## UTILIZAREA INDICATORILOR FINANCIARI PENTRU A IDENTIFICA FIRMELE ROMANESTI CU DIFICULTATI

## USING FINANCIAL RATIOS TO IDENTIFY ROMANIAN DISTRESSED COMPANIES

Madalina Ecaterina ANDREICA, PhD Student, ASE, madalina.andreica@gmail.com Mugurel Ionut ANDREICA, PhD Student, U.P.B., mugurelionut@gmail.com

Marin ANDREICA, PhD, ASE Bucharest, marinandreica@yahoo.com

## Rezumat

In  contextual  actualei  crize  financiare,  cand  din  ce  in  ce  mai  multe  firme  se confrunta  cu  situatii  de  faliment  sau    de  insolvabilitate,  lucrarea  isi  propune  sa  gaseasca metode  pentru  a  identifica  pe  baza  indicatorilor  financiari,  firmele  aflate  in  dificultate. Studiul  se  va  axa  pe  identificarea  unui  grup  de  de  companii  romanesti  listate  la  bursa, pentru care au fost disponibile date financiare pentru anul 2008. Pentru fiecare societate s-a calculat un  set de  14  indicatori financiari, ce a fost apoi  utilizat intr-o analiza a componentelor principale, urmata de o analiza cluster, intr-un model logit, precum si intrun model de  arbori de clasificare de tip CHAID.

Cuvinte cheie : firme cu dificultati, indicatori financiari, cluster, CHAID, modelul logit

## Abstract

In  the  context  of  the  current  financial  crisis,  when  more  companies  are  facing bankruptcy or insolvency, the paper aims to find methods to identify distressed firms by using  financial  ratios.  The  study  will  focus  on  identifying  a  group  of  Romanian  listed companies, for which financial data for the year 2008 were available. For each company a set  of  14  financial  indicators  was  calculated  and  then  used  in  a  principal  component analysis, followed by a cluster analysis, a logit model, and a CHAID classification tree.

Keywords

: distress company, financial ratio, cluster, CHAID, logit model

## 1. INTRODUCTION

The financial crisis has already thrown many financially strong companies out of business  all  over  the  world.  All  this  happened  because  they  were  not  able  to  face  the challenges and the unexpected changes in the economy. In Romania, for example, a study made by Coface Romania and based on the data provided by the National Trade Register Office, stated that around 14.483 companies were forced into bankruptcy by the end of the year 2008 or became financially distressed when they were not able to pay their financial obligations due to inadequate cash flows.

Looking at the above situation, we realise how important it is to understand the reasons behind the collapse of a company. Knowing these reasons might hinder a company from being financially distress and early actions could be taken as a precaution.

The study of this paper will  focus on identifying a group of distressed and nondistressed Romanian listed companies in 2008, for which data were available, and then to predict financial distressed companies by using the Logistic model .  For  each company a set  of  14  financial  ratios  were  calculated  and  then  used  in  the  process  of  identifying  and predicting  the  distressed  companies.  The  study  also  includes a  principal  component analysis ,  in order to better estimate the importance of each financial ratio included in the study,  as  well  as  several  methods  of  classification  such  as  a cluster  analysis and the CHAID classification tree method.

## 2. LITERATURE REVIEW

The first step in the evolution of the quantitative firm failure prediction model was taken by Beaver (1966), who developed a dichotomous classification test based on a simple t -test in a univariate framework. He used individual financial ratios from 79 failed and nonfailed  companies  that  were  matched  by  industry  and  assets  size  in  1954  to  1964  and identified a single financial ratio Cash flow/ Total Debt as the best predictor of corporate bankruptcy.

Beaver's study was then followed by Altman (1968), who suggested a Multivariate Discriminant Analysis ( MDA ).    By  utilizing  33  bankrupt  companies  and  33 non-bankrupt companies over the period 1946 - 1964, five variables  were selected  most relevant in predicting bankruptcy. These were Working Capital to Total Assets , Retained Earnings to Total Assets, Earnings before Interest and Taxes to Total Assets, Market Value of Equity to Book Value of Total Debt and Sales to Total Assets . The MDA model was able to  provide  a  high  predictive  accuracy  of  95%  one  year  prior  to  failure.  For  this  reason, MDA model had been  used  extensively  by  researchers  in bankruptcy  research  (Altman, Haldeman and  Narayanan,  1977;  Apetiti,  1984;  Izan,  1984,  Micha,  1984; Shirata,  1998; Ganesalingam and Kumar, 2001).

However, Eisenbeis (1977), Ohlson (1980) and Jones (1987) found that there were some  inadequacies in  MDA  with  respect  to  the  assumptions  of  normality  and  group dispersion. The assumptions were often violated in MDA and this may biased the test of significance and estimated error rates.

Logit  analysis which  did  not  have  the  same  assumptions  as  MDA  was  made popular  by Ohlson (1980).  He  used  105  bankrupt  companies  and  2058  non-bankrupt companies  from  1970  to  1976.  The  results  showed  that size, financial  structure  ( Total Liabilities to Total Assets ), performance and current liquidity were important determinants of bankruptcy. In the logit analysis, average data is normally used and it is considered as a single period model. Hence, for each non-distressed and distressed company, there is only one  company-year  observation.  The  dependent  variable  is  categorized  into  one  of  two categories that is distressed or non-distressed.

In  2004,  two  econometric  problems  with  the  single  period  logit  model  were discussed. (Hillegeist, 2004). First, is the sample selection bias that arises from using only one, non-randomly selected observation for each bankrupt company, and second, the model fails to include time varying changes to reflect the underlying risk of bankruptcy. This will induce  crosssectional  dependence  in  the  data.  Shumway  (2001)  demonstrated  that  these problems  could  result  in  biased,  inefficient,  and  inconsistent  coefficient  estimates.  To overcome these econometric problems, Shumway (2001) predicted bankruptcy using the hazard  model and  found  that  it  was  superior  to  the  logit  and  the  MDA  models.  This particular model  is actually a multi-period logit model because the likelihood functions of the  two  models  are  identical.  For  this  reason,  the  discrete-time  hazard  model  with  timevarying  covariates  can  be  estimated  by  using  the  existing  computer  packages  for  the analysis of binary dependent variables. The main particularities of the hazard model consist in the facts that firm specific covariates must be allowed to vary with time for the estimator to  be  more  efficient  and  a  baseline  hazard  function  is  also  required,  but  which  can  be estimated  directly  with  macroeconomic  variables  to  reflect  the  radical  changes  in  the environment.

In recent years many types of heuristic algorithms such as neural networks and decision  trees have  also  been  applied  to  the  bankruptcy  prediction  problem  and  several improvements in the financial distress prediction were noticed. Research studies on ANN for bankruptcy prediction started in 1990 like Bell et al.(1990), Tam and Kiang(1992),Wilson  et  al,(1992),  Coats  and  Fant  (1993),Udo(1993),  Fletcher  and    Goss (1993), Altman et al.(1994), Boritz and Kennedy (1995), Back et al.(1996), Etheridge and Sriram (1997), Yang et al.(1999), Fan and Palaniswami(2000), Atiya(2001) used to forecast financial distress for bank and other business, and are still active now. Neural networks are non-linear architectures, so that they are able to discriminate patterns which are not linearly separable  and  do  not  require  data  to  follow  any  specific  probability  distribution.  Neural Networks have been discovered to be better classifiers than discriminant analysis methods in  a  number  of  works  based  on  financial  data  from  American  firms  (Odom  and  Sharda 1990; Tam and Kiang 1990,1992; Coats and Fant, 1993; Wilson and Sharda 1994).

The  main  disadvantage  of  neural  network  models,  however,  consists  in  the difficulty of building up a neural network model, the required time to accomplish iterative process and the difficulty of model interpretation. Compared to neural networks, decision tree is not only a non-linear architecture, which is able to discriminate patterns that are not linearly  separable  and  allow  data  to  follow  any  specific  probability  distribution,  but  also plain to interpret its  results,  require  little  preparation  of  the  initial  data  and  perform  well with large data in a short time.

Zheng  and  Yanhui (2007)  used decision  tree methodologies  for  corporate financial distress prediction in their study. The authors presented the advantages of using CHAID decision trees in comparison to a neural network model, which is complicated to build up and to interpret or to a statistic model such as multivariate discriminate regression and logistic  regression,  where  the  patterns  need  to  be  linearly  separable  and  samples  are assumed to follow a multivariate normal distribution. Their study focused on 48 failed and continuing  Chinese  listed  companies  in  the  period 2003 -  2005. The  following  variables embodied  most  information  for predicting financial distress: Net  Cash  Flow  from Operating  Activity  as  a  percentage  of  Current  Liabilities,  Return  Rate  on  Total  Assets, Growth rate of Total Assets and Rate on Accounts Receivable Turnover . They also noticed that it is not appropriate to use financial information to predict financial distress ahead of four years.  However, the results supported by the test study showed that decision trees was a valid model to predict listed firms' financial distress in China, with a 80% probability of correct prediction.

## 3. RESEARCH DESIGN

## 3.1. Data description

For  this  study,  financial  information  for  the  year  2008  was  collected  for  a  total sample  of  55  Romanian  listed  companies,  from  the  Bucharest  Stock  Exchange.  The companies were divided into two categories, namely 'healthy' and 'unhealthy' companies, also called non-distressed and distressed companies. Since there is no standard definition for  a  'distressed'  company,  we  considered  a  company  to  be  'unhealthy'  in  case  it  had losses for at least two consecutive years or in case it had unpaid taxes or any other debts for at least two consecutive years. In the sample there were 8 companies with losses for at least two years and 4 companies with unpaid taxes for at least two years. However, there were also  6  companies  with  losses  for  the  year  2008,  which  were  also  included  in  the 'unhealthy' category, since this can also be considered a weaker but still possible sign of distress in an uncertainty situation. To summarize, from the total sample of 55 companies, 18 were classified as 'distressed' and 37 as 'non-distressed'.

## 3.2. Financial ratios

The selection of the main set of financial ratios was mainly based on the previous results presented in the related work, but also restricted to the financial data provided by the Bucharest Stock Exchange.  There were 14 financial ratios used in this study, which are presented in the table below. They were grouped into 5 distinct categories, based on issues such as profitability, solvency, asset utilization, growth ability and company size.

| Category  Code  Financial ratios  Definition  I1  Profit Margin  Net Profit or Loss / Turnover   *100  I2  Return on Assets  Net  Profit  or  Loss  /  Total  Assets  *100  I3  Return on Equity  Net Profit or Loss / Equity    *100  I4  Profit per employee  Net  Profit  or  Loss  /  number  of  employees  Profitability  I5  Operating  Revenue  per  employee  Operating  revenue  /  number  of  employees  I6  Current ratio  Current assets / Current liabilities  I7  Debts on Equity  Total Debts / Equity *100  Solvency  I8  Debts on Total Assets  Total Debts / Total Assets *100  I9  Working  capital  per  employee  Working  capital  /  number  of  employees  Asset  utilization  I10  Total Assets per employee  Total Assets / number employees  I11  Growth rate on net profit  (Net P/ L1 - Net P/L0) / Net P/L  0  I12  Growth rate on total assets  (Total  Assets1  -  Total  Assets0)  /  Total Assets0  Growth  ability  I13  Turnover growth  (Turnover1-  Turnover0) / Turnover0  Size  I14  Company size  ln (Total Assets)   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 3.3. Models and methodologies

## 3.3.1. Principal component analysis

Principal component analysis (PCA) is a way of identifying patterns in data, and expressing the data in such a way as to highlight their  similarities and differences.  Since patterns in data  can  be hard  to find in data  of high  dimension,  where  graphical representation is not available, PCA is a powerful tool for analysing data. The other main advantage of PCA is that once you have found these patterns in the data, and you compress the  data  by  reducing  the  number  of  dimensions,  without much  loss  of  information.  By dimensionality  reduction  in  a  data  set  only  those  characteristics  of  the  data  set  that contribute most to its variance are kept. PCA offers a convenient way to control the tradeoff between loosing information and simplifying the problem by reducing the dimension of the representation.

## 3.3.2. Cluster analysis

Cluster  analysis or clustering is  the  assignment  of  a  set  of  observations  into subsets (called clusters ) so that observations in the same cluster are similar in some sense. Clustering is a method of unsupervised learning and a common technique for statistical data analysis used in many fields. Hierarchical cluster analysis contains agglomerative methods and  divisive  methods  that  finds  clusters  of  observations  within  a  data  set.  The  divisive methods  start  with  all  of  the  observations  in  one  cluster  and  then  proceeds  to  split (partition)  them  into  smaller  clusters.  The  agglomerative  methods  begin  with  each observation being considered as separate clusters and then proceeds to combine them until all observations belong to one cluster.

In practice, the agglomerative methods are of wider use. On each step, the pair of clusters  with  smallest  cluster-to-cluster  distance  is  fused  into  a  single  cluster.  The  most common  algorithms  for  hierarchical  clustering  are: the  nearest  neighbour (or  the  single linkage  clustering,  where  the  distance  between  two  clusters  is  computed  as  the  minimal object-to-object distance), the farthest neighbor method (or the complete linkage clustering, where  the  distance  between  two  clusters  is  computed  as  the  maximal  object-to-object distance), the  average  linkage  clustering ,  where  the  distance  between  two  clusters  is computed as the average distance between objects from the first cluster and objects from the second cluster, the average group linkage ,  where the distance between two clusters is computed  as  the  distance  between  the  average  values  also  known  as  centroids  and the Ward's linkage , where the distance between two clusters is computed as the increase in the "error sum of squares" (ESS) after fusing two clusters into a single cluster. The outcome is represented graphically as a dendogram.

## 3.3.3. CHAID

Chi-square  automatic  interaction  detection  (CHAID)  was  originally  designed  to handle categorical attributes only. For each input attribute, CHAID finds the pair of values that  is  least  significantly  different  with  respect  to  the  target  attribute.  The  significant different is measured by the p -value obtained from a statistical test. The statistical test used depends on the type of the target attribute. If the target attribute is continuous, an F-test is used,  if  it  is  categorical,  then  a  Pearson  chi-square  test  is  used,  if  it  is  ordered,  then  a likelihood-ratio test is  used. For each selected pair, CHAID checks if p -value obtained is greater than a certain merge threshold. If the answer is positive, it merges the values and searches for an additional potential. The advantage of a CHAID classification tree is that it generates classification rules for the analyzed sample.

## 3.3.4. The Logistic Model

The logistic  model is  a  conditional  probability  model  that  uses  maximum likelihood estimation to provide the conditional probability of a firm belonging to a certain group  given  the  values  of  the  independent  variables  for  that  firm.  It  is  a  single-period classification model (Shumway, 2001) decribed by the function:

a. Rotation converged in 3 iterations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

An important issue in using binary state prediction models such as logit analysis is the selection of the cutoff probability which determines the classification accuracy. In order to  classify  an  observation  into  one  of  the  two  groups,  the  estimated  probability  from  the logit model is compared to a pre-determined cutoff probability. If the estimated probability is  below  the  cutoff,  the  observation  is  classified  as  an  inferior  performer  and  if  the estimated probability is above the cutoff, it is placed in the superior performer group.

## 4. ANALYSIS OF RESULTS

The analysis was made for the sample of 55 Romanian listed companies, by using only  the  financial  data  of  the  year  2008.    The  analysis  consisted  in  applying  a  principal component  analysis  followed  by  a  hierarchical  cluster  analysis,  a  CHAID  decision  tree model and a logistic model in order to classify the 'healthy' and 'unhealthy' Romanian listed  companies as  well as to identify the  most  significant financial ratio that contribute most to financial distress prediction.

## PRINCIPAL COMPONENT ANALYSIS:

We used SPSS 13.0 software for the set of data containing 14 financial ratios for all 55 Romanian listed companies, out of which 37 were 'healthy' and 18 'unhealthy'. The correlation matrix indicated some strong correlations between the next financial ratios: I1 and I2 (86%), I5 and I10 (81.8%), I2 and I4 (81.7%), I1 and I4 (77.5%) and I1 and I6 (75%).  In order to reduce the dimension of the initial set of data and also to identify which variables should be kept in order to loose as little information as possible, we applied the principal  component  analysis.  After  several  tests  and  after  excluding  one  by  one  several financial ratios that were most correlated between each other, we reached just two principal components with a total gain of information of 75%. The results are presented below and indicate that the first principal component is best explained by I1, I2, I4, I6 and I12, while the  second  component  is  explained  by  I3  and  I7.    We  can  say  that  first  component represents the profitability and growth element, while the second principal component is a Debts and Equity element.

<!-- image -->

Analysis.

Normalization.

<!-- image -->

After identifying the most relevant financial ratios that describe the two principal components, ( I1, I2, I3, I4, I6, I7 and I12 ) we applied a hierarchical cluster analysis by using the Nearest Neighbour Method in order to classify the Romanian companies in two distinct clusters. It resulted a classification extremely close to the initial classification of the listed  firms  into  'healthy'  and  'unhealthy'  companies.  Only  3  companies  were  missclassified  as  'healthy'.  As  a  conclusion  we  can  say  that  when  using  the  Profit  Margin, ROA, ROE, Profit per employee, Current Ratio, Debts on Equity and Growth rate on Total Assets  variables  in  a  cluster  analysis  we  can  reach  a  quite  good  classification  of  the 'healthy' and 'unhealthy' companies.

## CHAID CLASSIFICATION TREE

We studied the case when using all 14 financial ratios for all the 55 listed companies, out of which  I1  (Profit  Margin),  I2  (ROA)  and  I13  (Turnover  growth)  turned  out  to  be  most significant  in  the  financial  distress  prediction  problem.  The  following  classification  rules resulted: if I1&lt; 0.04 then

```
If  I2 < 0.03  =>  'unhealthy' Else if I2> 0.03 => 'healthy' Else if I1> 0.04 then If  I13 < 44.17  =>  'healthy' Else if I13> 44.17 => 'unhealthy' The decision tree is presented below:
```

<!-- image -->

## THE LOGISTIC MODEL

Several different models were estimated by experimentation using EViews 5.0 and having as criteria for selecting the final variable set: the high significance of the variables for the model, the correct sign of the coefficient in the model and a high level of prediction accuracy for the training sample. Out of the backward looking method, the following valid model resulted, in which the most significant financial ratios for distress prediction are I1 (Profit Margin) and I7 (Debts on Equity):

Tip\_firma= f( I1, I7)

Dependent Variable: TIP\_FIRMA

Method: ML - Binary Logit (Quadratic hill climbing)

Sample: 1 55

Included observations: 55

Convergence achieved after 10 iterations

Covariance matrix computed using second derivatives

| Variable  Coefficient  Std. Error  z-Statistic  Prob.  I1  -0.828685  0.311621  -2.659270  0.0078  I7  0.007475  0.004436  1.685006  0.0920  C  -1.539466  0.763775  -2.015601  0.0438  Mean dependent var  0.327273  S.D. dependent var  0.473542  S.E. of regression  0.219904  Akaike info criterion  0.452211  Sum squared resid  2.514605  Schwarz criterion  0.561702  Log likelihood  -9.435804      Hannan-Quinn criter.  0.494552  Restr. log likelihood  -34.77267      Avg. log likelihood  -0.171560  LR statistic (2 df)  50.67373  McFadden R-squared  0.728643  Probability(LR stat)  9.92E-12  Obs with Dep=0  37  Total obs  55  Obs with Dep=1  18   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 5. CONCLUSIONS

In order to identify the 'healthy' and 'unhealthy' Romanian listed companies for the  year  2008  we  applied  several  models  and  methodologies,  such  as  the  principal component analysis, a hierarchical cluster, CHAID decision tree model and the logit model. All models classified the listed companies quite good and provided relevant information of the  financial  ratios  that  better  predict  financial  distress.  The  PCA  and  cluster  analysis indicated  the  following  variables:  the  Profit  Margin,  ROA,  ROE,  Profit  per  employee, Current Ratio, Debts on Equity and Growth rate on Total Assets, the CHAID decision tree model indicated Profit Margin, ROA and Turnover growth, while the logit model indicated Profit Margin and Debts on Equity.

## 6. REFERENCES

- [1]  Altman,  E  I.  (1968)  "Financial  Ratios,  Discriminant  Analysis  and  the  Prediction  of Corporate Bankruptcy", Journal of Finance , 23, pp. 589-609.
- [2]  Beaver,  W.  (1966)  "Financial  ratios  as  predictors  of  failure", Journal  of  Accounting Research (Supplement) , 4, pp. 71-102.
- [3]  Chen, K., and Shimerda, T. (1981) "An empirical analysis of useful financial ratios", Financial Management , 10, pp. 51-60.
- [4]  Eisenbeis,  R.  (1977)  'Pitfalls  in  the  application  of  discriminant  analysis  in  business, finance and economics', Journal of Finance , 32, pp. 875-900.
- [5] Ganesalingam, S. and Kumar, K. (2001) 'Detection of financial distress via Multivariate Statistical Analysis', Managerial Finance , 27(4), pp.45-55.
- [6]  Hillegeist  S.A.,  Keating  E.K.,  Cram  D.P.  and  Lundstedt  K.G.  (2004)  'Assessing  the probability of Bankruptcy', Review of Accounting Studies , 9, pp. 5-34.
- [7] Joo, Ha Nam and Jinn Taehong (2000) 'Bankruptcy Prediction: Evidence from Korea Listed Companies During the IMF Crisis', Journal of International Financial Management and Accounting , 11(3), 178-197.
- [8]  Low,  S.,  Fauzias  M.N.  and  Zainal  Ariffin,  A.  (2001)  'Predicting  corporate  distress using logit
9. model: The case of Malaysia', Asian Academy of Management Journal , 6(1), pp. 49-62.
- [9]  Nam,  J  and  Jinn  T.  (2000)  'Bankruptcy  prediction:  Evidence  from  Korean  listed companies  during  the  IMF  crisis', Journal  of  International  Financial  Management  and Accounting , 11(3), pp. 178-197.
- [10] Ohlson, J. A. (1980) "Financial ratios and the probabilistic prediction of bankruptcy", Journal
12. of Accounting Research , 18, pp. 109-131.
- [11]  Scott,  J.  (1981)  'The  Probability  of  Bankruptcy:  A  Comparison  of  Empirical Predictions and Theoretical Models', Journal of Banking and Finance , 5, 317-344.
- [12]  Shumway,  T.  (2001)  "Forecasting  bankruptcy  more  accurately:  A  simple  hazard model", Journal of Business , 74 (1), pp. 101-124.
- [13] Zmijewski, M. E. (1984) "Methodological issues related to the estimation of financial distress prediction models", Journal of Accounting Research , 22, pp. 59-86.
- [14]  Zheng,  Q.  and  J.  Yanhui  (2007),  'Financial  Distress  Prediction  on  Decision  Tree Models', IEEE