## Nonlinear switching of low-index defect modes in photonic lattices

Fangwei Ye 1 , Yaroslav V. Kartashov 1 , Victor A. Vysloukh 2 , and Lluis Torner 1 1 ICFO-Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques, and Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya, Mediterranean Technology Park, 08860 Castelldefels (Barcelona), Spain 2 Departamento de Fisica y Matematicas, Universidad de las Americas - Puebla, Santa Catarina Martir, 72820, Puebla, Mexico

We address nonlinear signal switching between two low-index defect channels induced in periodic optical lattices. In contrast to conventional directional couplers, where the guiding mechanism  is  total  internal  reflection  or  refraction,  in  such  Bragg-type  coupler,  the guidance is of a photonic-bandgap origin. The coupling length in the low-index coupler is controlled by the lattice parameters and by the channel spacing. In the nonlinear regime the Bragg- type coupler behaves as an all-optical switch, exhibiting a remarkable difference of switching power for focusing versus defocusing nonlinearity.

## PACS numbers: 42.65.Tg, 42.65.Jx, 42.65.Wi.

Photonic bandgap structures (PBG), including photonic crystals [1] and photonic crystal fibers (PCF) [2-4], have attracted an enormous interest during the last decade. Attention has typically focused on high-contrast refractive-index structures. More recently, low-contrast  optically  induced  nonlinear  PCF-like  structures  were  introduced  [5].  Importantly, in such low-contrast lattices light gets localized due to distributed Bragg-type backscattering,  which  involves  at  least  a  few  lattice  periods.  This  is  in  contrast  to high-contrast microstructured geometries where anti-resonant reflecting mechanism frequently dominates and the transmission spectrum is determined by the index contrast and the thickness of the first high-index layer rather than by the lattice period [6]. The linear and nonlinear guiding properties of defects imprinted in such shallow lattices have been extensively  discussed  [7-9].  In  particular,  the  possibility  of  linear  directional  bandgap coupling,  which  leads  to  periodic  energy  switching  between  defects  akin  to  switching between  the  cores  in  conventional  directional  couplers  [10-15],  was  put  forward  for one-dimensional lattices with low-index defects [9]. Nonlinear effects have been studied mostly in dual-core PCFs with high-index defects [16,17]. Photonic band-gap couplers are more flexible than the conventional couplers, because of the possibility of engineering their dispersion characteristics by changing the lattice parameters and by using lattices with amplitude/frequency modulation. An enhanced flexibility is also afforded by the opportunity to operate with modes belonging to different gaps and by the potential switching of higher-order modes. Note also that photonic bandgap nanoscale structures are suitable for guiding of surface plasmon polaritons [18].

In this paper we study the impact of the nonlinearity on the coupling and switching characteristic between two low-index defect channels imprinted in a periodic harmonic lattice. We find that periodic power coupling between the low-index defects is possible only for non-overlapping domains of the lattice modulation depths. A remarkable difference of switching powers in focusing and defocusing media is a characteristic feature of Braggtype  coupler  that  we  also  analyze.  The  possibility  of  switching  with  higher-order  (dipole-like) modes is shown.

We start from the governing equation for the complex amplitude of the field of a light beam propagating in a medium with a shallow transverse refractive index modulation that can be derived from Maxwell equations for a dielectric medium in which one assumes a cubic nonlinearity. The derivation procedure is similar to that used in ref [19], where one uses  the  slowly  varying  amplitude  approximation  to  arrive  at  the  following  nonlinear Schrödinger equation: q

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here the transverse and  longitudinal ξ coordinates  are  scaled  to  the  characteristic beam width and diffraction length, respectively; the parameter characterizes the lattice depth;  and  the  function describes  the  refractive  index  profile.  In  our  case describes a couple of one-period low-index defects imprinted in a harmonic lattice and separated by the lattice segment of the length consisting of n lattice periods [Fig. 1(a)]. In the case of odd separating periods for η p ( ) R η ( ) R η s L nT = T ( ) 0 R η = /2 ( 1) T R / n η ≤ ≤ + 2 ( ) η = nT and R otherwise; in the case of even number of  periods  one  has for and ( ) 1 cos nT ( ) η Ω ( /2 n η ≤ ≤ η = + /2 0 1) T + ( ) R 1 co = -s( ) η η Ω

otherwise, where is the lattice frequency . The parameter defines the  type  of  nonlinearity  (defocusing/focusing).  Equation  (1)  conserves  the  energy  flow Ω 2 / T π Ω = 1 σ = ± 2 . U q d η ∞ -∞ = ∫ In view of the scaling properties of Eq. (1), we set in computer simulations. 4 Ω =

... (m) min p p The dynamics of linear Bragg-type coupling between low-index defect modes is also far from being trivial, and it exhibits important peculiarities. Thus, we start with a brief summary  of  the  linear  analysis.  Equation  (1)  was  integrated  by  a  beam  propagation method at with one channel initially excited by a single isolated defect linear mode, which can be found numerically. Such mode features exponentially fading oscillating wings covering a few lattice periods, a property that is typical of linear backward Bragg scattering [20]. One can clearly see (Fig. 1) that in contrast to the behavior exhibited by a conventional  coupler,  the  localization  of  light  in  each  channel  is  achieved  due  to  the Bragg-type distributed reflection, and the switching is due to the transmission through the separating lattice segment . Figure 1(c) shows typical example of the coupling dynamics. As in a conventional directional coupler, light is slowly tunneled into the second low-index channel. After a certain propagation length, light totally concentrates in the second channel, and then starts backward tunneling to the launching one. Nevertheless, we found that in contrast to conventional couplers, the Bragg-type one operate only in the non-overlapping domains of the lattice depth which are linked to the band-gap structure of the  defect-free  lattice.  These  domains  are  defined  by  the  inequalities where is the sequential number of finite gap. Notice that in the case of defect-free harmonic lattices, the band-gap structure [Fig. 2 (a)] follows from the properties of a corresponding Mathieu equation. If the lattice depth is outside of the above-mentioned domains, the light beam launched into one of the coupler channels rapidly diffracts [Figs. 1(b) and 1(d)]. To clarify such behavior, we considered the symmetric and anti-symmetric linear modes of the Bragg-type coupler [see Fig. 2(c) for an example]. The propagation constants  of  these  modes belong  to  the  first  ( )  finite  gap  of  the  lattice spectrum [Fig. 2(a,b)], and their profiles exhibit exponentially fading oscillating wings [Fig. 2(c)]. The difference of corresponding propagation constants defines the coupling length 0 σ = 1,2, 3 = s L nT = s a ( , ) b b (m) max p ≤ ≤ m 1 m = c s / L b π = -a b and  the  light  switching  might  be  interpreted  as  their  constructive/destructive interference during propagation.

Figure  2(d)  shows  the  dependencies  of  propagation  constants  of  symmetric  and anti-symmetric  modes  versus  the  lattice  depth  at .  When diminishes ( ) the propagation constant of symmetric mode approaches the lower edge of the first finite gap and the mode profile delocalizes transforming itself into a Bloch wave far from the defect.  Interestingly,  in  this  point  anti-symmetric  mode  still  remains  guided. When grows ( ) and the propagation constant of the anti-symmetric mode approaches  the upper edge  of  the  first  finite  gap,  this  mode  in  turn  delocalizes  and transforms  into  the  corresponding  Bloch  wave.  Consequently  the  coexistence  of  both modes (which, obviously, is a necessary ingredient for coupling to occur) is possible for the first finite gap only in the finite domain of the lattice modulation depths . For example, at one has and [see the points marked by circles in Fig. 2(d)]. Figure 2(e) shows the monotonic growth of the coupling length with increasing lattice depth. We found that when is odd the propagation constant of the anti-symmetric mode is higher than that for its symmetric counterpart, while when is even the situation reverses [Fig. 2(f)]. Clearly, increasing the defects spacing causes an exponential decrease of the coupling strength; also, the coupling length grows rapidly. s 3 L = s b x 3.1 ≈ T p n L (1) min p p → p (1) max p p → s 4 L T = (1) (1) max mi p p p ≤ ≤ n s (1) min 0.7 p ≈ (1) ma p n

A similar scenario holds for modes with propagation constants residing in the second finite gap ( ). In this case switching is possible for lattice depths , where and ; the linear switching dynamics is shown in Fig. 1(e). Higher-gap switching ( ) was also found possible in the proper domains of lattice depth.  Importantly,  Bragg-type  coupler  can  operate  using  higher-order  modes  with propagation  constants  belonging  to  different  gaps.  An  example  of  switching  with  dipole-type mode originating in the second gap is shown in Fig. 1(f), for the lattice depth at which switching with fundamental modes is impossible. It is worth noticing that possibilities  of  operation  in  the  disjoint  domains  of  lattice  depths  and  switching  with higher-order modes are distinctive features of Bragg-type couplers. 2 m = n 6.2 ≈ (2) (2) max min p p p ≤ ≤ (2) mi p (2) max 11.5 p ≈ 2 m &gt;

Note that while the salient features of the gap solitons have been extensively discussed on the basis of the coupled-mode theory [21], such analysis is based on a decomposition of the beam into forward and backward propagating waves with slowly varying amplitudes, under the condition of Bragg resonance, and the derivation a system of coupled nonlinear equations for those amplitudes. However, our more general approach that takes into account rapid variations of amplitudes, the overlapping of the wave packets in certain spectral domains and also strong coupling, is based on the direct numerical integration of nonlinear Schrödinger equation (1). Here we study the nonlinear response of the Bragg-type coupler by integrating Eq. (1) for different energy flows and input conditions. For simplicity we restrict ourselves to the modes from the first finite gap. As expected, at low energy flows the device acts as a linear Bragg coupler where almost all light is switched between two channels [Figs. 3(a) and 3(c)]. However, with growth of the energy flow U , light exhibits incomplete switching and lesser fraction of input energy transmits to the second channel. Figures 3(b) and 3(d) shows the corresponding dynamics for high-energy inputs in focusing and defocusing media, respectively. With further growth of the input energy flow, one arrives at the situation when light remains trapped in the input channel.

Figures 4(a) and 4(c) show the fractional output energy flow (normalized to the input one) trapped in both channels as a function of the input energy flow for focusing and defocusing nonlinearities, respectively. Upon calculation of such switching characteristics, we have fixed the length of the device equal to the linear coupling length and varied the input energy flow. In all cases the input beam profile resembles the profile of single-channel linear guided mode. At low energy flow levels, most of the light is coupled to the output channel and the coupling length is almost the same as linear one. If the energy flow grows the coupling length increases [Figs. 4(b) and 4(d)]. At a threshold input energy flow  the  coupler  enters  the  regime  when  energy  is  redistributed  equally  between  two channels at the output. Thus, for such energy flow the coupling length tends to infinity. Further increasing of the input energy results in defect soliton formation. The excess input energy in this regime goes to the second channel leading to the appearance of weak coupling [Figs. 4(b) and 4(d)]. c L

Interestingly we observed that at , the switching energy in defocusing medium is about 50% bigger than that in focusing one. This remarkable difference between focusing and defocusing media, obtained by direct integration of the governing equation, is in apparent contradiction with the simple model of coupled modes, which predicts equal switching powers for focusing and defocusing cases. To clarify the situation, we simulated the  switching  with  growing  channels  spacing ,  and  encountered  that  the  difference between switching energies tends to zero only when . For instance at this difference drops off to . This feature is linked to much slower (in comparison with the standard coupler) fading of the extended oscillating wings of the modes. Thus, for s 4 L = L T s s L → ∞ s 8 L T = 4.3 %

bandgap guidance the coupled-mode theory should be applied with care since it is essentially based on the assumption of weak coupling.

In conclusion, we exposed the main features of nonlinear light switching between two low-index defect channels in periodic lattices forming a Bragg-type coupler. The coupling length of such photonic bandgap device is effectively controlled by the lattice depth and by the  channel  spacing.  In  the  nonlinear  regime  the  Bragg-type  coupler  functions  as  an all-optical  switch, and exhibits remarkable difference of switching energies for focusing versus defocusing nonlinearity.

## References

1. J. D. Joannopoulos, R. D. Meade, J. N. Winn, Photonic Crystals: Molding the Flow of Light (Princeton U. Press, 1995).
2. S. D. Hart, G. R. Maskaly, B. Temelkuran, P. H. Prideaux, J. D. Joannopoulos, and Y. Fink, 'External reflection from omnidirectional dielectric mirror fibers,' Science 296 , 510 (2002).
3. P. St. J. Russell, 'Photonic crystal fibers,' Science 299 , 358 (2003).
4. J. C. Knight, 'Photonic crystal fibers,' Nature 424 , 847 (2003).
5. B. Freedman, G. Bartal, M. Segev, R. Lifshitz, D. N. Christodoulides, and J. W. Fleischer, 'Wave and defect dynamics in nonlinear photonic quasicrystals,' Nature 440 , 1166 (2006).
6. N. M. Litchinitser, A. K. Abeeluck, C. Headley, B. J. Eggleton, 'Antiresonant reflecting photonic crystal optical waveguides,' Opt. Lett. 27 , 1592 (2002).
7. F. Fedele, J. Yang, and Z. Chen, 'Defect modes in one-dimensional photonic lattices,' Opt. Lett. 30 , 1506(2005).
8. X. Wang, Z. Chen, and J. Yang, "Guiding light in optically induced ring lattices with a low-refractive-index core," Opt. Lett. 31 , 1887 (2006).
9. N. K. Efremidis and K. Hizanidis, 'Bandgap lattices: low index solitons and linear properties,' Opt. Express 13 , 10571(2005).
10. S. M. Jensen, "The nonlinear coherent coupler," IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech. MTT30 , 1568 (1982).
11. A. A. Maier, 'Self-switching of light in a directional coupler,' Sov. J. Quantum Electron. 14 , 101 (1984)].
12. S. R. Friberg, A. M. Weiner, Y. Silberberg, B. G. Sfez, and P. S. Smith, 'Femtosecond switching in a dual-core-fiber nonlinear coupler,' Opt. Lett. 13 , 904(1988).
13. I. M. Skinner, G. D. Peng, B. A. Malomed, and P. L. Chu, 'Soliton switching in variable nonlinear coupler,' Opt. Comm. 113 , 493 (1995).
14. S. Longhi, 'Landau-Zener dynamics in a curved optical directional coupler,' J. Opt. B 7 , L9 (2005).

15. I. L. Garanovich and A. A. Sukhorukov, 'Nonlinear directional coupler for polychromatic light,' Opt. Lett. 32 , 475 (2007).
16. J. R. Salgueiro and Y. S. Kivshar, 'Nonlinear dual-core photonic crystal fiber couplers,' Opt. Lett. 30 , 1858 (2005).
17. A. Betlej, S. Suntsov, K. G. Makris, L. Jankovic, D. N. Christodoulides, G. I. Stegeman, J. Fini, R. T. Bise, and D. J. DiGiovanni, 'All-optical switching and multifrequency generation in a dual-core photonic crystal fiber,' Opt. Lett. 31 , 1480 (2006).
18. S. I. Bozhevolnyi, J. Erland, K. Leosson, P. M.W. Skovgaard, and J. M. Hvam, 'Waveguiding in surface plasmon polariton band gap structures,' Phys. Rev. Lett. 86 , 3008 (2001).
19. G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics (Academic Press, Boston, MA, 1989).
20. A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Crystals: Propagation and Control of Laser Radiation. (Willey-Interscience, 1984).
21. C. M. de Sterke and J. E. Sipe, Progress in Optics 33 , 203 (1994).

## Figure captions

- Figure 1. (a) Bragg coupler with separation of between low-index guiding channels. Linear switching with fundamental modes at (b) , (c) , (d) , and (e) . (f) Linear switching with dipole-type mode at . In all cases the right channel of coupler was excited. s 4 L = T 0.6 p = p 2 4 8 6 =
- Figure 2. (a) Floquet-Bloch spectrum of uniform lattice. Gray regions show bands and white regions correspond to gaps. (b) Propagation constants of Bloch waves versus  transverse  momentum k at .  Locations  of  propagation  constants of symmetric and antisymmetric modes of Bragg coupler with are indicated with short black and red lines in (b). (c) Profiles of symmetric (black line) and antisymmetric (red line) linear modes supported by Bragg coupler at and . (d) Propagation constants of symmetric and antisymmetric modes and (e) coupling length in low-power limit versus at L . (f) Propagation constants versus number of lattice periods between cores of coupler at . Lines in (f) are guides for eye. 1 p = ) 3 T p s ( .974 b = -L = 0 s a ( 0.803) b = -s 8 L T = 2 p = 2 p = 3 T s =
- Figure 3. Dynamics of switching in Bragg coupler in focusing (a),(b) and defocusing (c),(d)  medium.  The  input  energy  flows  are (a), (b), (c), and (d). In all cases , . in 0.197 U = s 4 L T = 0.339 0.308 0.481 2 p =
- T Figure 4. (a) Normalized output energy flows concentrated in input and output channels of coupler and (b) coupling length versus input energy flow at , for the case of focusing nonlinearity. (c) and (d) show the same, but for the case of defocusing nonlinearity. 2 p = s 4 L =

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->