## Hidden Semi-Markov Models for Single-Molecule Conformational Dynamics

## Running title:

## HMM description of F1-ATPase rotation

A. Kovalev * ,  N.  Zarrabi * ,  F.  Werz * ,  M.  Börsch * ,  Z.  Ristic # ,  H.  Lill # ,  D.  Bald # ,  C.  Tietz * ,  J. Wrachtrup *

* 3. Physikalisches Institut, Universität Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 57, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
- # Department of Structural Biology, Faculty of Earth and Life Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1085, 1081 HV Amsterdam, Netherlands

Keywords: Hidden Markov Model, Markov process, dwell time histogram, single molecule, F1 ATPase, subunit rotation

## Abstract

The conformational kinetics of enzymes can be reliably revealed when they are governed by Markovian dynamics. Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) are appropriate especially in the case of  conformational  states  that  are  hardly  distinguishable.  However,  the  evolution  of  the conformational  states  of  proteins  mostly  shows  non-Markovian  behavior,  recognizable  by non-monoexponential  state  dwell  time  histograms.  The  application  of  a  Hidden  Markov Model technique to a cyclic system demonstrating semi-Markovian dynamics is presented in this paper and the required extension of the model design is discussed. As standard ranking criteria  of  models  cannot  deal  with  these  systems  properly,  a  new  approach  is  proposed considering the shape of the dwell time histograms. We observed the rotational kinetics of a single F1-ATPase α 3 β 3 γ sub-complex over six orders of magnitude of different ATP to ADP and  Pi  concentration  ratios,  and  established  a  general  model  describing  the  kinetics  for  the entire range of concentrations. The HMM extension described here is applicable in general to the accurate analysis of protein dynamics.

## Introduction

Single-molecule experiments, in comparison to ensemble measurements, allow to reconstruct the distribution of various molecular parameters. Often it is the aim to identify separate states or  conformations  of  the  molecule  and  to  express  state  dynamics.  Therefore  the  typical approach for a state definition is to introduce thresholds in order to classify data points into different co-domains and to assign these areas to different states afterwards (1,2). Once the states are identified, it is possible to derive transition rates between those states in order to characterize the dynamic behavior of the molecule. This approach works as long as the states molecule experiments this overlap is caused by a poor signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) especially data

can  be  separated  by  thresholds,  but  fails  as  soon  as  their  co-domains  overlap.  In  singlewhen  the  state duration lasts only  a few  milliseconds.  In  this case, increasing accumulation time or higher time resolution does not improve a proper state identification. For  instance,  when  conformational  changes  of  an  enzyme  are  investigated  by  Förster-type fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) (3,4) the average photon count rate of organic fluorophores is usually between 10 4 and 10 5 photons per second (5,6). With state transition rates around 10 2 to 10 3 s -1 ,  about 100 photons remain for identifying the FRET efficiency of a state within the data stream. Since the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) depends on two fluorophore photon count rates, that is, 50 counts in each of the two channels, and the SNR reaches a value of about 5:1 .

When the fluorescent marker is replaced by a small particle observable by bright- or darkfield microscopy, its Brownian motion at room temperature blurs the particle position, which makes it difficult to follow fast conformational changes. The bead attached to the F1-ATPase examined in this paper moves on average 14 nm within a 5 ms image frame during rotation. However the mean thermal displacement of the marker bead about 25 nm per frame yields a SNR of 0.6:1. SNR of single-molecule force measurements using optical tweezers (7) are of the  same  range.  Recently,  the  SNR  in  nucleic  acid  translocating  single-molecule  motor experiments was found to be below 2.4 at transition rates above 15 s -1 (8). Another example is the  motion  of  single-headed  kinesin  KIF1A  with  a  latex  bead  as  a  marker  observed  in  an optical trap. Its step size is determined to 8 nm with a standard deviation of 15 nm, i.e. the SNR is 0.5:1 (9).

Additional  information  is  required  for  a  proper  state  assignment  in  those  cases.  A  Hidden Markov model (HMM) utilizes the architecture of a conformational state network as a priori information. It assigns a separate probability density function (PDF) to each observable for every hidden state. The advantage of HMMs is that this method still assigns states correctly even if the PDFs overlap. Among many other applications, e.g. in speech recognition (10) or DNA  analysis,  trajectory  analysis  with  Hidden  Markov  Models  was  successfully  applied earlier  to  systems  with  inherent  Markov  states  (11,12).  As  soon  as  the  transition  from  the current state is dependent on the previous states of the system (i.e. non-Markovian behaviour) a standard Hidden Markov approach can not be used anymore. Nevertheless, in some special cases  it  is  possible  to  incorporate  system  memory  into  the  Markov  approach  to  derive  the underlying dynamic behaviour (11). Enzymes e.g. cyclically change among a finite number of conformations along catalytic reaction pathways and return to the initial condition after each reaction  cycle.  Therefore  the  memory  dependence  is  restricted  to  the  maximum  number  of conformations.  Consequently,  those  systems  can  be  treated  as  semi-Markovian  by  an extension of the set of conformational states (13,14).

Complex systems like proteins often have conformational states with multi-exponential dwell time distributions (15). That means, that state transitions can not be properly described by one rate constant. This is a clear feature of non-Markovian processes. An illustrative example of an enzyme with non-Markovian dynamics is the F1-ATPase α 3 β 3 γ sub-complex, which is an tunable  ATP-driven  effective  molecular  motor  (16-18).  Like  in  the  holoenzyme  FoF1-ATP synthase (19-21) the γ subunit  of  this  sub-complex rotates in 120° steps at millimolar ATP concentrations; sub-millisecond image analysis revealed that each 120 o step comprises a 80 o and  a  40 o sub-step  (22,23).  To  visualize  the  stepwise  rotational  movement  of  the  rotary subunit  a  bead  was  bound  to  the γ -subunit  (22).  The  stepwise  movement  of  the  bead  is superimposed by Brownian motion, which yields a strong broadening of the expected three stopping positions. Using small beads or low rotational speeds at  nanomolar  ATP concentrations a separation of the three states is easily possible by applying thresholds (22). Here, using F1-ATPase as a nanomotor operated under high load (i.e. with a large bead) and at high  rotational  speed  (i.e.  at  high  ATP  concentrations)  the  PDFs  of  the  bead  stopping positions overlapped. Because the shape of the dwell time histograms of the F1-ATPase states were found to be non-monoexponential, a state expansion approach to the Hidden Markov Model similar to (24) was used to take into account the histograms shape. A single model was developed describing the rotating behavior of the F1-ATPase nanomotor at different rotational speeds.

## Material and Methods

## Hidden Markov Models

The framework of a HMM consists mainly of a process that generates time series { qt } of a finite  number  of  not  directly  observable  and  therefore  "hidden"  states q according  to  an autonomous  Markov  process.  The  transition  probability  to  jump  from  state qi into  another state qj is described by a time independent parameter kij (for a three state model, see Figure 1 a). A model with n states  is  therefore characterized by a state transition matrix K with n × n entries. This time resolution ( Δ t ) dependent transition probability matrix can be converted to the more general matrix of rate constants R :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  corresponding  emission  functions p ( x t | qi )  project  each  hidden  state  to  an  observable signal  (schematically  shown  in  Figure  1  b).  These  emission  functions  are  probability distributions  of  the  multidimensional  signal  { x t }  while  the  system  is  in  the  corresponding hidden  state qi .  The  likelihood L is  the  probability,  that  a  hidden  state  trajectory  { qt } corresponds to an observed signal (25):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where M is  the  observed  trajectory  length, π is  a  vector  of a  priori probabilities  of  hidden states qi for the first observation x 1, and diag denotes a diagonal matrix derived from a vector. This  formulation  of  the  likelihood  requires  initial  values π (e.g.  all  equal),  which  allows including a priori knowledge by freely setting these priors in the calculation of the likelihood function.

The number of the likelihood L ({ qt }) calculations for the observed trajectory for a given set of parameters { K , p ( xt | qi ), π } is equal to the number of all possible state trajectories, which is on the  order  of n M .  With  datasets  of M ∼ 100'000  frames  each,  like  in  our  case,  this  is computationally infeasible. However, for the calculation of the likelihood defined by Eq. 2 only M matrix  multiplications  are  required.  This  approach  is  commonly  known  as  the forward-backward procedure (10). Given the parameter set and the observed signal, the most likely state sequence (Viterbi path) can be determined (10) . The power of a Hidden Markov analysis relies on the fact that iterative algorithms exist maximizing the likelihood, although those approaches are only able to locally maximize the likelihood function. In this paper we used the Baum-Welch algorithm (10) as an expectation maximization (EM) method (26).

For a Markovian system state transitions are described by the time-independent value kij for each transition  from  state qi to qj .  This  inherently  leads  to  state  lifetime  histograms  with  a mono-exponential decay (27) (or with a geometric distribution in the case of discrete times). The  limitation to exponentially decaying state lifetime histograms can  be  overcome substituting one hidden Markov state with a series of several adjacent states, which all share the same emission function (28). Additional free parameters in terms of transition constants can be introduced to allow for a wide range of different designs of state lifetime histograms. A serial adjustment of Markov states leads to a shift of the maximum of the histograms to longer times, whereas a parallel placement is able to introduce additional peaks.

The form of the emission functions is usually determined by the design of the experiment. We used  a  two  dimensional  Gauss  function  with  the  mean x i 0 and  the  covariance  matrix Ci to describe the probability distribution of the bead positions ( x ) for the states qi :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## F1-ATPase single-molecule assay

An F1-ATPase α 3 β 3 γ sub-complex from Bacillus PS3 with 10 histidine residues fused to the N-terminus of subunit β and the mutation S106C in subunit γ was used in the experiment (22). The  histidines  allow  the  enzyme  to  adsorb  unspecifically  on  an  unprocessed  cover  glass surface. The single cysteine available in the engineered γ subunit was biotinylated with biotinPEAC5 maleimide. The enzyme preparation was done as described (16,29). Briefly, the F1- ATPase sub-complex (20 nM) in buffer I (10 mM MOPS pH 7.0, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2) was infused into a flow chamber consisting of two Matsunami cover glasses separated by a 50 μ m spacer. After 2 minutes the flow chamber was washed with buffer II (buffer I + 10 mg/ml BSA)  to  remove  the  unbound  F1-ATPase  and  to  cover  the  bare  glass  surface  with  BSA. Afterwards the chamber was filled with streptavidin-coated polystyrene beads (diameter 0.56 μ m,  Bangs  Labs,  ~200  pM)  in  buffer  II.  One  bead  per γ subunit  of  the  F1-ATPase  subcomplex was bound through the stable biotin-streptavidin complex. To induce the rotation of the γ subunit  of  F1-ATPase the flow chamber was infused with 1 mM ATP in buffer II. A scheme of the assay is presented in Figure 2. During the experiment varying concentrations of ATP/ADP/Pi were applied according to table 1, with always the same F1-ATPase molecule being observed. The bead motion was registered with a LOGLUX ® i5  CL camera (Kamera Werk Dresden, Germany) installed on an Olympus IX71 microscope (Japan). Bead rotation was recorded with 5 ms time resolution. From the video sequences the center of mass of the rotating bead was estimated for further HMM analysis using Matlab 7.1 (MathWorks, Natick, USA).

## Results and Discussion

By varying the concentrations of the nucleotides in the buffer solution, the F1-ATPase motor was driven at different speeds. Figure 3 a shows the accumulated angle trace of the rotating bead on a single F1 ATPase molecule as a function of time at seven different concentrations of ATP, ADP, and Pi (see Table 1). All the measurements were done on the same F1-ATPase molecule. The decrease of ATP concentration reduced the bead rotation speed in agreement with previous results (30). The plateau sections on the accumulated angle graph (Figure 3 a) were assigned to events of ADP-Mg 2+ inhibition (31,32) of F1-ATPase activity and therefore stopped γ subunit rotation until ADP dissociated. The number of ADP-Mg 2+ inhibition events was not negligible at millimolar ADP concentrations (Figure 3 a).

F1-ATPase has C3 symmetry and the γ subunit rotates in discrete 120° steps. Figure 3 b shows a 2D density plot of the positions of the bead. The three most populated regions corresponded to the ATP hydrolysis and Pi release events of the enzyme (33). These events were on average shorter than our time resolution, which resulted in an elongated dwell of the three observed stopping  positions.  Because  the  bead  was  connected  to  the  F1  ATPase  through  a  PAEC5 biotin-streptavidin linker, the linker flexibility introduced an additional uncertainty of ≤ 20º for the orientation of the γ subunit (31).

In order to identify the three stopping positions of the molecular motor, the simplest approach was to divide the domain of angles into three areas in a sector model. The angle boundaries were chosen in a way that the sum of squares of the distances to their corresponding mean values was minimized (black lines in Figure 3 b). Furthermore, a Markov Model with three states was applied to the data. Regarding the mean angle positions of the states and the mean values  for  the  state  durations,  both  approaches  led  to  comparable  results.  However,  the probability distribution on the boundaries of co-domains did not drop to zero (Figure 3 b), i.e. the  probability  distributions  of  the  individual  states  overlapped  and  the  sector  model  was vulnerable to mis-assignment of states in those intermediate areas.

In Figure 4, the histograms of the state durations derived from the sector model (light gray) and from the Markov model (black) are compared. The peak values for both approaches were almost at the same position (at about 60 ms), but the sector model additionally showed a high amount of very short dwells. The separation of the dwells into fluctuating events, that is, the bead moved to the second state and moved back after a short dwell, and to transition events (the  bead  moved to a third state  after  a  jump  to  the  second  state)  indicated  that  these  very short dwells of the sector model belonged to the fluctuating fraction (see inset of Figure 4).

This clearly proved that those events were mis-assignments around the zone borders likely due to Brownian motion.

The results  derived  from  the  Hidden  Markov  Model  showed  no  such  mis-assignments.  An expectation  maximization  algorithm  searched  iteratively  for  HMM  parameters  maximizing the  likelihood  (10).  During  this  process  an  increase  of  the  transition  rates  due  to  the fluctuating events was balanced by a decrease of the rates caused by long dwell times. Taking the  fluctuating  events  into  account.  overlapping  emission  functions  favor  smaller  transition rates.  Whenever  the  bead  was  located  near  the  zone  borders,  the  contribution  of  the  two neighboring emission functions were both comparably low. In this case, the relatively high probability  to  stay  in  the  same  state  according  to  the  transition  matrix  prevented  a  state change. But as soon as the bead performed a long jump, the contribution of the next emission function  to  the  likelihood  would  be  strongly  increased  and  would  therefore  force  a  state change in the state trajectory (see Fig. 1 b).

After the optimal HMM parameter set was determined (state transition matrix, peak position and width of two dimensional Gaussian PDFs) the state assignment was performed and state duration  histograms  were  built.  Surprisingly,  these  dwell  time  histograms  were  not  monoexponential, although a single Markov state has inherently a mono-exponential state duration distribution. The observed distributions had their maxima at a position away from zero (see Fig.4, black curve). The size of the bead (~ 0.5 µm) and the flexibility of the linker introduced a  latency  to  the  system  causing  a  further  shift  of  the  maximum  to  longer  times  in  these histograms. Additionally, the intrinsic Brownian motion blurred the maxima to the observed shape.

One way to incorporate this feature of the histograms into the Markov Model is to split each Markov state into several "microstates" sharing the same emission function (28). We call a set of these microstates "macrostate" in the following. The introduced additional free parameters in terms of transition probabilities were used for a precise description of the steep left rise and the  right  shoulder  of  the  state  duration  histograms.  In  the  experiment,  only  the  macrostates were  visible,  i.e  it  was  only  possible  to  assign  data  to  macrostates.  Figure  5a  shows  the macrostate  dwell  time  histograms  extracted  from  experimental  data  using  the  HMM  in comparison  with  the  state  lifetime  distribution  found  from  the  solution  of  the  differential equations  generated  from  the  transition  matrix.  As  more  states  were  put  together  in  a sequence, the resulting  peak  beaome  sharper and  shifted  to  longer  times.  The  shape  of  the macrostate dwell time histograms did not change much for different models, which implicated that the state assignment was independent of the model (Figure 5 a, gray histograms).

A way to compare different model designs is to use the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) (34).  The  idea  behind  is  to  subtract  an  empirical  penalty  term,  which  should  reflect  the model's  complexity,  from  the  logarithm  of  the  likelihood.  Unfortunately  the  BIC  was  not sensitive  to  the  shape  of  the  dwell  time  histogram,  and,  therefore,  an  alternative  model selection  scheme  was  required.  The  deviation  of  the  curves  calculated  using  the  transition matrix  from  the  dwell  time  histograms  based  on  the  HMM  macrostates  assignment  was expressed as the residual sum of squares (RSS) between both. The four types of histograms for the different macrostate transitions (that is, forward-forward, forward-backward, backward-forward, and backward-backward) were used in the RSS calculations in Fig. 5. This deviation  criterion  characterized  much  better  how  well  the  extended  Markov  models described the data and, in contrast to the BIC, did not require any parameters.

However, a simple alignment of multiple states in a row has one drawback: a change of the rotational direction mainly influences only the first state of a row. This is due to the higher probability of the system to remain in one microstate instead of changing it (according to the transition  matrix).  Hence,  being  in  those  turnaround  macrostates  the  system  will  mostly remain in the first microstate of a row until the macrostate changes. This will again lead to an almost monoexponential dwell time distribution, regardless of how many microstates are in a row,(Figure 5 b).

To refine the Hidden Markov Model to overcome this drawback, additional states in the back step path had to be introduced. A similar model extension can be realized by adding a second row of states for the existing backward transitions (see Figure 5 b). In this model, turnaround events passed through two microstates and the dwell time histogram for the macrostate looked similar to the histogram for two sequential microstates shown in Figure 5a. The simplest "two row" model included just one microstate per macrostate for each direction and had four free parameters  (that is, transition probabilities).  Thereby  only  two  new  parameters  were introduced to the model although the number of microstates had doubled (Fig. 6 a).  Figure 6 b  shows  the  superiority  of  the  "two  row"  over  the  linear  model  for  a  sufficient  number  of microstates.  The  RSS-value  of  the  "one  row"  model  even  increased  with  increasing  model complexity. This is caused by the intrinsic increasing minimum state duration (equal to the number of states in a row) with increasing number of states in a row. Models with too many states in a row were not capable to describe the short-living states. Figure 6 c shows the result of the "two row" model applied to seven concentrations with increasing model complexity.

This  kind  of  model  extension  leds  to  a  universal  model,  which  was  able  to  assign  the macrostates properly and simultaneously to find the transition rates for a wide range of the enzymatic conditions. The higher the model complexity, the better the shape of the dwell time histograms was reproduced (see RSS curves on Fig, 6 c) for all six nucleotide concentrations. Each of the four different routes through a macrostate had its own dwell time histogram to be fitted.  The  proper  fit  of  the  steep  left  flank  required  additional  parameters.  With  four microstates per row (i.e. ten free parameters) the RSS reached its minimum, and additional microstates  did  not  improve  the  matching  of  the  dwell  times.  Basically,  the  shape  of  the histogram and the available statistics determined the required complexity of the model.

For  example,  the  Hidden  Markov  Model  with  four  microstates  per  row  included  the nucleotide concentration dependence in terms of its transition probabilities (Fig. 6 a). A single macrostate  of  the  "two  row"  model  is  shown  on  the  scheme  with  the  upper  row  for  the forward and lower row for the backward direction. The ratio of transition rate 1 to transition rate 2 is the ratio of the number of forward to backward steps, and it was found to be linearly dependent on [ATP] with a proportionality coefficient of (3.93 ±1.66)×10 4 M -1 .  The rate 3, responsible for the transition through the state in the backward direction, was dependent on [Pi]  in  good  agreement  with  previous  results  (33)),  or  on  ADP  concentration  with  a proportionality coefficient of (3.30  ±1.24)×10 4 M -1 s -1 . The  corresponding coefficients calculated  from  the  sector  model  (2.76  ±0.96)×10 3 M -1 and  (6.23  ±2.57)×10 2 M -1 s -1 were completely different from those obtained using HMM. For the sector model e.g. the ratio of rate  1  to  rate  was  influenced  by  a  mis-assignment  of  the  states  near  to  the  co-domains boundaries. The rate backward transition was model-dependent (see figures in the supplementary data).

Finally, using the macrostate assignment by HMM analysis it was possible to calculate the work done by the F1-ATPase for each macrostate transition ( Wtr ) according to eq. 4

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with kB, the Boltzmann constant, T, the absolute temperature, Δ t, the time resolution, m, the number of smoothed not-decreasing tangential displacements Δ si for  a  macrostate transition ( &lt;m&gt; ≈ 13, &lt; Δ si&gt; ≈ 14.5  nm,  for  detailed  description  see  supplemental  data), D τ, the diffusion  constant  for  a  tangential  displacement  ( D τ ≈ 6.16×10 -14 m 2 s -1 )  calculated  from &lt; Δ s0 2 &gt;=2D τΔ t ,  (with Δ s, ,  the  mean  square  tangential  displacement  during Δ t without  ATP consumption) using Δ s0 ≈ 24.8 nm and Δ t = 5 ms. Equation 4 was derived from the Einstein relation.  The  kinetic  energy  of  the  bead  was ∼ 10 -4 pN . nm  for  a  0.56 μ m  polystyrene bead,negligible in comparison to the thermal energy ( kBT ≈ 4.05 pN . nm). The work produced by  the  F1-ATPase  seemed  to  be  ATP  concentration  independent  in  good  agreement    with previous work (35). The work distributions turned out to be asymmetric and broad, indicating the importance of fluctuations in the present measurements. The mean work for the normal forward transition (ff)  is Wff =  (13.45  ±6.07)· kBT .  When a backward transition followed the forward one ( fb ), the work decreased to Wfb = (9.20 ±4.32)· kBT which probably is due to the fact  that  the  backward  jumps  mostly  took  place  when  the  forward  transition  was  not completed.  For  two  consecutive  backwards  steps  ( bb )  a  work Wbb =  (8.23  ±4.03)· kBT was produced as well. The work of the backward transition was smaller then the chemical energy of  ATP  (18.4 kBT for  concentration  ratio  C7,  or  39.2 kBT for  C1,  respectively)  and significantly smaller then the work of the forward transition. However the probability of the backward  jumps  was  higher  as  expected  for  thermal  fluctuations,  i.e.  also  the  backward transitions were ATP-driven.

## Summary

A non-Markovian behavior of the conformational dynamics of enzymes can be described by a semi-Markov process. In this case a hidden Markov approach with an extended model design leads  to  a  precise  description  of  the  conformational  state  transition  data.  Here  the  HMM design  was  extended  by  introducing  state  rows  sharing  the  same  emission  function  and replacing  the  single  states  of  the  standard  HMM.  The  similarity  between  the  dwell  time histograms  based  on  a  macrostate  assignment  and  the  histograms  calculated  from  the transition probabilities was used as a new criterion to evaluate the model quality.

We  have  presented  a  method  how  this  approach  can  be  applied  to  single-molecule experiments.  To  obtain  a  representative  data  set  of  conformational  dynamics,  a  single immobilized F1 ATPase sub-complex was driven at different speeds by altering the catalytic conditions.  The  extension  of  HMM  including  a  row  of  states  for  each  rotational  direction reproduced the state duration histograms very well, while a single row model was unable to describe  the  histograms  properly.  The  extended  HMM  approach  revealed  (1),  an  [ATP] dependence of the ratio of forward to backward jumps, (2), the [Pi] dependence of the rate in backward direction, (3) a likely  [ATP]  dependence for a backward step, and (4) a reduced work for the transition preceeding a backward step. In general this approach can be applied to a  whole  wealth  of  single-molecule  systems,  where  a  mathematical  procedure  is  needed  to identify individual states and state transitions of the molecule. This may be of importance in a field where the signal-to-noise ratio usually can only be moderately improved by averaging. Finally we would like to note that this approach may be applied to the estimation of stochastic entropy production (36) by this molecular motor.

## Acknowledgments

The  authors  want  to  thank  Kevin  Murphy  who  provided  a  powerful  software  package  for Bayesian learning algorithms as free Matlab code. This work was supported in part by the Landesstiftung Baden-Württemberg in the 'Network of Competence: Functional Nanodevices'.

## Notes

The measurement data used in this paper as well as the Matlab source code for the HMM analysis are available upon request.

## References

1.     Kalinin, S., S. Felekyan, A. Valeri, and C. A. M. Seidel. 2008. Characterizing multiple molecular states in single-molecule multiparameter fluorescence detection by probability distribution analysis. Journal of Physical Chemistry B 112:8361-8374.
2.          Schuler,  B.  2005.  Single-molecule  fluorescence  spectroscopy  of  protein  folding. Chemphyschem 6:1206-1220.
3.          Margittai,  M.,  J.  Widengren,  E.  Schweinberger,  G.  F.  Schroder,  S.  Felekyan,  E. Haustein, M. Konig, D. Fasshauer, H. Grubmuller, R. Jahn, and C. A. M. Seidel. 2003. Single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer reveals a dynamic equilibrium between  closed  and  open  conformations  of  syntaxin  1.  Proceedings  of  the  National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 100:15516-15521.
4.          Tinnefeld,  P.  and  M.  Sauer.  2005.  Branching  out  of  single-molecule  fluorescence spectroscopy:  Challenges  for  chemistry  and  influence  on  biology.  Angewandte Chemie-International Edition 44:2642-2671.
5.          Myong,  S.,  B.  C.  Stevens,  and  T.  Ha.  2006.  Bridging  conformational  dynamics  and function using single-molecule spectroscopy. Structure 14:633-643.
6.          Duser,  M.  G.,  Y.  Bi,  N.  Zarrabi,  S.  D.  Dunn,  and  M.  Borsch.  2008.  The  protontranslocating  a  subunit  of  FoF1-ATP  synthase  is  allocated  asymmetrically  to  the peripheral stalk. J Biol Chem.
7.     Moffitt, J. R., Y. R. Chemla, S. B. Smith, and C. Bustamante. 2008. Recent advances in optical tweezers. Annual Review of Biochemistry 77:205-228.
8.     Wallin, A. E., A. Salmi, and R. Tumay. 2007. Step length measurement - Theory and simulation for tethered bead constant-force single molecule assay. Biophysical Journal 93:795-805.
9.     Okada, Y., H. Higuchi, and N. Hirokawa. 2003. Processivity of the single-headed kinesin KIF1A through biased binding to tubulin. Nature 424:574-577.
10.     Rabiner, L. R. 1989. A Tutorial on Hidden Markov-Models and Selected Applications in Speech Recognition. Proceedings of the Ieee 77:257-286.
11.     Beausang, J. F., C. Zurla, C. Manzo, D. Dunlap, L. Finzi, and P. C. Nelson. 2007. DNA looping kinetics analyzed using diffusive hidden Markov model. Biophysical Journal 92:L64-L66.
12.          Messina,  T.  C.,  H.  Y.  Kim,  J.  T.  Giurleo,  and  D.  S.  Talaga.  2006.  Hidden  Markov model analysis of multichromophore photobleaching. Journal of Physical Chemistry B 110:16366-16376.
13.     Wang, H. Y. and H. Qian. 2007. On detailed balance and reversibility of semi-Markov processes and single-molecule enzyme kinetics. Journal of Mathematical Physics 48:-.

14.     Natarajan, P. and R. Nevatia. Hierarchical Multi-channel Hidden Semi Markov Models; 2007 Jan. 6-12, 2007; Hyderabad, India. p 2562-2567.
15.     Rief, M., R. S. Rock, A. D. Mehta, M. S. Mooseker, R. E. Cheney, and J. A. Spudich. 2000. Myosin-V stepping kinetics: A molecular model for processivity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 97:9482-9486.
16.          Bald,  D.,  H.  Noji,  M.  Yoshida,  Y.  Hirono-Hara,  and  T.  Hisabori.  2001.  Redox regulation  of  the  rotation  of  F1-ATP  synthase.  Journal  of  Biological  Chemistry 276:39505-39507.
17.     Hirono-Hara, Y., K. Ishuzuka, K. Kinosita, M. Yoshida, and H. Noji. 2005. Activation of  pausing  F-1  motor  by  external  force.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of Sciences of the United States of America 102:4288-4293.
18.     Yasuda, R., H. Noji, K. Kinosita, Jr., and M. Yoshida. 1998. F1-ATPase is a highly efficient  molecular  motor  that  rotates  with  discrete  120  degree  steps.  Cell  93:11171124.
19.     Diez, M., B. Zimmermann, M. Börsch, M. König, E. Schweinberger, S. Steigmiller, R. Reuter,  S.  Felekyan,  V.  Kudryavtsev,  C.  A.  Seidel,  and  P.  Gräber.  2004.  Protonpowered subunit rotation  in  single  membrane-bound  F0F1-ATP  synthase.  Nat  Struct Mol Biol 11:135-141.
20.          Börsch,  M.,  M.  Diez,  B.  Zimmermann,  R.  Reuter,  and  P.  Gräber.  2002.  Stepwise rotation  of  the  gamma-subunit  of  EF0F1-ATP  synthase  observed  by  intramolecular single-molecule fluorescence resonance energy transfer. FEBS Lett 527:147-152.
21.     Zimmermann, B., M. Diez, M. Börsch, and P. Graber. 2006. Subunit movements in membrane-integrated  EF0F1  during  ATP  synthesis  detected  by  single-molecule spectroscopy. Biochim Biophys Acta 1757:311-319.
22.     Yasuda, R., H. Noji, M. Yoshida, K. Kinosita, Jr., and H. Itoh. 2001. Resolution of distinct  rotational  substeps  by  submillisecond  kinetic  analysis  of  F1-ATPase.  Nature 410:898-904.
23.     Kinosita, K., Jr., K. Adachi, and H. Itoh. 2004. Rotation of F1-ATPase: how an ATPdriven molecular machine may work. Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct 33:245-268.
24.     Bonafonte, A., J. Vidal, and A. Nogueiras. 1996. Duration Modelling with Expanded HMM applied to Speech Recognition. A: Proceedings Fourth International Conference on Spoken Language Processing:1097-1100.
25.          Faucheux,  L.  P.  and  A.  J.  Libchaber.  1994.  Confined  Brownian-Motion.  Physical Review E 49:5158-5163.
26.     Murphy, K. P. The Bayes Net Toolbox for Matlab In: E. Wegman, A. Braverman, A. Goodman, and P. Smyth, editors. Frontiers in Data Mining and Bioinformatics; 2001; Costa Mesa,  Orange  County,  California, USA.  Interface Foundation  of  North America, Inc., 9748 Thorn Bush Drive, Fairfax Station, VA 22039, USA. p 331-350.

27.          Bilmes,  J.  A.  2006.  What  HMMs  can  do.  Ieice  Transactions  on  Information  and Systems E89D:869-891.
28.     Bonafonte, A., J. Vidal, and A. Nogueiras. 1996. Duration Modelling with Expanded HMM  applied  to  Speech  Recognition.  Proceedings  of  the  Fourth  International Conference on Spoken Language Processing:1097-1100.
29.          Pavlova,  P.,  K.  Shimabukuro,  T.  Hisabori,  G.  Groth,  H.  Lill,  and  D.  Bald.  2004. Complete  inhibition  and  partial  re-activation  of  single  F-1-ATPase  molecules  by tentoxin - New properties of the re-activated enzyme. Journal of Biological Chemistry 279:9685-9688.
30.     Sakaki, N., R. Shimo-Kon, K. Adachi, H. Itoh, S. Furuike, E. Muneyuki, M. Yoshida, and K. Kinosita,  Jr.  2005.  One  rotary  mechanism  for  F1-ATPase  over  ATP concentrations from millimolar down to nanomolar. Biophys J 88:2047-2056.
31.          Hirono-Hara,  Y.,  K.  Ishizuka,  K.  Kinosita,  Jr.,  M.  Yoshida,  and  H.  Noji.  2005. Activation  of  pausing  F1  motor  by  external  force.  Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A 102:4288-4293.
32.          Hirono-Hara,  Y.,  H.  Noji,  M.  Nishiura,  E.  Muneyuki,  K.  Y.  Hara,  R.  Yasuda,  K. Kinosita,  Jr.,  and  M.  Yoshida.  2001.  Pause  and  rotation  of  F(1)-ATPase  during catalysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98:13649-13654.
33.     Adachi, K., K. Oiwa, T. Nishizaka, S. Furuike, H. Noji, H. Itoh, M. Yoshida, and K. Kinosita. 2007. Coupling of rotation and catalysis in F-1-ATPase revealed by singlemolecule imaging and manipulation. Cell 130:309-321.
34.     T. Hastie, R. T., and J. Friedman. 2001. The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction. New York: Springer-Verlag.
35.     Muneyuki, E., T. Watanabe-Nakayama, T. Suzuki, M. Yoshida, T. Nishizaka, and H. Noji.  2007.  Single  molecule  energetics  of  F1-ATPase  motor.  Biophysical  Journal 92:1806-1812.
36.     Tietz, C., S. Schuler, T. Speck, U. Seifert, and J. Wrachtrup. 2006. Measurement of stochastic entropy production. Phys Rev Lett 97:050602.

TABLE 1 Concentrations of the nucleotides ATP, ADP and Pi used in the F1-ATPase rotation experiment. The ATP to ADP and Pi ratio covered six orders of magnitude.

| [ATP], mM  [ADP], mM  [Pi], mM  C 1  1  0.001  0.001  C 2  0.99  0.01  0.01  C 3  0.9  0.1  0.1  C 4  0.5  0.5  0.5  C 5  0.1  0.9  0.9  C 6  0.01  0.99  0.99  C 7  0.001  1  1   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## Figure legends

FIGURE 1. Scheme of  a  three-states  Markov  model.  (a) The  three  gray  circles  are  the Markov states S1, S2 and S3 with transition probabilities kij marked as black arrows. (b) The emission functions p ( x | k ) are probability density functions of the observed signal x .  Markov states  with  overlapping  emission  functions  are  not  straight  forward  distinguishable  and  are therefore called hidden states.

FIGURE  2. Experimental  system .  An  F1-ATPase  sub-complex  was  immobilized  on  a coverslip and a biotinylated bead was attached to the γ -subunit of the F1-ATPase using biotinstreptavidin bonds. ATP-driven bead motion was registered using a fast camera installed on a bright field microscope.

FIGURE 3. ATP-driven bead rotation on F1-ATPase . (a) Accumulated angle of rotation over time for the same F1-ATPase molecule at different nucleotide and phosphate concentrations according to Table 1. (b) two dimensional density plot of the bead positions during γ subunit rotation in the presence of 1 mM ATP, 1 μ M ADP and 1 μ M Pi. The black lines  mark  the  boundaries  of  the  sector  model.  The  PDFs  of  the  three  stopping  positions overlap leading to a mis-assignment of the states by the sector model (see text).

FIGURE 4. Dwell time histograms of one state according to the sector assignment approach (light gray) and the Hidden Markov Model (black) at 1 mM ATP, 1 μ M ADP and 1 μ M Pi. Inset , separation of fluctuating events from transition events discloses the mis-assigned states of the sector model as fluctuating events near the borders of a state (see text for details).

FIGURE 5. (a) Dwell time histograms of the visible state (macrostate) assigned by HMM analysis (gray area) and calculated from the transition matrix of the same HMM (black curve) at  1  mM  ATP, 1 μ M ADP and 1 μ M Pi. Each macrostate (gray ellipse) consists of 1 to 4 microstates (black circles) in a row.

(b) Dwell  time  histograms  of  the  macrostates  after  the  forward  and  before  the  backward transition assigned by HMM analysis (gray area) and calculated from the transition matrix of the same HMM (black curve) at 0.01 mM ATP, 0.99 mM ADP and 0.99 mM Pi.

FIGURE 6 "Two row" model and residual  sum  of  squares  (RSS) between  macrostate dwell  time  distributions  obtained  for  different  HMMs  and  calculated  using  the  HMMs transition matrices. (a) Scheme for a single macrostate in a "two row" model with the upper row for the forward and lower row for the backward direction. (b) Comparison of "one row" ( ● )  and "two row" ( ∇ )  HMM designs for a nucleotide concentration 0.5 mM ATP, 0.5 mM ADP and 0.5 mM Pi. (c) Dependence  of  the  RSS  from  the  number  of  free  parameters  for different  concentration  ratios  of  the  nucleotides  and  phosphate  (C1  -  C7,  see  table  1).  The divergence between these seven curves vanishes for a sufficient complexity of the model.

<!-- image -->

Figure 1

<!-- image -->

Figure 2

<!-- image -->

Figure 3

<!-- image -->

Figure 4

<!-- image -->

Figure 5

<!-- image -->

Figure 6

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Supplementary material

to article: Hidden semi-Markov Models for Single-Molecule Conformational Dynamics A. Kovalev * ,  N.  Zarrabi * ,  F.  Werz * ,  M.  Börsch * ,  Z.  Ristic # ,  H.  Lill # ,  D.  Bald # ,  C.  Tietz * ,  J. Wrachtrup *

## 1. Concentration dependence of state transition rates

HMM analysis  of  the  bead  motion  delivered  a  state  trajectory  and  a  transition  probability matrix. The transition rates between eight states ('two row' model) were calculated from the state  transition  probability  matrix  according  to  Eq.  1.  The  rates  were  further  averaged  over three  F1-ATPase  macrostates.  Dependence  on  nucleotide  concentrations  for  some  rates  is presented in supplementary Figure S1. Since identical ADP and Pi concentrations were used in the experiments (Tab. 1), we could not distinguish between ADP or Pi dependence of rate 3,(see Figure S1 b).

## 2. Computation of the work produced by the F1 ATPase subcomplex at ATP hydrolysis

Estimation of the mechanical work produced by the F1-ATPase along with its enzyme kinetics is  crucial  for  a  thermodynamic  characterization  of  the  ATP-driven  single  molecule  motor. Often  it  is  assumed  that  the  work  produced  by  F1-ATPase  during  ATP  hydrolysis  is proportional to the rotational angle of the attached bead. However, for the large beads used in our experiments, this assumption is not fulfilled. Only the tangential displacement of the bead reflects  the  work  produced  by  the  ATPase.  To  demonstrate  this  we  first  introduce  this tangential displacement, then we show a way to exclude the influence of the Brownian motion on the calculation of the work, and finally the work produced by the F1-ATPase is derived from these data.

Tangential  displacements  were  found  according  to  the  scheme  in  Figure  S2a.  First,  the 'rotation  center'  (O)  was  defined  as  a  center  of  the  circle  best-suited  to  the  bead  centroid positions.  Then,  for  the  two  positions  of  the  bead  centroid  labeled  1  and  2,  the  tangential displacement 1'-2' was found as a projection of the vector 1-2 on the axis perpendicular to the line going through the 'rotation center' O and the middle point of the vector 1-2, (see Figure S2a).  If  the  bead  motion  is  just  a  rotational  motion,  the  tangential  displacement  should  be proportional  to  the  distance  of  the  bead  from  the  center  of  rotation.  However,  Figure  S2b demonstrates a very weak dependence of the average tangential displacement on the distance from  the  rotation  center.  Therefore  the  bead  motion  is  mainly  a  translational  motion.  The friction  caused  by  the  bead  rotation  is  much  smaller  than  that  caused  by  the  translational motion of the bead.

The elementary work ( W Δ t ) produced by F1-ATPase within a time resolution interval ( Δ t =0.05 s) was calculated according to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ is a translational hydrodynamic friction coefficient, Δ t is the time resolution, s ~ Δ is a smoothed  not-decreasing  tangential  displacement  (see  below).  The  friction  coefficient  was defined using the Einstein relation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where kB is a Boltzmann constant, T is an absolute temperature, D τ is a diffusion coefficient for  the  tangential  motion.  Combining  Eq.  1s  and  Eq.  2s  and  summing  up  the  elementary works along a sub-trajectory of the transition through a macrostate we get Eq. 4. The diffusion coefficient D τ was determined from the longest sub-trajectory with no macrostate change (at the lowest ATP concentration) using the Einstein equation for one-dimensional diffusion and Δ t =0.05 s

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the brackest denote averaging.

Brownian motion of the bead complicated the precise estimation of the work in two ways. it affects the precision of Equation 3s, and it increases the accumulated tangential displacement (ATD) over time even without ATP consumption.

Equation 3s is valid for the classical Brownian motion of the bead. At the same time, the bead exhibits restricted diffusion, as revealed by the existence of a plateau in the curve of the mean square tangential displacement of the bead (Figure S3a). Thus we need to model the motion of the bead to find out its true diffusion coefficient. Simulations of the bead motion were done according to the stochastic differential equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where η is a normal distributed random vector with zero mean and variance equal to one, D is a diffusion matrix, x is a bead position vector (x,y), the bead is moving in a two dimensional potential  ( Ux,y ).  The  potential  in  equilibrium  (that  is,  no  change  of  the  macrostate)  is determined by ( ) y x B y x p k T U , , ln = -, where px,y is the probability for the bead to be at position (x,y). The potential is shown on Figure S4a. Simulations showed that the relative error of the diffusion coefficients is less then 2 percent defined using Eq. 3s for the smallest Δ t= 0.05 s

The second challenge is showsn in Figure S3b. The average difference between the maximum and  minimum  accumulated  tangential  displacement  (ATD)  reaches  0.2 μ m  for  the  same macrostate  (no  ATP  consumption)  over  a  time  interval  of ∼ 0.26  s.  This  is  similar  to  the average  ATD  for  a  transition  through  a  macrostate  in  the  forward  direction  (that  is,  upon ATP-driven motion). Therefore at observation times &gt;0.26 s, apparent state transition events due to Brownian motion could be incorrectly assigned to the events of the ATP-dependent rotation.

For  the  calculation  of  the  work  produced  by  the  enzyme  using  Equation  1s  the  following aspects  have  to  be  considered:  a  transition  from  one  macrostate  to  another  normally  takes place in many (i.e. more then five) sub-steps; the sub-step size is comparable with the step size of the Brownian motion; the energy released from ATP hydrolysis could be used only for an  one-directional  motion.  Figure  S4b  (squares)  shows  a  typical  course  of  the  ATD.  To exclude thermal fluctuations the ATD curve was smoothed (Fig. S4b, dotted line). The active motion  of  the  enzyme  was  assumed  to  be  one-directional,  hence  the  smoothed  curve  was further transformed to a non-decreasing curve (Figure S4b, gray line). In this way fluctuations of  the  enzyme  potential  were  excluded  from  the  work  calculations.  The  non-decreasing smoothed ATD for each time interval were used for the work calculation according to Eq. 4.

The  work  for  backward  jumps  following  forward  ones  cannot  be  calculated  in  this  way, because  the  bead  continues  its  forward  motion  at  first  and  only  then  changed  the  motion direction. The average ATD in this case is 0.045 μ m, whereas the average difference between maximal and minimal ATD is 0.139 μ m.

Typical work histograms are shown in Figure S5 for different types of transitions through a macrostate. They are broad, their shape is a gamma function in first approximation. The work was calculated for a sequence of jumps. The first step in a sequence is an initializing step showing  the  current  microstate.  The  actual  work  was  calculated  for  the  second  step.  The reason of introduction of the third step is explained in the main text.

FIGURE S1 Concentration dependence of the ratio of rates 1 and 2 ( a ), and of rate 3 ( b ). The proportionality coefficients for the linear fits are 3.93 × 10 4 [M -1 ] in (a), and 3.3 × 10 4 [s -1 M -1 ] in (b). The scheme shown in Fig. 6a in the text explains the rates numbering. Straight lines are the linear fits to the data.

<!-- image -->

FIGURE S2 ( a ) Scheme of the centroid of the bead motion from position 1 to position 2. 'O' is a rotation center, Δ s is a tangential displacement, 1-1' and 2'-2 are radial displacements. ( b ) The tangential displacement ( Δ s) of the bead within 0.05 s at different radial distances (r) in the presence of 0.5 mM ATP, 0.5 mM ADP and 0.5 mM Pi.

<!-- image -->

FIGURE S3 ( a ) Dependence of the mean square of the tangential displacement of the bead on the  observation  time  interval  ( Δ t).  ( b )  Dependence  of  the  average  maximal  dispersion  of  the tangential displacements on time interval Δ t,  for  nucleotides  concentrations 1 μ M ATP and 1 mM ADP. The dependencies were built for trajectory sections without a macrostate change.

<!-- image -->

FIGURE S4 ( a ) two dimensional potential probed by the bead on F1-ATPase. The numbers on  the  boundaries  of  grayscale  levels  are  the  potential  in  units  of  kBT.  Concentrations  of nucleotides were 1 μ M ATP and 1 mM ADP. The potential was found for trajectory sections with no macrostate change. ( b ) Accumulated tangential displacement over time (squares) for a forward transition through a macrostate. The dotted line is a smoothed ATD curve, the gray line is a non-decreasing smoothed ATD curve.

<!-- image -->

FIGURE S5 Histograms of works produced by F1-ATPase for: ( a ) a forward transition after a  forward transition before the next forward transition (fff), ( b )  a  forward transition after a forward transition  before  a  backward  transition  (ffb),  and  ( c )  a  backward  transition  after  a backward transition (bb). Black vertical lines show the mean values.

<!-- image -->