The Annals of Applied Probability 2014, Vol. 24, No. 1, 422-446 DOI: 10.1214/13-AAP929 c © Institute of Mathematical Statistics, 2014

## LOSS OF MEMORY OF HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS AND LYAPUNOV EXPONENTS 1

By Pierre Collet 2 and Florencia Leonardi 3

Ecole Polytechnique and Universidade de S˜ ao Paulo

In this paper we prove that the asymptotic rate of exponential loss of memory of a finite state hidden Markov model is bounded above by the difference of the first two Lyapunov exponents of a certain product of matrices. We also show that this bound is in fact realized, namely for almost all realizations of the observed process we can find symbols where the asymptotic exponential rate of loss of memory attains the difference of the first two Lyapunov exponents. These results are derived in particular for the observed process and for the filter; that is, for the distribution of the hidden state conditioned on the observed sequence. We also prove similar results in total variation.

1. Introduction. Let ( X t ) t ∈ Z be a Markov chain over a finite alphabet A . We consider a probabilistic function ( Z t ) t ∈ Z of this chain, a model introduced by Petrie (1969). More precisely, there is another finite alphabet B and for any X t we choose at random a Z t in B . The random choice of Z t depends only on the value X t of the original process at time t . The process ( Z t ) is the observed process and ( X t ) is the hidden process. This model is called a hidden Markov process.

We are interested in the asymptotic loss of memory of the processes ( X t ) t ∈ Z and ( Z t ) t ∈ Z conditioned on the observed sequence. For example, if the conditional probability of Z t given X t does not depend on X t , the process ( Z t ) t ∈ Z is an independent process. Another trivial example is when there is no random choice, namely Z t = X t , in this case the process ( Z t ) t ∈ Z is Markovian. However, as we will see, under natural assumptions, the process ( Z t ) t ∈ Z has infinite memory. On the other hand, a particularly interesting question from the point of view of applications is to consider the loss of memory of the filter; that is, the distribution of X 0 conditioned on the past observed sequence Z -1 , . . . , Z -n +1 and for different initial conditions on X -n ; see, for example, Capp´ e, Moulines and Ryd´ en (2005).

Received November 2011.

1 Supported in part by FAPESPs project Consistent estimation of stochastic processes with variable length memory (2009/09411-8), CNPqs projects Stochastic systems with variable length interactions (476501/2009-1) and USP project Mathematics , computation , language and the brain (11.1.9367.1.5).

2 Supported in part by the DynEurBraz European project.

3 Supported in part by a CNPq-Brazil fellowship.

AMS 2000 subject classifications. Primary 60J2; secondary 62M09.

Key words and phrases. Random functions of Markov chains, Oseledec's theorem, perturbed processes.

This is an electronic reprint of the original article published by the Institute of Mathematical Statistics in The Annals of Applied Probability ,

2014, Vol. 24, No. 1, 422-446. This reprint differs from the original in pagination and typographic detail.

Our goal is to investigate how fast these processes loose memory.

Exponential upper bounds for this asymptotic loss of memory have been obtained in various papers; see, for example, Douc et al. (2009), Douc, Moulines and Ritov (2009) and references therein. For the case of projections of Markov chains and the relation with Gibbs measures, see Chazottes and Ugalde (2011) and references therein.

In the present paper, under generic assumptions, we prove that the asymptotic rate of exponential loss of memory is bounded above by the difference of the first two Lyapunov exponents of a certain product of matrices. We also show that this bound is in fact realized, namely for almost all realizations of the process ( Z t ) t ∈ Z , we can find symbols where the asymptotic exponential rate of loss of memory attains the difference of the first two Lyapunov exponents. As far as we know our results provide the first lower bounds for the loss of memory of these processes. Similar results (in particular lower bounds) are also obtained in the total variation distance.

Conditioned on the observed sequence Z -1 , . . . , Z -n +1 , we have considered different possibilities for the initial distribution at time -n , namely one can either give the initial distribution of X -n or the initial distribution of Z -n . Similarly one can ask for the distribution of X 0 (the hidden present state) or of Z 0 (the observable present state).

As an application, we consider the case of a randomly perturbed Markov chain with two symbols. We show that the asymptotic rate of loss of memory can be expanded in powers of the perturbation with a logarithmic singularity. This was our original motivation coming from our previous work with Galves [Collet, Galves and Leonardi (2008)].

The relation between product of random matrices and hidden Markov models was previously described in Jacquet, Seroussi and Szpankowski (2008). In this paper it was proved in particular that the first Lyapunov exponent is the opposite of the entropy of the process.

The content of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we give a precise definition of the asymptotic exponential rate of loss of memory and state the main results about the relation of this rate with the first two Lyapunov exponents.

Proofs are given in Section 3. They rely on more general propositions which allow to treat at once the different situations of initial distributions and present distributions. In Section 4 we give the application to the random perturbation of a two states Markov chain.

2. Definitions and main results. Let ( X t ) t ∈ Z be an irreducible aperiodic Markov chain over a finite alphabet A with transition probability matrix p ( ·|· ) and unique invariant measure π . Without loss of generality we will assume A = { 1 , 2 , . . . , k } . In the sequel, we will use the shorthand notation x s r for a sequence of symbols ( x r , . . . , x s ) ( r ≤ s ). Consider another finite alphabet B = { 1 , 2 , . . . , ℓ } , and a process ( Z t ) t ∈ Z , a probabilistic function of the Markov chain ( X t ) t ∈ Z over B . That is, there exists a matrix q ( ·|· ) ∈ R k × ℓ such that for any n ≥ 0, any z n 0 ∈ B n +1 and any x n 0 ∈ A n +1 , we have

From now on, the symbol ¯ z will represent an element in B Z . Define the shift-operator S : B Z → B Z by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The shift is invertible, and its inverse is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To state our results we will need the following hypotheses:

- (H1) min i,j p ( j | i ) &gt; 0, min i,m q ( m | i ) &gt; 0.
- (H2) det( p ) =0.
- (H3) rank( q ) = k .

̸

Note that hypothesis (H3) implies ℓ ≥ k .

For the convenience of the reader we recall Oseledec's theorem in finite dimension; see, for example, Ledrappier (1984), Katok and Hasselblatt (1995). As usual, we denote by log + ( x ) = max(log( x ) , 0).

Oseledec's theorem. Let (Ω , µ ) be a probability space and let T be a measurable transformation of Ω such that µ is T -ergodic. Let L ω be a measurable function from Ω to L ( R k ) (the space of linear operators of R k into itself). Assume the function L ω satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, there exist λ 1 &gt;λ 2 &gt; · · · &gt;λ s , with s ≤ k and there exists an invariant set ˜ Ω ⊂ Ω of full measure ( µ (Ω \ ˜ Ω) = 0) such that for all ω ∈ ˜ Ω there exist s +1 sub-vector spaces

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

such that for any ⃗ v ∈ V ( j ) ω \ V ( j +1) ω ( 1 ≤ j ≤ s ) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where L [ n ] ω = L T n -1 ( ω ) · · · L ω . Moreover, the subspaces satisfy the relation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

1 2 s are called the Lyapunov exponents. Z ¯ z

The numbers λ , λ , . . . , λ

In the sequel we will use this theorem with Ω = B , µ the stationary ergodic measure of the process ( Z ) [Capp´ e, Moulines and Ryd´ en (2005)],

t t ∈ Z T = S -1 and L the linear operator in R k with matrix given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With this notation, we have, for example,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( ⃗ θ b ) i = p ( i | b ) and ⃗ 1 a is the basis vector with component number a equal to one.

From now on we will use the ℓ 2 norm ‖ · ‖ and the corresponding scalar product on R k . Note that from our definition of L z we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore we can apply Oseledec's theorem to get the existence of the Lyapunov exponents.

For any ¯ z ∈ B Z , for probabilities ρ on A , η on B and any integer n , we define two probabilities on A by

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These are the probabilities of X 0 conditioned on the observed string z -1 -n +1 when the distribution of X -n is ρ (resp., the distribution of Z -n is η ).

When ρ is a Dirac measure concentrated on b we will simply denote the measure ν [ n ] ¯ z,ρ by ν [ n ] z,b , and similarly for σ [ n ] ¯ z,η .

¯ We can state now our main results.

¯

Theorem 2.1. Under the hypothesis (H1) , for each a ∈ A , for any probabilities ρ and ρ ′ on A ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

µ -almost surely. Similarly, under the hypothesis (H1) , for each a ∈ A , for any probabilities η and η ′ on B ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

µ -almost surely.

Remark. When A = B and q is the identity matrix, ( Z t ) t ∈ Z =( X t ) t ∈ Z is a Markov chain. The second part of hypothesis (H1) does not hold, but it is easy to adapt the proof of Theorem 2.1 for this particular case. It is easy to verify recursively that the matrices L [ n ] ¯ z are of rank one. The Lyapunov exponents can be computed explicitly. One gets λ 1 = -H ( p ) (the entropy of the Markov chain with transition probability p ) from the ergodic theorem, and λ 2 = -∞ with multiplicity k -1.

Theorem 2.2. Under hypotheses (H1)-(H2) , for µ -almost all ¯ z there exists a, b, c ∈ A (which may depend on ¯ z ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under hypotheses (H1)-(H3) , for µ -almost all ¯ z there exists a ∈ A , b, c ∈ B (which may depend on ¯ z ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As a corollary, we derive equivalent results for the loss of memory of the process ( Z t ) t ∈ Z . For any ¯ z ∈ B Z , for probabilities ρ on A , η on B and any integer n , we define two probabilities on B by

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Corollary 2.3. Under the hypothesis (H1) , for each e ∈ B , for any probabilities ρ and ρ ′ on A ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

µ -almost surely. Similarly, under the hypothesis (H1) , for each e ∈ B , for any probabilities η and η ′ on B ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

µ -almost surely.

Moreover, under hypotheses (H1)-(H3) , for µ -almost all ¯ z there exists e ∈ B , b, c ∈ A (which may depend on ¯ z ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under hypotheses (H1)-(H3) , for µ -almost all ¯ z there exists e, b, c ∈ B (which may depend on ¯ z ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From a practical point of view, one can prove various lower bounds for the quantity λ 2 -λ 1 . As an example we give the following result.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proposition 2.4. Under hypotheses (H1)-(H2) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now state a related result using the total variation distance between the distributions. This result will only use a weaker version of hypothesis (H3), namely

(H3 ′ ), there exists b, c ∈ B in and i ∈ A such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Note that under this hypothesis, we do not assume any relation between the cardinality of A and the cardinality of B (we require of course the cardinality of B being at least two).

Let We recall that the total variation distance TV( ν 1 , ν 2 ) between two measures ν 1 and ν 2 on A is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar definitions are given for two measures on B .

It follows at once that under the hypothesis (H1) we have µ -almost surely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and similarly for the measures σ , ˜ ν and ˜ σ . In order to state a lower bound for these quantities, we need to recall a result about Lyapunov dimensions.

We denote by s the number of different Lyapunov exponents, and by m i (1 ≤ i ≤ s ) the multiplicity of the exponent λ i , namely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from Oseledec's theorem that these numbers are µ -almost surely constant.

Theorem 2.5. Assume hypotheses (H1)-(H2) . Then for µ -almost every ¯ z and for any pair ( b, c ) of elements in B satisfying (H3 ′ ) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark. Similar lower bounds for the total variation distance between the measures ν [ n ] ¯ z,b and ν [ n ] ¯ z,c can be proven under hypotheses (H1)-(H2). In the case of the total variation distance between ˜ σ [ n ] ¯ z,b and ˜ σ [ n ] ¯ z,c (resp., between ˜ ν [ n ] ¯ z,b and ˜ ν [ n ] ¯ z,c ) we can prove also the same lower bounds, but this requires the full set of hypotheses (H1)-(H3).

3. Proofs. We begin by proving some lemmas which will be useful later. We introduce the order ( R k , ≤ ) given by ⃗ v ≤ ⃗ w if and only if v i ≤ w i for all i =1 , . . . , k . When needed, we will also make use of the symbols &lt; , &gt; and ≥ , defined in an analogous way. Note that since the matrices L ¯ z have strictly positive entries, if ⃗ v ≤ ⃗ w , then L ¯ z ⃗ v ≤ L ¯ z ⃗ w . We will use the notation ⃗ 1 ∈ R k for the vector with components ( ⃗ 1) i =1 for each i =1 , . . . , k and the notation ⃗ 1 a ∈ R k for the vector with components ( ⃗ 1 a ) a =1 and ( ⃗ 1 a ) i =0 for i = a .

̸

Lemma 3.1. Under hypothesis (H1) , if ξ ⃗ ∈ V (2) ¯ z \ { ⃗ 0 } , then ξ ⃗ has two nonzero components of opposite signs, µ -almost surely.

Proof. Assume there exits ξ ⃗ ∈ V (2) ¯ z \{ ⃗ 0 } with ξ ⃗ i ≥ 0 for all i =1 , . . . , k . Then, from hypothesis (H1) it follows that there exists α&gt; 0 such that, for all ¯ z ,

One may take, for example,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We can apply L [ n -1] S -1 ¯ z to both sides, use monotonicity and take norms, to obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ⃗ w ∈ V (1) S -1 ¯ z \ V (2) S -1 ¯ z . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and using Oseledec's theorem we have µ -almost surely that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which contradicts the fact that ξ ⃗ ∈ V (2) ¯ z \ { ⃗ 0 } . □

Lemma 3.2. Under hypothesis (H1) we have Codim( V (2) ¯ z ) = 1 , µ -almost surely.

Proof. Assume Codim( V (2) ¯ z ) ≥ 2. Since any vector ⃗ w 1 of norm one in the cone C k = { ⃗ w : ⃗ w &gt; 0 } does not belong to V (2) ¯ z (by Lemma 3.1), the vector space V (2) ¯ z ⊕ R ⃗ w 1 is of codimension at least one, µ -almost surely. Therefore we can find a vector ⃗ w 2 of norm one in C k \ ( V (2) ¯ z ⊕ R ⃗ w 1 ). Note that

¯

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since otherwise, the minimum is reached at a finite nonzero pair ( γ,⃗ y ) which would contradict ⃗ w 2 ∈ C k \ ( V (2) ¯ z ⊕ R ⃗ w 1 ). Let ¯ z be a fixed element in B Z .

Define

Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from hypothesis (H1) that φ &gt; 0. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the Birkhoff-Hopf theorem [see, e.g., Cavazos-Cadena (2003)], there exists a constant β &gt; 0 such that for all z ∈ B Z and all n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To see this observe that δ n +1 ≤ γ n +1 by definition. We also have by monotonicity of L ¯ z

and also

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the sequence ( γ n ) is decreasing, there exists γ ∗ and β ′ &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, it follows immediately from (3.2) that for any i =1 , . . . , k , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then there exists β ′′ &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now prove that This implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Since ⃗ w 1 and ⃗ w 2 are linearly independent, we have ⃗ w 1 -γ ∗ ⃗ w 2 = ⃗ 0. This and the previous inequality imply that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then ⃗ w 1 -γ ∗ ⃗ w 2 ∈ V (2) ¯ z \ { 0 } , and this contradicts (3.1). □

The proof of Theorem 2.1 will follow from the next proposition.

Proposition 3.3. Let ( ⃗ ψ a ) a ∈ A be a basis of R k satisfying ⃗ ψ a ≥ 0 for any a . Let ⃗ θ 1 &gt; 0 and ⃗ θ 2 &gt; 0 be two vectors in R k . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. By Lemma 3.1, since ( ⃗ ψ a ) i ≥ 0 for any i =1 , . . . , k then ⃗ ψ a / ∈ V (2) ¯ z , µ -almost surely. In the same way, from Lemma 3.1 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note also that since ( ⃗ ψ a ) a ∈ A form a basis of nonnegative vectors, we must have ⃗ ψ i &gt; 0 for all i =1 , . . . , k . Therefore, by Lemma 3.2 we have that for any a ∈ A ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ξ ⃗ a ∈ V (2) ¯ z , u a =0, and this decomposition is unique. Then

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define for any n and ¯ z

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and let

Then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and similarly

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In other words for any n and z ,

(3.5)

Then

Note that

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, using Oseledec's theorem the result follows. □

Proof of Theorem 2.1. We observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ⃗ θ ρ , ⃗ ψ a ∈ R k are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore,

and the first statement of Theorem 2.1 follows from Proposition 3.3 since the conditions on ( ψ a ) a ∈ A , ⃗ θ ρ and ⃗ θ ρ ′ can be immediately verified using hypothesis (H1).

The second part follows similarly by noting that

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This finishes the proof of Theorem 2.1. □

Before proceeding with the proof of Theorem 2.2 we will prove a useful lemma.

Lemma 3.4. Let ( ⃗ ψ a ) a ∈ A be a basis of R k such that ⃗ ψ a ≥ 0 for all a . Let ˜ Ω be a set of full µ -measure where the Oseledec's theorem holds. Then for any ¯ z ∈ ¯ Ω , there exists a symbol a = a ( ¯ z ) ∈ A such that ξ ⃗ a ∈ V (2) ¯ z \ V (3) ¯ z , where ξ ⃗ a is the unique vector in V (2) ¯ z satisfying

for some real number u a .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Assume ξ ⃗ a ∈ V (3) ¯ z for all a . Then, as Codim( V (3) ¯ z ) ≥ 2, the set { ⃗ ψ a } generates a sub-space of co-dimension 1. This contradicts the fact that the set of vectors { ⃗ ψ a : a ∈ A } forms a basis of R k . □

The proof of Theorem 2.2 will follow from the next proposition.

Proposition 3.5. Let ( ⃗ ψ a ) a ∈ A be a basis of R k satisfying ⃗ ψ a ≥ 0 for any a . Let ( ⃗ θ j ) j ∈ A be another basis of R k such that ⃗ θ j &gt; 0 . Then for µ -almost every ¯ z there exist a ∈ A and two indices r, s ∈{ 1 , . . . , k } such that Proof. Let ˜ Ω be a set of full µ -measure where the Oseledec's theorem holds. Applying Lemma 3.4, for any ¯ z ∈ ˜ Ω we find a symbol a = a ( ¯ z ) ∈ A such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with ξ ⃗ a ∈ V (2) ¯ z \ V (3) ¯ z . Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now show that there exist r and s such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the vectors ˜ θ j ( n, ¯ z ) are defined by

Assume this is not the case, namely that for any r and s ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Choose for any n (and fixed ¯ z ) a normalized vector f ⃗ ( n, ¯ z ) orthogonal to V (2) S -n ¯ z . Such a vector exists by Lemma 3.2. Note that for any j , n and ¯ z , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This implies that the vectors ( f ⃗ ( n, ¯ z ) , ˜ ξ a ( n, ¯ z ) , ˜ θ 1 ( n, ¯ z ) , . . . , ˜ θ k ( n, ¯ z )) belong to a compact subset of R k +2 . Therefore, we can find a subsequence ( n j ) of integers such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The vectors ¯ f ( ¯ z ) and ¯ ξ a ( ¯ z ) have norm one, and the vectors ¯ θ j ( ¯ z ) have nonnegative components and satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have also for any r and s

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now show that the set of vectors { ¯ θ m ( ¯ z ) } is a basis of R k . This follows from

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now observe that since all the components of the vector ζ ( n, ¯ z ) are strictly positive, and since by Lemma 3.1 any vector in V (2) S -n ¯ z has two components of opposite sign, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking the limit we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now define the orthogonal projection P on the orthogonal ¯ f ⊥ of ¯ f parallel to ¯ ζ , namely for any vector v

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We claim that the vectors ( P ( ¯ θ m ( ¯ z ) -¯ θ m +1 ( ¯ z ))) m =1 ,...,k -1 form a basis of ¯ f ⊥ . Indeed, if this is not true, there exist real numbers α 1 , . . . , α k -1 , with at least one nonzero, such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In other words, there exists a number α such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

But this is impossible since the vectors ( ¯ θ m ( ¯ z ) -¯ θ m +1 ( ¯ z )) m =1 ,...,k -1 and ¯ ζ ( ¯ z ) form a basis of R k . Since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we obtain that the normalized vector ¯ ξ a ( ¯ z ) would be orthogonal to the basis ( P ( ¯ θ m ( ¯ z ) -¯ θ m +1 ( ¯ z ))) m =1 ,...,k -1 of ¯ f ⊥ which is a contradiction with (3.10). In other words, there exists a = a ( ¯ z ), r = r ( ¯ z ) and s = s ( ¯ z ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Schwarz's inequality we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, for this choice of a ( ¯ z ) ∈ A , r ( ¯ z ) and s ( ¯ z ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Theorem 2.2. As in the proof of Theorem 2.1 we take for any a ∈ A the vector ⃗ ψ a = ⃗ 1 a . We also take for any b ∈ B the vector ⃗ θ b in R k as the vector ⃗ θ ρ in (3.6) with ρ the Dirac measure concentrated on b , that is, ( ⃗ θ b ) i = p ( i | b ). Under (H2), these definitions verify the hypotheses of Proposition 3.5 and the first part of Theorem 2.2 follows.

For the second part, we define for any c ∈ B the vector ( ⃗ θ c ) as the vector ( ⃗ θ η ) in (3.7) with η the Dirac measure concentrated on c , that is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from (H2) and (H3) that we can choose c 1 , . . . , c k such that ( ⃗ θ c j ) 1 ≤ j ≤ k is a basis of R k . The result follows again from Proposition 3.5. □

Proof of Corollary 2.3. The upper bound follows by noting that for all ¯ z ∈ B Z , for any e ∈ B and for any measures ρ and ρ ′ on A , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and applying Theorem 2.1, the second upper bound follows similarly.

We now prove that the upper bound is reached for almost all z ∈ B Z .

¯ By (H3), as rank( q ) = k there exists symbols e 1 , . . . , e k ∈ B such that the matrix M ∈ R k × k with elements M i,j = q ( e i | j ) is invertible. For b, c ∈ A , denote by U [ n ] b,c, ¯ z and V [ n ] b,c, ¯ z the vectors in R k with elements ( U [ n ] b,c, ¯ z ) i = ˜ ν [ n ] ¯ z,b ( e i ) -˜ ν [ n ] ¯ z,c ( e i ) and ( V [ n ] b,c, ¯ z ) i = ν [ n ] ¯ z,b ( i ) -ν [ n ] ¯ z,c ( i ). By (3.11) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and as M is invertible

Then, for all a, b, c ∈ A

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying the logarithm on both sides, dividing by n an taking limits, we have that for all ¯ z on a set of positive measure, for all a, b, c ∈ A , and for all e ∈ B

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the third part of Corollary 2.3 follows from Theorem 2.2. The last part follows by the same arguments. □

Proof of Proposition 2.4. It is well known that the sequence of Lyapunov exponents satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the numbers m i denote the multiplicity of λ i , namely dim( V ( j ) ¯ z ) = m j + · · · + m s ; see Ledrappier (1984), Katok and Hasselblatt (1995). In particular, 1 + m 2 + · · · + m s = k . Let E = E µ [log | det L ¯ z | ]. Then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

Note that by Lemma 3.1, for almost all ¯ z we have

Moreover,

Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Before proving Theorem 2.5, we prove a lemma in linear algebra which will be useful for the proof. This lemma is probably well known but we could not find a reference. We give the proof here for the convenience of the reader.

Lemma 3.6. Let e 1 , . . . , e k be a basis of R k and assume that all the vectors ‖ e j ‖ have norm one. Then, for any vector v ∈ R k of norm one, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A is a matrix mapping the basis ( e i ) to an orthonormal basis.

Proof. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ( f j ) be an orthonormal basis of R k . Let A be the matrix mapping the basis ( e j ) to the basis ( f j ), namely Ae j = f j for 1 ≤ j ≤ k . We have

Therefore,

and

On the other hand, since ( e j ) ℓ = A -1 j,ℓ we have | A -1 j,ℓ | ≤ 1 for 1 ≤ j ≤ k and 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k . This implies by the well-known formula expressing the elements of an inverse matrix in terms of minors and determinant that for any 1 ≤ j ≤ k and 1 ≤ ℓ ≤ k

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore ‖ A t ‖ = ‖ A ‖ ≤ k ( k -1)! det A (the Hilbert-Schmidt norm), and we finally get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 2.5 will be a consequence of the following proposition.

Proposition 3.7. Assume hypotheses (H1)-(H2) hold. Let ( ⃗ ψ a ) a ∈ A be a basis of R k satisfying ⃗ ψ a ≥ 0 for any a . Let ⃗ θ 1 &gt; 0 and ⃗ θ 2 &gt; 0 be two vectors in R k with ⃗ θ 1 independent of ⃗ θ 2 . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. As in the proof of Proposition 3.3 let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also define the vector η ⃗ ( n, ¯ z ) = ⃗ θ 1 -γ ( n, ¯ z ) ⃗ θ 2 that satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any a ∈ A , we denote as before by ξ ⃗ a the unique vector in V (2) ¯ z such that ⃗ ψ a = u a ⃗ ψ + ξ ⃗ a , with u a a real number. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let a 2 , . . . , a k be any given collection of k -1 different elements of A . Then, for any ¯ z ∈ Ω, the set of vectors ⃗ ψ, ⃗ ξ a 2 , . . . , ⃗ ξ a k form a basis of R k (since ⃗ ψ / ∈ V (2) z by Lemma 3.1).

̸

¯ By the hypotheses (H1)-(H2) we have that for any ¯ z , det( L ¯ z ) =0, and therefore for any integer n , det( L [ n ] ¯ z ) =0. This implies that the collection of vectors

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is also a basis of R k and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now apply Lemma 3.6 and obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where M is the matrix formed by the vectors in (3.13). We now observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

since ⃗ θ 1 is independent of ⃗ θ 2 . We also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We observe that, for any a ∈ A , by Oseledec's theorem we have µ -almost surely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore [see, e.g., Ledrappier (1984), Katok and Hasselblatt (1995)], since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is the first part of the lower bound. We also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since all the Lyapunov exponents are nonpositive, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Theorem 2.5. The result follows immediately from Proposition 3.7 using the same choices for the vectors ( ⃗ ψ a ) a ∈ A and ( ⃗ θ b ) b ∈ B as in the proof of Theorem 2.2. □

4. Perturbed processes over a binary alphabet. Consider the Markov chain ( X t ) t ∈ Z over the alphabet A = { 0 , 1 } with matrix of transition probabilities given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we assume p 0 = p 1 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The quantities p ( j | i ) are given by p ( j | i ) = P i,j .

Consider also the process ( Z t ) t ∈ Z over the alphabet B = { 0 , 1 } with output matrix q ε ( j | i ) = P ( Z 0 = j | X 0 = i ) = (1 -ε ) 1 { i = j } + ε 1 { i = j } . From now on we will assume ε ∈ (0 , 1) \ { 1 / 2 } . Then, as z 0 ∈{ 0 , 1 } ,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have the following equality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

see, for example, Ledrappier (1984) or Katok and Hasselblatt (1995) for a proof. Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the above expression for L ¯ z,ε we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For z 0 ∈{ 0 , 1 } define the vectors

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These vectors have norm 1 and satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since z 0 and z 1 equal zero or one.

We recall that a distance d can be defined on Ω as follows. For ¯ z and ¯ z ′ in Ω, let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We refer to Bowen (2008) for details, in particular Ω equipped with this distance is a compact metric space. We now prove the following result.

Lemma 4.1. There exist two constants ε 0 &gt; 0 and D&gt; 0 and two continuous functions ρ ( ε, ¯ z ) and h ( ε, ¯ z ) such that for any ε ∈ [0 , ε 0 ] , the vectors

satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, there is a constant U &gt; 1 such that for any ε ∈ [0 , ε 0 ] , any n and any ¯ z ∈ Ω ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The equation for ⃗ g is equivalent to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking the scalar product of both terms in equation (4.2) with ⃗ e z 1 and f ⃗ z 1 we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and since M t z 1 f ⃗ z 1 =0 and 〈 f ⃗ z 1 , ⃗ e z 1 〉 =0,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote by D the Banach space of continuous functions on [0 , ε 0 ] × Ω equipped with the sup norm. On the ball B D of radius D =4 β -1 centered at the origin in D we define a transformation T given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Direct computation shows that for all ( ε, ¯ z ) ∈ [0 , ε 0 ] × Ω we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We first prove that T maps B D into itself. Indeed for h ∈ B D , since D =4 β -1 there exists ε ′ 0 &gt; 0 small enough such that for any ε ∈ [0 , ε ′ 0 ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We leave to the reader the proof that T ( h ) is a continuous function of ε and ¯ z . We now prove that T is a contraction on B D . For h and h ′ in B D ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since D =4 β -1 there exists ε 0 &gt; 0 small enough, and smaller than ε ′ 0 , such that for any ε ∈ [0 , ε 0 ] we have

By the contraction mapping principle [see, e.g., Dieudonn´ e (1969)], the map T has a unique fixed point h in B D . It follows at once that the vectors

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

satisfy equation (4.2). The estimate on ⃗ g ( ε, ¯ z ) follows immediately from the fact that h ∈ B D , and from (4.4),

The estimate on ρ ( ε, ¯ z ) follows from (4.3). □

Remark. An easy improvement of the above proof allows to show that ρ and h depend analytically on ε in a small (complex) neighborhood of 0.

By the estimate on ⃗ g ( ε, ¯ z ) of the previous lemma and Lemma 3.1 applied to the vector ⃗ 1, we have µ -almost surely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand from Lemma 4.1 it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using again the estimate on ⃗ g ( ε, ¯ z ) from Lemma 4.1, the Birkhoff ergodic theorem [Krengel (1985)] and the ergodicity of µ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The first Lyapunov exponent λ 1 is equal to H the entropy of the process ( Z t ) t ∈ Z and this entropy has an expansion in terms of ε ; see Jacquet, Seroussi and Szpankowski (2008). Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where H 0 is the entropy of the Markov chain ( X t ) t ∈ Z .

The following theorem is an immediate consequence of the above estimates.

̸

Theorem 4.2. If p 0 = p 1 , min { p 0 , p 1 1 -p 0 , 1 -p 1 } &gt; 0 and ε &gt; 0 is small enough, we have µ -almost surely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, for µ -almost all ¯ z there is a triplet ( a, b, c ) (which may depend on ¯ z ) where the equality holds.

Proof. It is easy to verify that hypotheses (H1)-(H2) are satisfied. We therefore apply Theorems 2.1 and 2.2. The result follows from (4.1) and the above estimate on λ 1 . □

As λ 1 and λ 2 are fixed, the above estimate also applies to the asymptotic rate of exponential loss of memory of the measures σ [ n ] ¯ z,η , ˜ ν [ n ] ¯ z,ρ and ˜ σ [ n ] ¯ z,η .

Acknowledgments. The authors thank A. Galves for interesting discussions about the subject, and an anonymous referee for useful suggestions. This work is part of FAPESP's project NeuroMat (2011/51350-6) and CNPq's project Probabilistic modeling of brain activity (480108/2012-9). F. Leonardi is also thankful to the Brazilian-French agreement for cooperation in mathematics and USP-COFECUB project (2009.1.820.45.8).

## REFERENCES

- Bowen, R. (2008). Equilibrium States and the Ergodic Theory of Anosov Diffeomorphisms , revised ed. Lecture Notes in Math. 470 . Springer, Berlin. MR2423393
- Capp´ e, O. , Moulines, E. and Ryd´ en, T. (2005). Inference in Hidden Markov Models . Springer, New York. MR2159833
- Cavazos-Cadena, R. (2003). An alternative derivation of Birkhoff's formula for the contraction coefficient of a positive matrix. Linear Algebra Appl. 375 291-297. MR2013472
- Chazottes, J.-R. and Ugalde, E. (2011). On the preservation of Gibbsianness under symbol amalgamation. In Entropy of Hidden Markov Processes and Connections to Dynamical Systems . London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series 385 72-97. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge. MR2866665
- Collet, P. , Galves, A. and Leonardi, F. (2008). Random perturbations of stochastic processes with unbounded variable length memory. Electron. J. Probab. 13 1345-1361. MR2438809
- Dieudonn´ e, J. (1969). Foundations of Modern Analysis . Pure and Applied Mathematics 10-I . Academic Press, New York. Enlarged and corrected printing. MR0349288
- Douc, R. , Moulines, E. and Ritov, Y. (2009). Forgetting of the initial condition for the filter in general state-space hidden Markov chain: A coupling approach. Electron. J. Probab. 14 27-49. MR2471658

- Douc, R. , Fort, G. , Moulines, E. and Priouret, P. (2009). Forgetting the initial distribution for hidden Markov models. Stochastic Process. Appl. 119 1235-1256. MR2508572
- Jacquet, P. , Seroussi, G. and Szpankowski, W. (2008). On the entropy of a hidden Markov process. Theoret. Comput. Sci. 395 203-219. MR2424508
- Katok, A. and Hasselblatt, B. (1995). Introduction to the Modern Theory of Dynamical Systems . Encyclopedia of Mathematics and Its Applications 54 . Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge. MR1326374
- Krengel, U. (1985). Ergodic Theorems . de Gruyter Studies in Mathematics 6 . de Gruyter, Berlin. MR0797411
- Ledrappier, F. (1984). Quelques propri´ et´ es des exposants caract´ eristiques. In ´ Ecole D'´ et´ e de Probabilit´ es de Saint-Flour, XII-1982 . Lecture Notes in Math. 1097 305-396. Springer, Berlin. MR0876081
- Petrie, T. (1969). Probabilistic functions of finite state Markov chains. Ann. Math. Statist. 40 97-115. MR0239662

Centre de Physique Th´ eorique CNRS UMR 7644 Ecole Polytechnique 91128 Palaiseau Cedex

France

E-mail:

pierre.collet@cpht.polytechnique.fr

Instituto de Matem´ atica e Estat´ ıstica

Universidade de S˜ ao Paulo CEP 05508-090, Cidade Universit´ S˜ ao Paulo, SP Brasil E-mail: fl orencia@usp.br

aria