International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

## EVIDENCE FEED FORWARD HIDDEN MARKOV MODEL: A NEW TYPE OF HIDDEN MARKOV MODEL

Michael Del Rose 1 , Christian Wagner 2 , and Philip Frederick 1 1 U.S. Army Tank Automotive Research, Development, and Engineering Center, Warren, Michigan, U.S.A

2 Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Oakland University, Rochester, Michigan, U.S.A

## ABSTRACT

The ability to predict the intentions of people based solely on their visual actions is a skill only performed by humans and animals.  The intelligence of current computer algorithms has not reached this level of complexity,  but  there  are  several  research  efforts  that  are  working  towards  it.    With  the  number  of classification algorithms available, it is hard to determine which algorithm works best for a particular situation.    In  classification  of  visual  human  intent  data,  Hidden  Markov  Models  (HMM),  and  their variants, are leading candidates.

The  inability  of  HMMs  to  provide  a  probability  in  the  observation  to  observation  linkages  is  a  big downfall in this classification technique.  If a person is visually identifying an action of another person, they monitor patterns in the observations.  By estimating the next observation, people have the ability to summarize  the  actions,  and  thus  determine,  with  pretty  good  accuracy,  the  intention  of  the  person performing the action.  These visual cues and linkages are important in creating intelligent algorithms for determining human actions based on visual observations.

The  Evidence  Feed  Forward  Hidden  Markov  Model  is  a  newly  developed  algorithm  which  provides observation to observation linkages.  The following research addresses the theory behind Evidence Feed Forward  HMMs,  provides  mathematical  proofs  of  their  learning  of  these  parameters  to  optimize  the likelihood of observations with a Evidence Feed Forwards  HMM,  which  is  important in all computational  intelligence  algorithm,  and  gives  comparative  examples  with  standard  HMMs  in classification  of  both  visual  action  data  and  measurement  data;  thus  providing  a  strong  base  for Evidence Feed Forward HMMs in classification of many types of problems.

## KEYWORDS

Hidden  Markov  Model,  Visual  Human  Intent  Analysis,  Visual  Understanding,  Image  Processing, Artificial Intelligence

## 1. INTRODUCTION

Visual  Understanding  (VU)  is  the  ability  for  a  machine  to  understand  events,  items,  and scenarios through visual cues, or visual data.  It is a very important and complex process used in  many  artificial  and  computational  intelligence  research  programs.    The  need  for  VU  is increasing with the growing advances in technology that require  VU algorithms to be taken out of the research labs and into fully developed programs [11, 12, 13, 32, 83].

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

A sub research area of VU is Visual Human Intent Analysis (VHIA).  This area may also be referred  to as visual  human  behavior  identification , action  or  activity  recognition ,  and understanding human actions from visual cues .  VHIA concentrates on the visual identification of  actions  made  by  a  human.    There  are  many  different  names  associated  with  VHIA  that describe the specific process. In static self security systems visual  human  behavior identification systems  will  aide  or  replace  security  guards  monitoring  CCTV  feeds  [13]. Television  stations  and  the  gaming  community  will  require activity  recognition systems  to automatically categorize and store or quickly search for certain scenes in a database [12].  The military is pushing robotics to replace the soldier, thus requiring the need to understand human actions  from  visual  cues to  determine  hostile  actions  from  people  so  the  robot  can  take appropriate actions to secure itself [83].  These are just a few names of the many names for VHIA.

Evidence  Feed  Forward  Hidden  Markov  Models  are  designed  to  better  handle  many  of  the shortcomings  not  addressed  in  current  classification  systems.    The  motivation  of  this  new research  is  to  provide  a  way  of  better  detecting  human  movements  for  classification  of  the person's activity.  This classification will be based on the observations being linked, not just linking  observations  with  events  as  described  in  standard  Hidden  Markov  Models.    Moving from better  classifications  in  visual  human  activity  to  other  types  of  non-visual  data  will  be discussed.  Classification results of Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Models compared with results of standard Hidden Markov Models will also be shown for both visual and nonvisual data.  The goal of this research is to develop a more robust classification system then current  standard  Hidden  Markov  Models  and  to  identify  a  new  way  of  looking  at  the  links between  evidences  from  the  classification  system;  in  the  case  of  Evidence  Feed  Forward HMMs this is described as observation to observation links.

The first section of this paper is the introduction.  The second section is a brief overview of current research in the area of VHIA.  The third section describes the Evidence Feed Forward theory and derives the equations for the three common problems of HMMs.  The fourth and fifth  sections use the Evidence Feed Forward HMM developed algorithms and apply them to two  examples,  one  measurement  based  and  one  visual  based.    The  final  section  is  the conclusion.

## 2. CURRENT RESEARCH IN THE AREA OF VISUAL HUMAN INTENT ANALYSIS

The current research in the area of VHIA is split into six sub-sections which best describes the methods  based  on  the  volume  of  work:  Non-traditional  artificial  intelligent  (AI)  methods, traditional AI methods, Markov models and Bayesian networks, grammars, traditional hidden Markov models (HMM), and non-traditional HMMs.

Non-traditional AI methods general do not have learning in them and rely on heavy processing of the data to determine the intent of the person.  M. Cristani et al [1] uses non-traditional AI methods by taking in both audio and visual data to determine simple events in an office.  First they  remove  foreground  objects  and  segment  the  images  in  the  sequence.    This  output  is coupled with the audio data and a threshold detection process is used to identify unusual events. These event sequences are put into an audio visual concurrence matrix (AVC) to compare with known AVC events.

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

Template  matching  is  performed  by  M.  Dimitrijevic  et.  al.  [2].    They  developed  a  template database  of  actions  based  on  five  male  and  three  female  people.    Each  human  action  is represented by three frames of their 2D silhouette at different stages of the activity: the frame when the person first touches the ground with one of his/her feet, the frame at the midstride of the step, and the end frame when the person finishes touching the ground with the same foot. The three frame sets were taken from seven camera positions.  When determining the event, they use a modified Chamfer's distance calculation to match to the template sequences in the database.

Traditional  AI  methods  usually  have  some  type  of  learning,  either  with  known  or  unknown outcomes.  Typical methods would include neural networks, fuzzy systems, and other common AI techniques.  H. Stern et al. [3] created a prototype fuzzy system for picture understanding of surveillance cameras.  His model is split into three parts, pre-processing module, a static object fuzzy system module, and a dynamic temporal fuzzy system module.  The static fuzzy system module classifies pre-processed data as a single person, two people, three people, many people, or  no  people.    The  dynamic  fuzzy  system  determines  the  intent  of  the  person  based  on  the temporal movements.

Grammars are often used to describe the sequence of events, usually through a type of words or characters.  These words are developed by extrapolating the action to common words, which grouped together may make a sentence describing the action (in a non-literal sense).  A. Ogale et. al. [4] uses probabilistic context free grammars (PCFG) in short action sequences of a person from  video.    Body  poses  are  stored  as  silhouettes  which  are  used  in  the  construction  of  the PCFG.  Pairs of frames are constructed based on their time slot: the pose from frame 1 and 2 are paired, the pose from frame 2 and 3 are paired, and so on.  These pairs construct the PCFG for the given action.  When testing the algorithm, the same procedure is followed.  Comparing the testing data with the trained data is accomplished through Bayes: P(sk|pi) = P(pi|sk)P(sk)/P(pi), where sk is the k th silhouette and p i is the i th pose.

There are a number of traditional and non-traditional Hidden Markov Models (HMM) that are used in trying to understand peoples actions based on visual sequences.  Traditional HMMs are used to classify items that have a flow to them.  This flow, generally related to time, determines the specific body pose of the action sequence and the HMM determines how likely the flow is. For  non-traditional  HMMs,  they  are  just  an  offshoot  to  the  standard  HMM  except  they  add another facet which provides better results based on the type of data coming in, generally used in  specific  examples.    A  few  include  Yamato  et.  al.  [5]  used  HMMs  to  recognize  six  tennis strokes with a 25x25 mess feature matrix to describe body positions in each frame.  Wilson and Bobick [6] use a Parametric Hidden Markov Model (PHMM) to recognize hand gesture.  Oliver et.  al.  [7]  developed  a  method  to  detect  and  classify  interactions  between  people  using  a Coupled  Hidden Markov  Model  (CHMM) based on simulations.   Multi-Observation  Hidden Markov  Models  (MOHMM)  are  discussed  in  both  [8]  and  [9]  from  Xaing  and  Gong  for recognizing break points in video content for separation of activities and detect piggybacking of peoples going through a security door, respectively.

## 3. Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Models

## 3.1 Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Model Introduction

The Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Model is more than an extension or a variance of Hidden  Markov  Models  (HMM),  like  Parametric  HMMs  or  Hierarchical  HMMs,  because  it links  the  current  observations  to  the  next  observation  in  the  sequence,  assigns  a  probability associated with this, and has the ability to better describe visual actions. Forward  HMM  gives  the  impression  of  disregarding HMM theory, by providing the link between observations which in the strict sense, Markov models current stat observations  to  the  next  observation  in  the  sequence,  assigns  a  probability associated with this, and has the ability to better describe visual actions.   The Evidence Feed HMM gives  the  impression  of  disregarding  the  rules  of  causality,  as  suggested  by by providing the link between observations that is not through the hidden nodes, Markov models current state only depends on the previous states observations  to  the  next  observation  in  the  sequence,  assigns  a  probability The Evidence Feed as  suggested  by that is not through the hidden nodes, e only depends on the previous states.

The assumption of breaking causality reason for making the model is to causality rule, at least how we look at causality in modeling with HMMs note that in many cases, previous events will affect fu weather example found in many textbooks: and would like to know whether it is raining or not outside.  The only evidence he has is observation of his boss coming inside with or without make his decision.  Figure 1 shows the hidden l No Rain (NR).  The observation (NU).  This  example  shows  that  the  evidence  (observation)  is  only  dependent  on  the  hidden layer  and  not  vice  versa.    Also,  the  hidden  layer  is  only  dependent  on  the  previous weather  (with  some  probability). probability  of  the  current  observation's  effect  on  the  next  observation.  Obviously,  i example, current observation of an umbrella (or no observation of an umbrella) does not affect tomorrow's  observation  of  an  umbrella  (or  no  umbrella).    However,  if  you  look  at  the observation as another event carried out by the boss, then you can see probability  in  the  HMM  that  has  been  overlooked  when  modeling  this  example.    These  two events can be tied together in this model; the event of the boss choosing an umbrella and the event of the person seeing the umbrella.  Independe Causality  of  the  observation  is  looked  at  differently  than  in  a  standard  HMM  model.    The underlying reason the observations have an effect on the next observation is based on the event by  the  boss  and  not  looked  at  as  just  an  observation.    Thus,  causality  is  still  adhered  to. Specifically,  if,  for  example,  the  boss  comes  into  the  building  without  an  umbrella  and  it  is raining then one can probably assume that the boss may be more likely to carry an umbrella t next day since he did not like getting wet.  The same may be true if he did carry an umbrella. This connects the evidence of each event to the evidence of the next nodes event as shown in Figure 2. causality is relatively true in standard HMMs, but if you look at t is to 'model the event' not create real world, then we can relax the east how we look at causality in modeling with HMMs.  It is also important to previous events will affect future events.  Take, for example a found in many textbooks:  A person is locked inside a windowless building and would like to know whether it is raining or not outside.  The only evidence he has is inside with or without an umbrella.  He constructs an gure 1 shows the hidden layer is represented by the nodes, Rain (R) and observation is represented by the nodes, Umbrella (U) and No Umbrella This  example  shows  that  the  evidence  (observation)  is  only  dependent  on  the  hidden and  not  vice  versa.    Also,  the  hidden  layer  is  only  dependent  on  the  previous weather  (with  some  probability).    HMMs  and  their  variants  do  not  take  into  account  the probability  of  the  current  observation's  effect  on  the  next  observation.  Obviously,  i example, current observation of an umbrella (or no observation of an umbrella) does not affect tomorrow's  observation  of  an  umbrella  (or  no  umbrella).    However,  if  you  look  at  the observation as another event carried out by the boss, then you can see that there may be some probability  in  the  HMM  that  has  been  overlooked  when  modeling  this  example.    These  two events can be tied together in this model; the event of the boss choosing an umbrella and the event of the person seeing the umbrella.  Independence with respect to the model is still intact. Causality  of  the  observation  is  looked  at  differently  than  in  a  standard  HMM  model.    The underlying reason the observations have an effect on the next observation is based on the event ked  at  as  just  an  observation.    Thus,  causality  is  still  adhered  to. Specifically,  if,  for  example,  the  boss  comes  into  the  building  without  an  umbrella  and  it  is raining then one can probably assume that the boss may be more likely to carry an umbrella t next day since he did not like getting wet.  The same may be true if he did carry an umbrella. This connects the evidence of each event to the evidence of the next nodes event as shown in , but if you look at the not create real world, then we can relax the It is also important to ture events.  Take, for example a common A person is locked inside a windowless building and would like to know whether it is raining or not outside.  The only evidence he has is the an umbrella.  He constructs an HMM to Rain (R) and No Umbrella This  example  shows  that  the  evidence  (observation)  is  only  dependent  on  the  hidden and  not  vice  versa.    Also,  the  hidden  layer  is  only  dependent  on  the  previous  day's into  account  the probability  of  the  current  observation's  effect  on  the  next  observation.  Obviously,  in  our example, current observation of an umbrella (or no observation of an umbrella) does not affect tomorrow's  observation  of  an  umbrella  (or  no  umbrella).    However,  if  you  look  at  the that there may be some probability  in  the  HMM  that  has  been  overlooked  when  modeling  this  example.    These  two events can be tied together in this model; the event of the boss choosing an umbrella and the nce with respect to the model is still intact. Causality  of  the  observation  is  looked  at  differently  than  in  a  standard  HMM  model.    The underlying reason the observations have an effect on the next observation is based on the event ked  at  as  just  an  observation.    Thus,  causality  is  still  adhered  to. Specifically,  if,  for  example,  the  boss  comes  into  the  building  without  an  umbrella  and  it  is raining then one can probably assume that the boss may be more likely to carry an umbrella the next day since he did not like getting wet.  The same may be true if he did carry an umbrella. This connects the evidence of each event to the evidence of the next nodes event as shown in International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

Figure 1:  Weather example using HMMs.  The nodes Rain (R) and No Rain (NR).  The nodes Weather example using HMMs.  The nodes in the hidden layer are represent Rain (R) and No Rain (NR).  The nodes in the observation layer are represented by U and NU represented by ed by U and NU.

<!-- image -->

Figure  2:    Weather  example  using  Evidence  Feed evidence (marked U and NU) and the oth occurring based on the previous evidence. Weather  example  using  Evidence  Feed-Forward  HMMs.    Linkages  between  the ) and the other evidences represent the probability of the evidence occurring based on the previous evidence. Linkages  between  the er evidences represent the probability of the evidence

<!-- image -->

In  this  example,  Figure  2  shows  that  the  edges  connecting  observations  to  observations  are represented as bi-directional edges which may suggest that the probability is the same in either direction.  This is not the case.  In fact, it complexity  so  that  the  probabilities  of  the  edges  connecting  the  evidence  rely  only  on  the evidence  and  the  current  hidden  state  and  not  on  the  future  hidden  state.    The  bi edges  are  illustrated  as  such  due  to  simplification  of  the  drawing. assume that the boss forgets his umbrella while it is raining outside.  One can assume that the probability associated with the boss carrying his umbrella the next day should be he did not like the feeling of getting wet, thus puts more emphasis on carrying an umbrella whether it is raining can be assumed that the probability represented in the the same probability as the edge addition to the probabilities based on the person (or thing) which th directly related to. 2  shows  that  the  edges  connecting  observations  to  observations  are directional edges which may suggest that the probability is the same in either direction.  This is not the case.  In fact, it can be shown that the problem can be reduced complexity  so  that  the  probabilities  of  the  edges  connecting  the  evidence  rely  only  on  the evidence  and  the  current  hidden  state  and  not  on  the  future  hidden  state.    The  bi edges  are  illustrated  as  such  due  to  simplification  of  the  drawing.    In  this  weather  example, assume that the boss forgets his umbrella while it is raining outside.  One can assume that the with the boss carrying his umbrella the next day should be greater since he did not like the feeling of getting wet.  He probably wants to reduce his chance of getting wet, thus puts more emphasis on carrying an umbrella whether it is raining outside probability represented in the edge from U given R to U given NR edge going to U given R.  In a sense, one can think of this as an addition to the probabilities based on the person (or thing) which the outcome (observation) is 2  shows  that  the  edges  connecting  observations  to  observations  are directional edges which may suggest that the probability is the same in either be shown that the problem can be reduced in complexity  so  that  the  probabilities  of  the  edges  connecting  the  evidence  rely  only  on  the evidence  and  the  current  hidden  state  and  not  on  the  future  hidden  state.    The  bi-directional In  this  weather  example, assume that the boss forgets his umbrella while it is raining outside.  One can assume that the greater since wants to reduce his chance of getting outside or not.  It from U given R to U given NR has one can think of this as an outcome (observation) is

## 3.2 Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Forward Hidden Markov model derivation

Before jumping into deriving equations total number of hidden nodes and M be the total number of observations.  Let T be the total number of transitions (or time).  Let state at time t is S i where 1 ≤ i ≤ means the observation at time t is V Before jumping into deriving equations, the variables should formally be defined.  Let N be the total number of hidden nodes and M be the total number of observations.  Let T be the total number of transitions (or time).  Let Q t be the current state at time t, 1 ≤ t ≤ T; Qt = S ≤ N.  The observations at time t are represented by O means the observation at time t is Vh where 1 ≤ h ≤ M. Let N be the total number of hidden nodes and M be the total number of observations.  Let T be the total = Si means the represented by Ot.  Ot = Vh

The probability of transitioning from on the current state and j is the next state, 1 the a ij 's.  The rows represent the current state (i) and the columns represent the next state (j). there are three hidden nodes in the Evidence Feed The probability of transitioning from one hidden state to another is captured by aij state and j is the next state, 1 ≤ i,j ≤ N.  Let A be an NxN matrix which captures all 's.  The rows represent the current state (i) and the columns represent the next state (j). dden nodes in the Evidence Feed Forward HMM, N=3, then A would be: ,  where i is Let A be an NxN matrix which captures all 's.  The rows represent the current state (i) and the columns represent the next state (j).  If then A would be:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

Let bjh be  the  probability  of observing V h while in state S j .    Let  B  be  an  NxM  matrix which holds  the  observation  probabilities.    If  there  were  three  hidden  layers  and  two  observations, N=3 and M=2, then B would be

Let  c i (h,k)  be  the  probability  of  being  in  state  S i and  currently  observing  V h with  the  next observation  being  Vk for  1 ≤ h,k ≤ M.    Let  C  be  the  MxMxN  matrix  represented  as  shown below

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to the standard HMM, the Evidence Feed Forward HMM is represented by λ but with an added parameter. λ has the parameters A, B, C, and π and can be written as λ =( π , A, B, C). Either λ or ( π , A, B, C) can represent the Evidence Feed Forward HMM.  Given the model λ at time t in the current state S i observing Vh, what is the probability of being in state S j observing Vk?  The calculation of transitioning from state Si to state S j is a ij , observing Vh from state Sj is bjh ,  and  being  in  state  S i observing  Vh  with  next  observation  being  Vk  is  c i (h,k).    This probability  is  a ij · bjh · ci (h,k).    When  possible,  to  increase  the  readability,  S i for  all  i  will  be represented as just i.  Also, V h for all h will be represented by just h.

Let the probabilities of starting in state S i be represented as π i . π is a 1xN vector which holds all the π i values. g2024 g3404   g4670 g2024 g2869 g2024 g2870 g2024 g2871 g4671 for a three hidden node Evidence Feed-Forward HMM.

There are three typical problems that all HMMs should solve:

1. What is the probability of the observation sequence O = (O1,O2,…,OT) given the model λ ?   This is asking to find P(O| λ ).
2. What is the most optimal hidden state path given the observations O and the model λ ? This is asking to solve P(Q|O, λ ) where Q = (Q1,Q2,…,QT).
3. Given a number of observations, what is the optimal parameters of λ which maximizes P(O| λ )?  This is the learning problem.

For a detailed tutorial on how standard HMMs solve these problems the reader is referred to Rabiner [13].

To  solve  the  first  problem,  'What  is  the  probability  of  the  observation  sequence  O  = (O1,O2,…,OT)  given  the  model λ ?',  a  forward  algorithm  procedure  is  developed  to  compute α i(t) = p(O1,O2,…Ot,Qt = i| λ ).  When t = T, P(O| λ ) is found by summing all the α i 's at time T. The forward algorithm procedure is:

1. α i (1) = π i bi (O1) for all i, 0 ≤ i, t ≤ T, and bi(O1) = bih for some h which O1 = Vh.  Notice that there is no c term because this is the initial starting state calculation for α i so there is no observation to observation in the calculation of the initial probabilities.
3. P(O| λ ) = ∑ g2009 g3036 g4666 g1846 g4667 g3015 g3036 g2880g2869 .
2. α j (t+1) = g3427 ∑ g2009 g3036 g3015 g3036 g2880g2869 g4666 g1872 g4667 g2009 g3036g3037 g1855 g3036 g4666 g1841 g3047 , g1841 g3047g2878g2869 g4667 g3431g1854 g3037 g4666 g1841 g3047g2878g2869 g4667 ,  where c i (Ot,Ot+1 ) is c i (h,k) for Ot = V h and Ot+1 = Vk and N is the total number of hidden states.

From the final part of step 2 where α i(T) =  P(O1,O2,…,OT,QT = i| λ ), we find the probability of the observation sequence and the final state QT = i given the model.  By summing up all the α i 's we get the final probability of P(O| λ ) shown in step three.

A  backwards  algorithm  procedure  can  also  be  developed  to  find  P(O| λ ).    In  the  backwards algorithm, the starting state is at time T and the algorithm is worked backwards towards time t. The variable β i is defined as β i (t) = P(Ot+1 ,Ot+2 ,…,OT | Qt = i, λ ).

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

1. β i (T) = 1 2. β i (t) = g3427 ∑ g1853 g3036g3037 g1854 g3037 g4666 g1841 g3047g2878g2869 g4667 g3015 g3037g2880g2869 g2010 g3037 g4666 g1872 g3397 1g4667g3431g1855 g3036 g4666 g1841 g3047 , g1841 g3047g2878g2869 g4667

It  should  be  noted  that  the  probability  of  the  observations  given  the  model  using  both  the forward  and  backwards  algorithms  are  used  later  to  help  find  answers  to  the  remaining  two Evidence Feed-Forward HMM problems.

3. P(O| λ ) = ∑ g2010 g3036 g4666 1g4667 g3015 g3036 g2880g2869 g2024 g3036 g1854 g3036 g4666 g1841 g2869 g4667 .

The second common HMM problem which the Evidence Feed-Forward HMM should solve is computing the optimal path of hidden states from the observations given the model.  Optimal path  could  mean  many  different  things.    One  way  to  look  at  optimal  paths  is  to  find  the maximum probability moving from one state/observation to another, considering only the path which is maximum for only the current transition.  This has the possibility of transitioning to a state which leaving from is impossible.

In  this  research,  finding  the  optimal  path  is  considered  the  same  as  finding  the  maximum probability for the entire series and not individual maximums. Optimal path is assumed that one is  looking  for  the  path  that  gives  the  maximum  probability  of  the  state  sequence  given  the observations and the model; maximizing P(Q|O, λ ).  This solution requires the use of both the forward and backwards algorithms.  To do this two new variables must be created, δ and Path. δ is defined as the running probability of paths at time t.  Path is the current path found from computing δ .

1. δ 1 (i) = π i bi (O1).  Path = []. 2. δ t (j) = max g2869g3000g3036g3000g3041 g3427g2012 g3047 g2879g2869 g1853 g3036g3037 g1854 g3037 g4666 g1841 g3047 g4667 g1855 g3036 g4666 g1841 g3047g2879g2869 , g1841 g3047 g4667 g3431 .  Path is the state which this is maximized. Add the state to the Path.
3. Final step is finding the state which maximizes δ T (i) for 1 ≤ i ≤ n.

The first step of calculating the δ value is to assign each δ value the probability of starting in each of the states.  The recursion step continues to keeps the maximum value throughout the model.  The final step finds the final hidden node which is the maximum of all the δ i 's at time T.

The third and final problem that HMMs should be able to solve is the learning problem.  To learn, assume you have a number of observations with known results.  These observations are used to calculate new parameters that maximize the probability of the observations given the model, P(O| λ ).   To do this, re-estimation of parameters for the model must increase P(O| λ ) where the re-estimated model parameters are defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g2024 g3364 g3036 g3404 g1857g1876g1868g1857g1855g1872g1857g1856 g1866g1873g1865g1854g1857g1870 g1867g1858 g1872g1861g1865g1857g1871 g1861g1866 g1871g1872g1853g1872g1857 g1861 g1853g1872 g1872g1861g1865g1857 g1872 g3404 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

First, define the variable γ i (t) to be the probability of being in state i at time t for the sequence of observations O and the model λ .  That is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

Earlier, the variable α i (t) was defined in the forward algorithm as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and β i(t) was defined in the backwards algorithm as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Multiplying these together to get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is the same as P(Qt = i, O| λ ).  Thus, we can calculate γ i (t) from equation 1 as

Now, define the new variable ξ ij (t) to be the probability of being in state i at time t and state j at time t+1 given the observation sequence O and the model λ .  That is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The equation for ξ ij (t) can be re-written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the forward algorithm, we know that at state Qt = i and left is equal to α i (t).    From the backwards algorithm, we know that at state Qt+1 = j and right is equal to β j(t).  We also know that the probability of going from state Qt = i to Qt+1 = j with our observations is equal to (the probability of transition from state i to state j) times (the probability of observing O t+1 at state j) times (the probability of being in state i observing O t and next observing Ot+1); i.e. P(Q t = i,Q t+1 = j,O| λ ) = α i (t) · aij bjk ci (h,k) ·β j (t).  Equation 2 can now be written as:

Notice that if you sum γ i (t) across all of t, ∑ g2011 g3036 g4666g1872g4667 g3021 g3047g2880g2869 , you get the expected number of times in state i.  Also, if you sum ξ ij (t) across all of t, ∑ g2022 g3036g3037 g4666g1872 g4667 g3021g2879g2869 g3047g2880g2869 , you get the expected transitions from state i to state j.  We can now write the equations for re-estimating the parameters of the model with the given observations to maximize P(O| λ ).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g2024 g3364 g3036 g3404 g1857g1876g1868g1857g1855g1872g1857g1856 g1866g1873g1865g1854g1857g1870 g1867g1858 g1872g1861g1865g1857g1871 g1861g1866 g1871g1872g1853g1872g1857 g1861 g1853g1872 g1872g1861g1865g1857 g1872 g3404 1

g1853

g3364

g3036g3037

g3404

g1857g1876g1868g1857g1855g1872g1857g1856 g1866g1873g1865g1854g1857g1870 g1867g1858 g1872g1870g1853g1866g1871g1861g1872g1861g1867g1866g1871 g1858g1870g1867g1865 g1871g1872g1853g1872g1857 g1861 g1872g1867 g1871g1872g1853g1872g1857 g1862

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g1857g1876g1868g1857g1855g1872g1857g1856 g1866g1873g1865g1854g1857g1870 g1867g1858 g1872g1870g1853g1866g1871g1861g1872g1861g1867g1866g1871 g1858g1870g1867g1865 g1871g1872g1853g1872g1857 g1861

g1854 g3364 g3037g3035 g3404 g1857g1876g1868g1857g1855g1872g1857g1856 g1866g1873g1865g1854g1857g1870 g1867g1858 g1872g1861g1865g1857g1871 g1861g1866 g1871g1872g1853g1872g1857 g1862 g1867g1854g1871g1857g1870g1874g1861g1866g1859 g1867g1854g1871g1857g1870g1874g1853g1872g1861g1867g1866 g1848 g3035 g1857g1876g1868g1857g1855g1872g1857g1856 g1866g1873g1865g1854g1857g1870 g1867g1858 g1872g1861g1865g1857g1871 g1861g1866 g1871g1872g1853g1872g1857 g1862

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g1191

If  the  current  model  is λ =  ( π ,  A,  B,  C)  and  the  re-estimated  model  is g2019 g3404 g4666g2024 g3364 , g1827 , g1828 g3364 , g1829 g4667 then either the model λ is close enough to g2019 that both models can be considered identical at the local critical point, i.e. g2019 g3404 g2019 ,  or g1842g4666g1841|g2019 g4667 g3410 g1842g4666g1841|g2019g4667 ,  which is proven by Baum [10].  With the new model and the re-estimated parameters, continue to iterate through the observations with their known outcomes until g2019 g3404 g2019 .  At this point, you will be in a local critical point which we will consider the best parameter estimates within this local area.

g1191

g1191

g1191

g1191

To prove that the re-estimated equations are correctly derived, we can mathematically optimize the parameters in the likelihood function, P(O| λ ), so that it is maximized with the observations with known outputs.  This is accomplished using Expectation Maximization (EM) techniques, very similar to [13], which computed the re-estimated parameters of g2024 g3364 g3036 , g1853 g3364 g3036g3037 , and g1854 g3364 g3037g3035 .  Following the same methods, the Baum Auxiliary Function is defined as g1843g3435g2019, g2019 g3439 g3404 ∑ g3427g1842g4666g1843 g3404 g1869 |g1841 g3404 g3028g3039g3039 g3044 g1867, g2019g4667 · log  g1842g4666g1843 g3404 g1869, g1841 g3404 g1867|g2019 g4667 g4671 .  Since

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g1191

the log of this can separate out parts of the above equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g1191

where q(t) and q(t+1) are the states at time t and t+1, and o(t) and o(t+1) are the observation at time t and t+1.

Now the Baum Auxiliary Function can be re-written as

g1191

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g1191

Or simply

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g1191

g1191

g1191

g1191

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the following constraints

Lagrange multipliers can be used to solve for the estimated parameters of g2019 g3404 g3435g2024 g3364 , g1853 g3364 , g1854 g3364 , g1855g1191g3439. This has been solved of g2024 g3364 g3036 , g1853 g3364 g3036g3037 , and g1854 g3364 g3037g3035 in [13].  To solve for g1855g1191 g3036 g4666 g1860, g1863 g4667 the same techniques used to solve for the other parameters are used here.  Let ρ be  the  Lagrange  multiplier.    Solving  for g1843 g3030 g4666 g2019, g1855g1191 g4667 ,  combine  the  constraint,  equation  4,  with  the  Lagrange  multiplier  and  put  with equation 3, differentiated and set to 0 for a solution; which is then put into the equations for the final solution of g1855g1191 g3036 g4666 g1860, g1863 g4667 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g1191

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Sub this into the constraint equation 4 to get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The right part of this equation can be reduced by combining the summation together to get

Finally, g1855g1191 g3036 g4666 g1860, g1863 g4667 can be written as

which is the same as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4. EXAMPLE 1: FISHER IRIS DATA OF EXAMPLE OF MESSY DATA

## 4.1 Introduction to the Problem

This  chapter  will  discuss  the  application  of  the  theory  of  Evidence  Feed  Forward  HMMs  to classify.    A  great  amount  of  thought  on  what  type  of  data  should  be  used  to  focus  on  the difference  in  Evidence  Feed  Forward  HMMs  and  standard  HMMs.    It  has  always  been  a problem  with  standard  HMMs  that  errors  in  data  give  poor  classification  results.    The  data provided here will be over-processed to a point where standard techniques to classify this data cannot be accomplished algorithmically or through human inspection.  Although there may be viewable patterns in the HMM input data, there will also be errors.

At  this  point,  the  reader  should  come  to  the  conclusion  that  Evidence  Feed  Forward  HMMs should be pretty good at identifying visual data from people.  This is because with Evidence Feed Forward HMMs, the link between observation to observation gives insight into patterns of movement.  For example, if a baseball player is pitching a ball, the pitching arm is moving in generally  the  same  direction  for  most  of  the  action.    The  linkage  from  observation  to observation will identify continual motion better than standard HMMs, thus more probability International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

will be associated with the trained data of pitching to increase probability in the motion of the pitching arm.  This will increase likelihood which will provide better results.

However, video and image data of people are not the only category which will benefit from Evidence Feed Forward HMMs.  From the simple weather example presented earlier, it should be  clear  that  the  linkage  of  observation  to  observation  will  provide  a  means  of  increasing probability associated with the observations outside of the hidden states.

The  over-processed  Fisher  Iris  data  example  will  demonstrate  the  increased  classification ability  of  Evidence  Feed  Forward  HMMs in non-video/image data.  Although this may look like a stretch with relation of different data sets, it will be shown that there is some linkage and that Evidence Feed Forward HMMs provide a better means of classifying the over-processed data.

The  Fisher  Iris  Data  [11]  is  a  classical  data  set  used  throughout  the  image  processing  and pattern recognition communities as example data and test data for classification of algorithms. R.A. Fisher used this data in 1936 for pattern recognition.  It was originally gathered from an American botanist, Edgar Anderson in 1935. The data consists of a collection of sepal width, sepal  length,  petal  width,  and  petal  length  of  three  types  of  Iris  flowers,  the  Setosa,  the Versicolour, and the Virginica.  150 data sets are provided with 50 of each Iris type.  One class is linearly separable from the others.

Using  this  data  will  help  show  that  the  Evidence  Feed  Forward  HMM  works  better  than standard HMMs on more than just image and video data classifications.  For this data sets, the information will be over-processed to a point of non recognition visually through the human eyes.  That is, there will be no recognizing features when viewing this data visually.  The reason for over-processing the data is two-fold. First,  HMMs  have  inherently  been  bad  at classification with messy data.  The over-processing of the data will make messy data.  Second, this data will show a better example of the increased capabilities of the Evidence Feed Forward HMM when compared with a standard HMM on the same data.

## 4.2 Pre-processing of the Data

The Fisher Iris data was imported from the University of California - Irvine Machine Learning Repository  [11]  which  contains  the  original  data  with  two  fixes  as  described  at  the  website. These fixes were errors in the data when originally used.  A plot of the petal length versus the petal  width  shows  the  Setosa  class  linearly  separable  from  the  other  two  classes,  shown  in Figure 3.

After  importing  the  data,  each  category  was  identified  with  the  highest  and  lowest  values. These  values  made  up  the  end  points  for  the  class  category.    For  example,  the  petal  length ranges from 1.0 cm to 6.9 cm, so the highest value is 6.9 and the lowest value is 1.0.  The value range decided the values associated with each bin.  A bin, in this case, is a value associated with a range of values from the data.  Ten bins were used.  For example, Petal Length has a range of 5.9 cm (6.9 cm - 1.0 cm), thus each bin is split 0.59 cm wide.  Bin 1 holds the values from 1.0 to 1.59.  Bin 2 holds the values of greater than 1.59 to 2.18, and so on.  The same holds true for all four categories.

Figure 3: Fisher Iris data plot of petal length versus petal width.

<!-- image -->

After the bins were created, the new data was processed to find the trends from sepal length to sepal  width,  sepal  width  to  petal  length,  and  petal  length  to  petal  width.    That  is,  increase, decrease, or no change in bin values for each flower.  So, if sepal length had a higher bin value then sepal width then this would be viewed as a decrease.  If it was a lower bin value then it would be an increase.  If the bin values were the same, then no change is recorded.  This was done three times (sepal length to sepal width, sepal width to petal length, and petal length to petal width).  This is the inputs into the HMMs for comparison.

## 4.3 Results and Analysis

The  data  used  for  both  training  and  testing  of  the  Evidence  Feed  Forward  HMM  and  the standard HMM is described above.  Both the Evidence Feed Forward HMM and the standard HMM models were set up to have three hidden nodes and three outputs.  More nodes were trained and tested with little to no changes in the results.  MatLAB was used to program both the Evidence Feed Forward HMM and the standard HMM.  Each HMM was trained with ten data items per flower grouping creating three separate HMMs, one for each Iris type.  Training was considered complete when a change in likelihood value of 0.01 or less was attained.  This was assumed a good value after several runs through the training and testing.  Values that were less  than  0.01  took  several  more  iterations  to  converge.    Values  higher  than  0.01  threshold converged quickly with worse results when testing the data.  From the remaining 120 pieces of data both the standard HMM and the Evidence Feed Forward HMM was tested by running the data through each of the three HMMs.  The highest likelihood was the winner.

The results showed that for the standard HMM, the likelihood of correctly identifying the Iris category is 35%.  This number is very low and can normally be considered a guess since it is about one third correct classification on three possible categories.  However, after looking at the results one can see that it correctly categorized almost all the Setosa Iris data but almost none of the other two Iris types.  The Setosa Iris is nearly linearly separable in sepal length verse sepal width and in petal length versus petal width.  This gives a clue into why the Setosa category was almost completly categorized correctly.

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

The Evidence Feed Forward HMM did much better in categorizing the over-processed Iris data. It  correctly  categorized  75%  correctly.    This  is  probably  because  of  the  linkage  between  the observations (evidence).  Observations are the increase, decrease, or no change to the bins from sepal length to sepal width, sepal width to petal length, and petal length to petal width.  There seems to be more of a pattern when a bin value stays the same, increase, or decrease from one bin to another.  The bin changes are captured better by the Evidence Feed Forwards HMM than the standard HMM due to the observation to observation transition probability, as shown in the results.

Although these classification rates are still poor when compared to other classifiers, one has to remember  the  type  of  data  that  these  are  trained  and  tested  on  as  well  as  comparing  the classifiers within their own category.  This data has been over processed and thus, very messy. There are no visual recognizable patterns that stand out in this pre-processed data.

HMMs  are  notorious  for  being  poor  classifiers  with  messy  data.    This  is  shown  with  the standard HMM on this data, only correctly classifying 35% correctly.  However, the Evidence Feed  Forward  HMM  has  given  much  better  results,  classifying  75%  correctly.    This  better classification  rate  than  standard  HMMs  is  due  to  the  linkage  in  Evidence  Feed  Forward Observations which is not present in standard HMMs.

## 5. EXAMPLE 2: VIDEO ACTION RECOGNITION WITH SPARSE MESSY DATA

## 5.1 Introduction to the Problem

The video action recognition data used is from a popular source which created this data to be used to improve people's action classification algorithms on visual data.  The database comes from  Carnegie  Melon  University  (CMU)  Graphics  Lab  and  can  be  found  at  [12].    For  this example, the simulated data on jumping, running (jogging), dribbling a basketball, and soccer kick was used.  Like the Fisher Iris data, this data was over processed to better show the reader the ability to classify with sparse messy data; sparse data because in some cases there where only a handful of action sequences to test and train on.

The  CMU  data  was  captured  as  a  sequence  of  simulated  people  singled  out  to  perform  an activity.    Each simulated action is performed different between the groups.  The starting and stopping frames are different as is the way the activity is performed.  For example, comparing two running sequences, one may take a longer stride  than the other  or  arm  movements  may have different frequencies.

This  data  was  processed  so  that  the  hands,  arms,  and  head  can  be  tracked.    It  was  over processed  to  a  point  where  one  could  say  it  is  unusable.    This  was  to  show  the  strength  of Evidence Feed Forward HMMs compared to other HMMs.  The hands, feet and head location were often misclassified which produced large, abnormal movements with hands, head, and/or feet.

## 5.2 Pre-processing the Data

This  data  was  easier  to  process  then  real  data  since  there  is  no  background  information  that needed to be segmented out or tracking of colors.  Like many image processing exercises, the more processing that is done to an image, the more likely that the image is no longer a good International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011 representative  of  the  items  you  are  trying  to  find.    In  this  case,  we  are  trying  to  find  links between frames to represent actions.

The determination of the edges of the body was by threshold analysis.  If the grayscale image of the body was below a threshold, then it was considered not to be part of the body.  As images are taken, there is usually a mixing of colors from the edges of the body to the background. This mixture is removed using thresholding.  If thresholding was not used then the edges of the image  would  be  very  rough  and  virtual  impossible  to  perform  some  of  our  data  processing techniques to it.  The thresholding produced a binary image.

Next the binary image of each frame was skeletonized.  That is, the area representing the image was thinned to a point where only a single line represented the body parts.  This made it easier to identify the tips of the hands, feet, and head through the endpoints of skeletal image frame. If a point in the image frame had only one neighbor, then it was considered an endpoint.  Often times, the skeletonization process thins the image to much where several end points other than the tips of the hands, feet, and head are found.  This creates extra points in the image.

To reduce the number of extra points, another process is performed to find the location of the last points and keep all points that are within a certain distance from them.  This distance must be greater than the pre-determined distance otherwise it is considered part of the point.  This alleviates  some  of  the  problems  with  multiple  points,  but  not  all  of  them.    So,  only  the  five points which best represent the last five points are kept.

Looping of an endpoint occurs from the thresholding process, which the skeletonization process exploits.  When a loop occurs, there is no endpoint since all points in the looped area have more than  one  neighbor.    This  eliminates  key  endpoints.    To  add  the  end  points  back  in,  a  close representative of the point is used.  It keeps the location of the last point which was missing and assumes the change is negligible.  As one can imagine, this may cause some problems with the classification  since  changes  are  important  with  Evidence  Feed  Forward  HMMs.    When automating the pre-processing phase of the image sequences, this problem occurs often, so no measures  are  made  to  manually  reduce  it.    The  idea  is  to  have  some  uniformity  in  the  preprocessing as well as the classification.

The worst of these errors happen when a point is missing in one frame and then shows up as extra points in the others.  Often times the skeletonization process produces lines where none should  exist  and  creates  loops  where  there  should  exist  a  single  line,  all  in  the  same  image frame.  In this case, it may have found the five points it was looking for, but not the correct ones. This error is propagated into the classification algorithm as well as in the pre-processing procedure since it uses the previous frame as a template to where the points should be.

Without all  the  image  processing  errors,  this  would  be  a  viable  way  to  find  activities  of  the people.  The hands, feet, and head location would probably be tracked and with enough data, the classification algorithm would utilize all the position information.  However, at this point it should be noted that first, this is not an image processing research project.  The errors in the pre-processing  are  common  and  with  a  greater  amount  of  time  many  may  be  alleviated. However, to demonstrate the robustness due to errors in Evidence Feed Forward HMMs versus standard HMMs, these types of errors will not be removed.

To continue along with the  pre-processing  of  this  data,  the  five  points  are  feed  into  another processing step which is meant to find and track the changes in the position of the points in relation to each other.  The five points will make up a bounding box which all five points are International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

either on the edge of the box or inside.  Bounding boxes are often used in pedestrian detection to encompass the entire pedestrian within the box.  This process is similar except that it only encompasses the hands, feet, and head.  If you can imagine a person standing sideways with hands out, the box would be thinner than if a person is standing facing forward with hands to their sides and feet spread apart.  These differences are what we are looking for.

The height/width ratio is found by taking the height and dividing by the width.  This method is sometimes  used  as  a  simple  way  of  determining  body  position  from  crouching  to  standing, however in this  case,  only  hands,  feet,  and  head  are  used  to  create  the  bounding  box  where usually the entire body is used to create the bounding box.

The height/width ratio for each frame in the sequence of images is put into one of eleven groups based on the value of the ratio.  Group 1 is if the ratio is below 0.1, group 2 is for the ratio to be between 0.1 and 0.2, and so on to group 11 which is above 1.0.  It is assumed that the hands, feet, and head would be changing throughout the activity and these changes can be tracked to produce a similar activity representation per individual.  In reality, this simplifies the activity and  would  be  true  if  this  was  applied  to  a  single  person's  way  of  performing  the  activity. However, everyone has a relatively unique body position at each stage of the activity.  This over simplification of the activity is part of the over-processing which is often a problem with many classifiers.

The final step of pre-processing is to track and record these changes in groups from frame to frame.  If a frame changes to a higher group then the previous frame then it is considered an INCREASE, if it is lower than it is a DECREASE.  If there is no change in grouping then it is considered NO CHANGE.  This creates a way of tracking the changes from frame to frame for input into the HMMs.  However, this process does not track the magnitude of the change which might also be important.  The idea is to keep the data simple and  represent the output in our HMMs.  If the observation data was more complicated, i.e. more values associated with it, then the training data would need to be increased to cover all the possible options of the observation data.

The pre-processed data represents the evidence, or observations, for our HMMs.  The evidence is the input into the HMMs for both training and testing.  The number of frames per activity varies greatly, anywhere from 20 to 120 frames per activity. it was decided that the likelihood of  each  testing  activity  would  be  compared  and  the greatest  likelihood  would be  the  class it represented.

## 5.3 Results and Analysis

Of the four classes, there are a total of 64 activities modeled by the simulated sequences.  17 of these activities are jumping, 28 are jogging/running, 7 are soccer kicking, and 12 are dribbling a basketball.  The dribbling a basket ball had 9 from the right hand and 3 from the left.  From each group, except for soccer kicking, four

random activities  were  used  as  training  the  Evidence  Feed  Forward  HMM  and  the  standard HMM.  Three were taken for soccer kicking because the sample was very small.  These training activities  were  the  same  for  training  both  HMMs.    The  training  and  testing  of  the  Evidence Feed Forward HMM and the standard HMM were programmed in MatLAB.

A total of 3 nodes were used in the hidden layer.  More were tried, but did not increase the classification rate.    With  less  nodes,  the  classification  rates  were  worse,  so  three  nodes  were optimal on our testing/training samples.  Also, from earlier, three input values are used as the evidence  which  roughly  represented  the  change  in  body  position  from  frame  to  frame (INCREASE, DECREASE, and NO CHANGE).  The training was considered complete when the threshold changes of the previous HMM log-likelihood and the new HMM log-likelihood with updated parameters were less than 0.25.  Many different thresholds where tried with 0.25 being the optimal one.  With a lower threshold, the training took a long time to converge on a solution for many of the activities.  This usually means over-training and as a result the testing data was classified correctly at a worse rate than with a threshold of 0.25.  When increasing the threshold above 0.25, the training converged very quickly and the results were also not as good when the testing  data  was  applied.    This  is  indicative  of  under  training.  A  threshold  change value of 0.25 was considered optimal.

For the standard Hidden Markov Model, it correctly classified 67% of the jump activity, 21% of the jogging activity, 50% of the soccer kick activity, and 12.5% of the dribbling activity.  See Table  1  below.    The  Evidence  Feed  Forward  HMM  correctly  identified  78%  of  the  jump activity, 46% of the jogging activity, 100% of the soccer kick activity, and 50% of the dribbling activity.

Notice that in all cases, the Evidence Feed Forward HMM did better than the standard HMM on this  data.    This  is  because,  even  though  the  data  is  sparse  and  it  was  over  processed,  the Evidence Feed Forward HMM was still able to pick up some of the patterns that recognized the activity due to its ability to increase predictions based on previous observations.  That is, the observation  to  observation  link  in  the  Evidence  Feed  Forward  HMM  provides  the  ability  to increase the overall probability of an activity's pattern, and thus increase the classification rate.

Table 1. Classification rates of HMM and Evidence Feed Forward HMM.

| Activity  HMM  EFF-HMM  Jump  67  78  Jogging  21  46  Soccer kick  50  100  Dribbling a basketball  12.5  50   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

To  further  improve  on  the  analysis  one  must  first  look  at  how  the  data  is  perceived  to  the classifier.  For the jumping data, one can imagine the ratio starting small, getting bigger as the person crouches to jump, then getting small again when the person stretch through the jump. The patterns of the groupings should be decreasing for a while then increasing.  For running, the  arms  stretch  out  around  the  time  the  legs  stretch  out  and  they  come  together  as  the  legs come together.  Therefore, one would expect, depending on the starting phase of the sequence simulating  running,  the  bounding  box  ratio  would  be  small  (arms  and  legs  together)  then increasing until a certain point (when the arms and legs are at their peak) then decreasing.  This is  similar  to  the  jumping  and  it is  noted    that  many  of  the  misclassified  activities  of jogging were classified as jumping.

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

For  the  dribbling  a  basketball  activity,  one  would  expect  that  the  bounding  boxes  would  be pretty much the same throughout.  As the person walks, the dribbling hand continues up and down at the same position but with further analysis, it shows that some of the simulations move their  opposite  arm  similar  to  walking  which  makes  the  bounding  box  increase  and  decrease, thus the changes in the bounding box ratio will also increase and decrease in a similar fashion to jogging and jumping.

Soccer kicking was a bit different than the rest of the activities.  As the player lines up towards the  ball  the  legs  come  together.    Further  into  the  sequence  the  right  arm  extends  out  as  the kicking  process  is  started.    Next  the  leg  extends  out.    Most  of  the  bounding  box  ratio  from frame to frame is increasing.  This is easy for the soccer kicking to classify correctly.  However, some of the Jogging activity also was classified as soccer kicking.  This is because the way the running  simulation  in  these  four  people  had  a  large  amount  of  increasing  which  better associated with soccer kicking then with running.

These results not only shows why some of the activities were misclassified, but also shows the problem  with  over-processed  data.    Since  there  are  no  real  distinguishing  features  that  are indicative  to  the  activity,  many  of  the  activities  were  classified  with  similar  events  as  far  as their data representation is concerned.

The  Evidence  Feed  Forward  HMM  did  much  better  than  the  standard  HMM  in  this  sparse, over-processed data.  This is due to the linkage of observations to observations.  Even though there were no visible patterns associated with the activity, the Evidence Feed Forward HMM showed that fairly good classification could still be accomplished when compared to standard HMM classification.

## 6. CONCLUSION

The Evidence Feed Forward Hidden Markov Model is more than a standard Hidden Markov Model.   It  provides  observation  to  observation  linkage  in  the  algorithm.    The  linkages  were developed through analysis and proven mathematically.  It was originally designed for better classification  of  visual  action  data,  like  the  differences  in  pitching  and  throwing  from  the outfield.  The idea is that if there existed a way to link one observation frame to another, then there may be some patterns that the Evidence Feed Forward HMM could recognize better than if  there  were  no  observation  linkages,  like  how  a  standard  HMM  would  classify.    This  was extended for more than just visual data and has shown to work in other classification areas.

The proposed research on the development of the Evidence Feed Forward HMM has worked well  for  classifications  of  items  based  on  the  observation  to  observation  link  that  is  not available in other types of HMMs.  With messy data, it has outperformed the standard HMM in classification  of  the  Iris  data.    With  sparse  messy  data  it  has  outperformed  classification  on visual activities created by simulated actions from the CMU data set.  This dataset was overprocessed to a point where no visual cues were seen.

The mathematical proofs, results, and analysis of the Evidence Feed Forward HMM has added a  new  type  of  classifier  and  a  new  way  of  thinking  about  how  the  data  should  be  viewed. Observation to observation linkages are essential, especially for visual data, if a more complete classification system is to be developed.

International Journal of Artificial Intelligence &amp; Applications (IJAIA), Vol.2, No.1, January 2011

## REFERENCES

- [1] Cristani, M., Bicego, M., Murino, V., 'Audio-Visual Event Recognition in Surveillance Video Sequences,' IEEE Transactions on Multimedia , Vol. 9, No. 2, Feb. 2007, pp. 257-267.
- [2] Dimitrijevic, M., Lepetit, V., Fua, P., 'Human Body Pose Detection Using Bayesian SpatioTemporal Templates,' Computer Vision and Image Understanding , Vol. 104, No. 2, 2006, pp.127-139.
- [3] Stern, H., Kartoun, U., Shmilovici, A., 'A Prototype Fuzzy System for Surveillance Picture Understanding,' Proceedings from Visual Imaging and Image Processing Conference , Sept 2001, pp. 624-629.
- [4] Ogale, A., Karapurkar, A., Aloimonos, Y., 'View-Invariant Modeling and Recognition of Human Actions Using Grammars,' Lecture Notes in Computer Science , Vol. 4358, Springer, Berlin, 2007, pp.115-126, doi:10.1007/978-3-540-70932-9\_9
- [5] Yamato, J., Ohya, J., Ishii, K., 'Recognizing Human Action in Time Sequential Images Using Hidden Markov Models,' Proceedings from IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 1992, pp. 379-385.
- [6] Wilson, A., Bobick, A., 'Parametric Hidden Markov Models for Gesture Recognition,' IEEE Transaction on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (PAMI) , Vol. 21, 1999, pp. 884-899.
- [7] Oliver, N. M., Rosario, B., Pentland, A. P., 'A Bayesian Computer Vision System for Modeling Human Interaction,' IEEE Transactions in Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , Vol. 22, No. 8, Aug. 2000, pp. 831-843.
- [8] Xiang, T., Gong, S., 'Incremental Visual Behaviour Modelling,' Proceedings from European Conference on Computer Vision , 2006, pp. 65-72.
- [9] Xiang, T., Gong, S., 'Activity Based Video Content Trajectory Representation and Segmentations,' Proceedings from British Machine Vision Conference , 2004, pp. 177-186.
- [10] Baum, L., 'An Inequality and Associated Maximization Technique in Statistical Estimation for Probabilistic Functions of Markov Processes,' Inequalities , Vol. 3, 1972, pp. 1-8.
- [11] Fisher Iris dataset website, http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Iris
- [12] CMU Motion Capture dataset website, http://mocap.cs.cmu.edu/
- [13] Rabiner, L., 'A Tutorial on Hidden Markov Models and Selected Applications in Speech Recognition,' Proceedings of the IEEE , Vol. 7, 1989, pp. 257-286.