## Hidden Markov Mixture Autoregressive Models: Parameter Estimation

S.H.Alizadeh, S.Rezakhah ∗

## Abstract

This report introduces a parsimonious structure for mixture of autoregressive models, where the weighting coefficients are determined through latent random variables as functions of all past observations. These variables follow a hidden Markov model. We modify EM and Baum-Welch algorithms to estimate the parameters of the model.

MSC: primary 62M10, 60J10 secondary 60G25

Keywords and phrases. Hidden Markov Model, Mixture Autoregressive Model, Parameter Estimation.

## 1 Hidden Markov Mixture Autoregressive Model

Let Y = { Y t } ∞ t =0 be a sequence of continuous random variables, where y t is a realization of Y t . Also let F t = σ { Y s : s ≤ t } represents the sigmafield of all information up to time t , F ( y t |F t -1 ) the conditional distribution function of Y t given past information and α ( t ) h ≡ α ( t ) h ( y 1 , ..., y t -1 ). In addition { Z t } t ≥ p denotes a hidden or latent process which construct a positive recurrent Markov chain on a finite set E = { 1 , 2 , ..., K } , with the initial conditional probabilities

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and transition probability matrix

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∗ Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science ,Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran. Email: rezakhah@aut.ac.ir, sasan alizadeh@aut.ac.ir

in which

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also invariant probability measure is denoted by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α j = lim t →∞ P ( Z t = j ).

We consider { Y t } ∞ t =0 to have a Hidden Markov-Mixture Autoregressive, HM-MAR( K,p ), model with K normal distributions, and p lagged observations in the AR processes, if the conditional distribution of Y t given F t -1 follows

- i. For t = p

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

ii. For t ≥ p +1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α ( t ) h = P ( Z t = h |F t -1 ) and Φ( . ) is the standard normal distribution function.

̸

The novelty of HM-MAR model is that the contribution of each distribution in the mixture structure is not of predefined fixed form. Although HM-MAR model uses all past observations from Y 0 to Y t -1 but the hidden Markov assumption of the process { Z t } t ≥ p , enables us to build a parsimonious model.

In fact latent random variables { Z t } ∞ t = p +1 determine the contribution of distributions in the mixture model. Also conditioning on Z t , { Y t , t ∈ N } is p -tuple Markov, independent of { Z s , s = t } . So by conditioning on { Y t -1 , · · · , Y t -p } and Z t , Y t is independent of { Y s , s &lt; t -p } and { Z s , s = t } .

̸

The MAR model [3] can be considered as a special case of such a HMMAR model (5-6), in which the transition matrix P of the process { Z t } t ≥ p has K identical rows (i.e. p ( Z t = i | Z t -1 = j ) = α i for all i, j = 1 , ..., K . Thus { Z t } ∞ t = p +1 are independent and identically distributed) with p ( Z t = i | Z t -1 = j ) = α i .

HM-MAR model will also lead to hidden Markov model in general state space where p is considered to be zero in (6) (i.e. Y t given Z t , is independent of past observations).

## 2 Estimation

In this section, we discuss estimation of parameters of a HM-MAR( K,p ) model. A new algorithm is proposed based on modification of Baum-Welch [1] and EM [2] algorithms. Baum welch algorithm was originally proposed in the context of Hidden Markov Models for parameter estimation (For a comprehensive review see MacDonal and Zucchini [1]). In HMM each observation just depends on a state of a hidden variable, however in HMMAR, past observations have also effect on next time series observation. First we justify that the modification of Baum-Welch algorithm is correct and then modify the EM algorithm for the case where the latent variable follows a Hidden Markov process.

Let denote A j = ( a 0 ,j , · · · , a p,j ) ′ then θ = { A j , σ j , ρ j , π mn , m,n,j = 1 , · · · , K } constitutes the parameter set of HM-MAR model, which includes { K 2 + ( p + 2) K } parameters. As Y t given Z t forms a p -tuple Markov in HM-MAR model, its conditional distribution can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Y t = (1 , y t , · · · , y t -p +1 ) ′ , also the conditional distribution P ( z t | z t -1 ) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.1 Extension of Baum-Welch Algorithm

Lemma 2.1. Let { y t } T t =0 be a set of time series observations and { Z t } be a set of correct predictor indexes, in ARSNN next time series observations just depends on the last correct predictor. That is for t ≤ k ≤ T

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Considering the homogeneous hidden Markov structure assumption of { Z t } in HM-MAR model (5-6) and the assumption that y t given we have information about the Z t , just depends on p lagged time series observations through 7, we use the method of induction to prove (9). So for k = t +1 we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is independent of { Z t -i , i ∈ N , i &gt; 1 } . Now assume that equation (9) holds for t +1 &lt; ℓ &lt; T , that is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We show that (9) is valid for k = ℓ +1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is independent of { Z t -i } i ≥ 1 by the induction's assumption (10).

## Theorem 2.1. Let for t &gt; p

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then α t ( h ) and β t ( h ) can be calculated by Baum-welch forward backward recursions as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

And the forward recursion starts with α p +1 ( h ) = ρ h Φ { ( y p +1 -Y ′ p A h ) /σ h } and backward recursion starts at β T ( h ) = 1 , in which Φ( . ) is the standard normal distribution function.

Proof. α t ( h ) in equation (11) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also by lemma 2.1, for β t ( h ) in equation (12) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.2 Modification of EM Algorithm

The EM algorithm is used for maximization of completed data log-likelihood. By completed data we mean that the set of time series observations { y t } T t =1 augmented with the latent set of correct predictor indicators { z t } T t = p +1 (i.e. {{ y t } T t =1 , { z t } T t = p +1 } ). So this log-likelihood, by the method of iterative conditioning, can be represented as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last equality holds by (7) and the Markov property of { Z t } with transition probabilities in (8). It is clear that ∑ T t = p +2 I ( z t = k ) I ( z t -1 = j ) is equal to the number of transitions from state j to state k . At the E-step, the algorithm computes the conditional expected value of each I ( z t = k ) and I ( z t = k ) I ( z t -1 = j ) given the observed data.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Last equation holds by linear property of expectation and since Φ { ( y t -Y ′ t -1 A k ) σ k } is measurable with respect to σ { Y 1 , ..., Y T } . Also E ( I ( z t = k ) | y 1 ...y T ) = P ( z t = k | y 1 ...y T ) and E ( I ( z t = k ) I ( z t -1 = j | y 1 ...y T ) = P ( z t = k, z t -1 = j | y 1 ...y T ). These posterior probabilities can be obtained by the following lemma

Lemma 2.2. P ( Z t = h | Y 1 , · · · , Y T ) and P ( Z t = j, Z t -1 = i | Y 1 , · · · , Y T ) in equation (16) can be calculated as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in which F ( Y p +1 , · · · , Y T | Y 1 , · · · , Y p ) = ∑ K j =1 α T ( j ) and { α t ( . ) , β t ( . ) } T t = p +1 are calculated by theorem 2.1.

Proof. Using equations (11) and (12) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in which

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and by lemma 2.1, (7) and Markov property of { Z t } we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the M-step, roots of equation ∂E [ ℓ ∗ ( θ ) | y 1 , · · · , y T ] /∂θ i = 0 , θ i ∈ θ , are calculated

Theorem 2.2. Let ˜ Y = ( Y p , · · · , Y T -1 ) , ¯ Y = ( y p +1 , · · · , y T ) ′ and P k = diag ( P ( Z p +1 = k | y 1 ...y T ) , · · · , P ( Z T = k | y 1 ...y T )) , then maximum likelihood estimate of the parameters HM-MAR are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. calculating ∂E [ ℓ ∗ ( θ ) | y 1 , · · · , y T ] /∂φ k = 0, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

calculating ∂E [ ℓ ∗ ( θ ) | y 1 , · · · , y T ] /∂σ k = 0, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since ( ¯ Y ′ P k ˜ Y ′ A k ) ′ = A ′ k ˜ YP k ¯ Y . Replacing ˆ A k from equation (22), we obtain equation (19) for ˆ σ 2 k .

Since for each j = 1 , · · · , K in the transition matrix P of Markov process Z t , ∑ K i =1 π j,i = 1 thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Calculating the roots of equation ∂E [ ℓ ∗ ( θ ) | y 1 , · · · , y T ] /∂π j,i = 0, by equation (24), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In a similar way we obtain equation (21) for ˆ ρ j for j = 1 , · · · , K .

## 2.3 Learning

A brief summary of HM-MAR(K,P) parameter estimation algorithm is as follows:

1. For t=1 to T do
2. Let
3. For h=1 to K do

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

4. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

5. Initialize θ randomly.
6. do while none of the parameters of θ changes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (b) β T ( h ) = 1
- (c) For t=1 to T do

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (e)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (f) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (g) set the maximum likelihood estimate as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the convergence of training algorithm is issued by the convergence of all expectation maximization algorithms [2].

Remark 2.1. If all rows of the transition probability matrix, P (3), of hidden Markov chain { Z t } are estimated to be equal, then { Z t } are independent (i.e. P ( z t +1 = j | z t = i ) = P ( z t +1 = j ) ) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that the weighting coefficients of HM-MAR model can be considered to be fix after parameter estimation. Thus HM-MAR model will result in a MAR model automatically without any further parameter adjustment.

## References

- [1] I.L. MacDonald and W. Zucchini, Hidden Markov and other models for discrete-valued time series , Monographs on statistics and applied probability, Chapman &amp; Hall, 1997.
- [2] G.J. McLachlan and T. Krishnan, The EM algorithm and extensions , Wiley series in probability and statistics, Wiley-Interscience, 2008.
- [3] Chun Shan Wong and Wai Keung Li, On a mixture autoregressive model , Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Statistical Methodology) 62 (2000), no. 1, pp. 95-115 (English).