## STABILITY OF THE OPTIMAL FILTER IN A HIDDEN MARKOV MODEL WITH MULTIPLICATIVE NOISE

BIRGIT DEBRABANT AND WILHELM STANNAT

Abstract. We consider a hidden Markov model with multiplicative noise emerging from studies of software reliability. We show the stability of the optimal filter w. r. t. general initial conditions in the total variation- and L p -norm and deduce explicit rates. Remarkably, stability turns out to be independent of the ergodic behavior of the signal.

## 1. Introduction

The stability of nonlinear filters is a field of active research, see e. g. [3], the introduction of [9] and references therein. However, the majority of results requires the signal process to be ergodic or stable in some sense. In addition, most of the results are obtained for signals observed with additive noise. The case of nonergodic signals and also the case of signals observed with multiplicative noise still remains mostly open. In this context, the present article studies the stability of the optimal filter in the following hidden Markov model:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where W n , n ∈ N , are independent identically Beta ( α, β ) -distributed random variables, α, β &gt; 0 , describing the noise incorporated in the unknown signal, b is a positive parameter depending on which the unknown signal process can be ergodic or nonergodic and where G n , n ∈ N , are independent Γ(1 , β ) -distributed. Hence, the observation Y n depends on X n via multiplication with the independent noise G n . Thus, model (1) and (2) is an example of filtering a signal observed with multiplicative noise. Note that although to logarithmize leads to a classical linear model with additive noise, stability cannot be studied immediately with known methods such as proposed in e. g. [8, 4] since the corresponding noise terms are rather irregular e. g. neither unimodal nor do they have light tails.

Essentially, the above model appears in [1] as example for models admitting explicit invariant conditional distributions. In our case this amounts to the fact that the incorporated assumptions on the distributions of signal and observation together with a corresponding initial distribution, i. e.

signal:

$$( X n /bX n - 1 | X n - 1 ) ∼ Beta ( α, β )$$

initial distribution:

X 0 ∼ Γ( λ, q ) , where q = α + β and λ &gt; 0

observation:

$$( Y n | X n ) ∼ Γ( X n , β )$$

imply the following explicit updating rules:

2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. 93E11, 93E15, 60G35.

Key words and phrases. Stability, Optimal filter, Multiplicative noise.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our stability results give the dependence of the optimal filter π y 1: n n , that is the regular conditional distribution of X n given the observations y 1: n = ( y k ) k =1 ,...,n , on the initial distribution π 0 of X 0 . To cover a wider range of admissible initial conditions we extend the assumptions of [1, 2] and suppose the initial distribution of X 0 to be a mixed Gamma-distribution with the following density

To study software reliability, model (1) and (2) was later applied in [6, 2] as enhancement to the Kalman filter taking into account that failure data tends to be highly skewed and observational errors are not mainly caused by instrumental inaccuracies. Thereby, the observables Y n can be interpreted as interfailure times of some software. The X n play the role of unknown parameters steering their distribution. To model an evolution of the software the parameters evolve according to (1). The value of b is typically unknown and indicates if we have a tendency of increasing reliability since e. g. E ( Y n | Y 1: n -1 , X 0 ) = 2 b -n ( X 0 + ∑ n -1 j =1 b j Y j ) obviously tends to infinity if b &lt; 1 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where q = α + β and U 0 is a probability measure on a compact subset of (0 , ∞ ) . Such a mixture conserves the conjugacy of this distribution, cp. Lemma 6 which shows that all the posterior distributions are of a similar type.

The pure Gamma case, where U 0 is a Dirac measure is easy to treat and will serve us as an introductory example, see Section 2. Provided that the unknown true initial condition ˜ π 0 is absolutely continuous w. r. t. the assumed initial condition π 0 with a density bounded away from 0, we show stability in the total variation norm (almost surely given the observations) and in the L p -norm for arbitrary p &gt; 0 (expectation w. r. t. the observations Y 1 , Y 2 , . . . ) both with explicit geometric rates.

In Sections 3 and 4 we pass on to the general mixed Gamma initial condition. Under assumptions similar to those in Sec. 2 we show stability with geometric rates. Concerning the total variation norm, Theorem 5 gives that almost surely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for δ &lt; E ( W β 1 ) -1 β , which coincides with the pure Gamma case. Note that the rate of stability 1 δ is independent of the parameter b in the signal. That is, the filter is stable whether or not the signal is ergodic. However, the constant on the right hand side of (4) will depend on the given sequence y 1 , y 2 , . . . of observations. For the L p -norm with p ∈ ( 0 , -u 0 ¯ B ln E ( W β 1 ) ) , Theorem 9 yields

where ρ = ( E ( W β 1 ) e p ¯ B u 0 ) p p + β and where ¯ B = ¯ B ( β, u 0 , o 0 ) is a positive constant specified in the theorem. These rates are smaller compared to ρ = E ( W p 1 ) in the pure Gamma case.

All stability statements of this article are based on an universal stability result of [7]. Therein, a general bound for the total variation distance of optimal filters w. r. t. to the initial condition is deduced in terms of the Lipschitz contraction χ ∗ n of a certain parabolic ground state transform P ∗ n associated with π y 1: n n . More precisely, suppose that the optimal filter is erroneously initialized with initial condition π 0 and that ˜ π 0 is the true initial condition. If ˜ π 0 ≪ π 0 with density h 0 = d ˜ π 0 dπ 0 it follows that ˜ π y 1: n n ≪ π y 1: n n with density h n given by h n = P ∗ n ◦ · · · ◦ P ∗ 1 h 0 , n ∈ N , where P ∗ n f := g ( · ,y n ) ˆ P ( fπ y 1: n -1 n -1 ) π y 1: n n ∫ g ( s,y n ) ˆ Pπ y 1: n -1 n -1 ( s ) ds , ˆ P resp. ˆ p is the dual operator of the

transition probability P resp. the transition density p of the signal, that is P ( X n +1 ∈ dx n +1 | X n ) = p ( X n , x n +1 ) dx n +1 and ˆ Pf = ∫ p ( x, · ) f ( x ) dx , and where g denotes the regular conditional density of the observation given the signal, i. e. P ( Y n ∈ dy | X n ) = g ( X n , y ) dy . It follows that the error between the true optimal filter ˜ π y 1: n n and the erroneously initialized filter π y 1: n n can be expressed in terms of the Lipschitz contractions χ ∗ n of the Markovian transition kernels P ∗ n , whereby χ ∗ n :=

sup f ∈ Lip || P ∗ n f || Lip || f || Lip and where Lip is the space of all Lipschitz continuous functions with the corresponding norm || · || Lip :

Proposition 1 (cp. Prop. 2.1 of [7]) . For the total variation distance of the true optimal filter ˜ π y 1: n n to a wrongly initialized π y 1: n n the following explicit bound is valid:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the formulation in [7] is more general and gives a bound also in the case H = 0 .

provided that ˜ π 0 has π 0 -density h 0 which is bounded away from 0 by a positive constant H and with ˆ σ n = ∞ ∫ 0 ∞ ∫ 0 | x 1 -x 2 | dπ y 1: n n ( x 1 ) dπ y 1: n n ( x 2 ) .

Clearly, for our model (1) and (2) we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2. Stability w. r. t. pure Gamma initial conditions

We consider the particular case π 0 ( x ) ∝ x q -1 λ q e -λx , x &gt; 0 , for some λ &gt; 0 , hence X 0 is Γ( λ, q ) -distributed. Using the recursion

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∑ To study the asymptotic dependence of the optimal filter on the initial condition we apply Prop. 1. Since

it is straightforward to show that the corresponding optimal filters π y 1: n n , n ∈ N , are again Gamma-distributed, namely Γ( λ n , q ) with λ n = b -n λ + n j =1 b j -n y j .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we find || P ∗ n || Lip = b -1 , n ∈ N . Further

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Prop. 1 then implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if the true initial condition ˜ π 0 has a π 0 -density which is bounded away from 0 by some constant H &gt; 0 .

The following lemma analyses the limiting behavior of b n λ n = λ + ∑ n j =1 b j y j which evidently plays a crucial role concerning stability:

Lemma 2. P (lim inf j →∞ { b j Y j &gt; δ j } ) = 1 for arbitrary δ &lt; E ( W β 1 ) -1 β . In particular, ∑ ∞ j =1 b j Y j = + ∞ almost surely.

Proof. We may assume δ ≥ 0 . Note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 3. Lemma 2 remains valid for any initial condition π 0 satisfying E ( X β 0 ) &lt; ∞ .

is summable for δ &lt; E ( W β 1 ) -1 β . Hence, the Borel-Cantelli lemma yields P (lim inf j →∞ { b j Y j &gt; δ j } ) = 1 . Since E ( W β 1 ) -1 β &gt; 1 , we can choose δ &gt; 1 which implies that ∑ ∞ j =1 b j Y j diverges to infinity almost surely. □

Concerning almost sure stability, Lemma 2 implies that (8) converges to 0 almost surely and behaves as O ( δ -n ) for every δ &lt; E ( W β 1 ) -1 β .

Moreover, concerning stability in the L p -norm, for 0 &lt; p &lt; β we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

n ∈ N . Therefore, the optimal filter is stable in the corresponding L p -norm and satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with ρ = E ( W p 1 ) = Beta ( α + p,β ) Beta ( α,β ) .

## 3. Stability in the total variation norm

We return to the more general mixed Gamma initial conditions of the form (3) and deduce an estimate of the total variation distance of π y 1: n n w. r. t. differing initial conditions in Thm. 4 which then implies almost sure stability with geometric rates, cp. Thm. 5.

Theorem 4. Let π 0 and ˜ π 0 be such that

- π 0 ( x ) ∝ x q -1 ∫ ∞ 0 λ q e -λx dU 0 ( λ ) for some probability measure U 0 with support [ u 0 , o 0 ] ⊂ (0 , ∞ ) , and

Let y 1: n ∈ R n + and let π y 1: n n resp. ˜ π y 1: n n be the optimal filter w. r. t. π 0 resp. ˜ π 0 . Then

- ˜ π 0 is a probability density on R + such that the corresponding density h 0 := ˜ π 0 π 0 is Lipschitz continuous and h 0 ≥ H &gt; 0 for some constant H .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This estimate induces stability with geometric rates:

Theorem 5. Under the assumptions of Theorem 4 the optimal filter is stable for almost all sequences y 1 , y 2 , . . . of observations and we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every δ &lt; E ( W β 1 ) -1 β .

Proofs and preliminary results. Before proving the above main statements we consider two preliminary results. Firstly note that posterior distributions corresponding to an initial condition of the form (3) are again of mixed Gamma type:

Lemma 6. The posterior distributions π y 1: n n are mixed Gamma-distributions with densities

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hereby, the distributions U n , n ∈ N , obey the following recursive scheme:

- U (2) n ( A ) = U (1) n ( b · A ) for A ∈ B ( R + ) ,
- U (1) n ( dλ ) = λ α U n ( dλ ) ,
- U (3) n = δ y n +1 ⋆ U (2) n , where δ y n +1 denotes the Dirac measure in y n +1 and ⋆ the convolution,
- U n +1 ( dλ ) = λ -q U (3) n ( dλ ) .

Remark 7. For U 0 = δ λ with some λ &gt; 0 we obtain U n = δ b -n λ + ∑ n k =1 b k -n y k . This setup corresponds to the pure Gamma case of Section 2.

If U 0 has compact support [ u 0 , o 0 ] then U n has also a compact support [ u n , o n ] with u n = b -n u 0 + ∑ n k =1 b k -n y k and o n = b -n o 0 + ∑ n k =1 b k -n y k , n ∈ N .

Proof. The recursion (6) implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In order to apply Prop. 1 we deduce an upper bound for the contraction coefficient χ ∗ n of the ground state transform P ∗ n :

Proposition 8. Let f : R + → R be Lipschitz-continuous. Under the assumptions of Thm. 4 we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

Moreover

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notations: To simplify notations in the following proof we introduce for x, y &gt; 0 and n ∈ N the following measures derived from U n :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, note the following estimate via Jensen's inequality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let n ∈ N . Due to the structure of the optimal filter we obtain for x, y &gt; 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For x 1 , x 2 &gt; 0 we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As x ↦→ p ∗ n ( x, y + b -1 x ) is differentiable with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for T 2 we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since ¯ U x n -1 is a probability measure on [0 , ∞ ) 2 . Therefore,

and formula (12) yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since 1 ≤ o n u n ≤ o 0 u 0 and o n u n ↓ 1 due to Lemma 2. For T 2 we finally have

which together with the obvious estimate | T 1 | ≤ || f || Lip b · | x 1 -x 2 | yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we can proceed with the proofs of Theorems 4 and 5:

Proof. of Thm. 4: We apply Prop. 1. Due to Prop. 8 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For ˆ σ n we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

due to (12). Altogether this yields (10) and proves the theorem.

Proof. of Thm. 5:

First note that

□

We show that ( b n u n ) -1 ∏ n -1 k =0 ( 1 + B o 0 -u 0 b k u k ) vanishes almost surely if n goes to infinity:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remember that b k u k = u 0 + ∑ k j =1 b j y j . Due to Lemma 2 we can find δ &gt; 1 and a random index J δ a. s. finite such that Y j &gt; ( δb -1 ) j for all j ≥ J δ . Consequently, there is a j δ ∈ N with

since 1 + x ≤ exp x for x ∈ R .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ¯ B = B ( o 0 -u 0 ) . The right hand side of (13) can be bounded for n ≥ j δ by

which tends to 0 as O ( δ -n ) for n →∞ .

## 4. Stability in the L p -norm

In the setting of Theorem 4 the optimal filter is always stable in the L p -norm for every p &gt; 0 since the total variation norm is bounded by 1 and so almost sure convergence of the optimal filter implies

by dominated convergence.

Moreover, for some values of p we can specify the rates of this convergence:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

□

Note that the theorem achieves lower rates than those in the pure Gamma case since

The proof is based on Theorem 5 and the bound (14) for the total variation distance. Consider first the following Lemma specifying the behavior of the random index J δ introduced in the proof of Thm. 5.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 10. Let 0 &lt; δ &lt; E ( W β ) -1 β . For

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where q = δ β E ( W β 1 ) .

Proof. Using (9) we have for n ∈ N 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. of Thm. 9: First note that for s ≥ 0

Due to Lemma 10 the expectation is finite if e s q &lt; 1 , where q = δ β E ( W β 1 ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now let δ = ( E ( W β 1 ) e p ¯ B u 0 ) -1 p + β . Then δ satisfies 1 &lt; δ &lt; E ( W β 1 ) -1 β . Now, Lemma 10 applies and we obtain from (14) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which tends to 0 as O ( ρ n ) since e p ¯ B u 0 q = δ -p = ρ and ρ &lt; 1 due to the assumptions on p . □

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that in this proof the choice δ = ( E ( W β 1 ) e p ¯ B u 0 ) -1 p + β is optimal as the two components of the above bound are directed opposite to one another and the actual δ is chosen such that their behavior merges.

## References

- [1] J. A. Bather. Invariant conditional distributions. Ann. Math. Stat. , 36:829-846, 1965.
- [2] Yiping Chen and Nozer D. Singpurwalla. A non-Gaussian Kalman filter model for tracking software reliability. Stat. Sin. , 4(2):535-548, 1994.
- [3] Dan Crisan (ed.) and Boris Rozovskii (ed.). The Oxford handbook of nonlinear filtering. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
- [4] Randal Douc, Eric Moulines, and Yaacov Ritov. Forgetting of the initial condition for the filter in general state-space hidden Markov chain: a coupling approach. Electron. J. Probab. , 14:27-49, 2009.
- [5] Norman L. Johnson, Samuel Kotz, and N. Balakrishnan. Continuous univariate distributions. Vol. 2. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Wiley, 1995.
- [6] Nozer D. Singpurwalla and Simon P. Wilson. Statistical methods in software engineering . Springer Series in Statistics. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1999. Reliability and risk.
- [7] Wilhelm Stannat. Stability of the optimal filter for nonergodic signals - a variational approach. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
- [8] Ramon van Handel. Discrete time nonlinear filters with informative observations are stable. Electron. Commun. Probab. , 13:562-575, 2008.
- [9] Ramon van Handel. Uniform observability of hidden Markov models and filter stability for unstable signals. Ann. Appl. Probab. , 19(3):1172-1199, 2009.