## Convergence in distribution for filtering processes associated to Hidden Markov Models with densities

Thomas Kaijser

Department of Mathematics, Link¨ oping University, S-581 83 Link¨ oping, Sweden ; thkai@mai.liu.se

## Abstract

Consider a filtering process associated to a hidden Markov model with densities for which both the state space and the observation space are complete, separable, metric spaces. If the underlying, hidden Markov chain is strongly ergodic and the filtering process fulfills a certain coupling condition we prove that, in the limit, the distribution of the filtering process is independent of the initial distribution of the hidden Markov chain. If furthermore the hidden Markov chain is uniformly ergodic, then we prove that the filtering process converges in distribution.

Keywords : Hidden Markov Models, filtering processes, Markov chains on nonlocally compact spaces, convergence in distribution, barycenter.

Mathematics Subject Classification (2000) : Primary 60J05; Secondary 60F05.

## 1 Introduction

A Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is a mathematical concept which usually is defined in such a way that it consists of a state space, an observation space, a transition probability function (tr.pr.f) or a transition probability matrix (tr.pr.m) on the state space and a tr.pr.f or a tr.pr.m from the state space to the observation space.

In the present paper we shall consider HMMs for which both the state space and observation space are complete, separable, metric spaces with topologies and σ -algebras determined by the given metrics. To both spaces we will associate a σ -finite measure, which we call λ and τ respectively. Our definition of a HMM (see Definition 2.1 below) will be slightly more general than what is usual, and will simply be based on a tr.pr.f from the state space to the product space of the state space and the observation space. We shall denote this tr.pr.f by M , and shall often assume that the tr.pr.f M has a probability density kernel m with respect to the product measure of the measures λ and τ .

A HMM generates two basic stochastic processes, a Markov chain, which is called the hidden Markov chain and which takes its values in the state space, and an observation sequence taking its values in the observation space. The filtering process of a HMM is, loosely speaking, the sequence of conditional distributions of the hidden Markov chain that is obtained as new observations are received.

It is well-known, that the filtering process itself, is also a Markov chain. A classical, theoretical problem is to find conditions such that the filtering process, has a unique, invariant probability measure.

This problem goes back to the paper [7] from 1957 by D Blackwell for the case when the hidden Markov chain takes its values in a finite set and it goes back to the paper [30] from 1971 by H Kunita for the case when the state space of the hidden Markov chain is a compact, separable, Hausdorff space.

Blackwell studied HMMs with finite state space for which the connection between the hidden Markov chain { X n } and the observation sequence { Y n } is simply

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus g is a mapping from the state space to the observation space, and he proved that if the tr.pr.m of the Markov chain is ergodic and has 'rows which are nearly identical and no element which is very small', then there is a unique invariant probability measure for the filtering process. Blackwell also made the conjecture that there is unique invariant probability measure if the tr.pr.m of the hidden Markov chain is indecomposable.

In [30], Kunita considered two coupled stochastic processes which one could regard as the hidden Markov process and the observation process of a continuous time HMM. The hidden Markov process { X t } was supposed to be a Feller process and to take its values in a compact, separable, Hausdorff space. The observation process { Y t } was defined by the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where h is a continuous map from the state space to R N and { W t } is an Ndimensional Wiener process.

In the proof of Theorem 3.3 of [30] - the main theorem -, Kunita proves the existence of a unique invariant probability measure, if the hidden Markov process has a unique invariant probability measure π such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus 〈 u, π 〉 means the integral of u with respect to π , S denotes the state space and X t ( s ) denotes the hidden Markov process at time t when starting at s . (See [30], formula (5).)

Kunita's proof is based on the observation that probabilities on a compact, convex set is partially ordered with respect to integration of convex functions, (see e.g [11], section 26). Kunita considers the two extremal measures among the set of probabilities on the set of probabilities on S which have the invariant probability measure π as the barycenter. The smallest is simply δ π - the Dirac measure at π . The other extremal measure, the largest, is more abstract, and loosely speaking, it is the measure that 'puts' mass π ( ds ) at the Dirac measure δ s , where thus s denotes an arbitrary point in the given set. By proving that the filtering process with the smallest extremal measure as initial measure gives rise to a process of increasing probability measures with barycenter π , and the largest extremal measure gives rise to a process of decreasing probability measures with barycenter π , Kunita proves - by using (2) - that the two limiting measures, both of which are invariant with respect to the Markov kernel of the filtering process, are equal.

Unfortunately, approximately 30 years after its publication, it was found that there is a gap in the proof of Theorem 3.3 of [30]; this gap is still not fully resolved but in the paper [38] the conclusions of Theorem 3.3 are proved under slightly stronger assumptions than those made in [30]. (For en extensive discussion regarding the gap in the proof of Theorem 3.3 of [30], see [6].)

A problem closely related to the problem of the existence of a unique invariant probability measure is the following convergence problem: When does there exist a unique limit distribution towards which the distributions of the filtering process converge irrespectively of the initial distribution of the hidden Markov chain? When such a limit distribution exists, then we simply say that the filtering process converges in distribution or that the convergence property holds. Of course, if the convergence property holds, then there also exists a unique invariant probability measure for the filtering process.

In the paper [22] from 1975 the convergence property was proved for a HMM with finite state space, under a condition called Condition A. In order to present Condition A we need to introduce the two notions 'stepping matrix' and 'subrectangular matrix'.

Consider a HMM for which both the state space and the observation space are finite - or denumerable -, and let P be the tr.pr.m that governs the hidden Markov chain. To every observation a one can associate a nonnegative matrix M ( a ), of the same format as P , called the stepping matrix . An element ( M ( a )) i,j of the stepping matrix M ( a ) expresses the probability that the next state of the hidden Markov chain will be the state j and the next observation will be a , given that the hidden Markov chain is in state i .

Note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A nonnegative matrix M is called subrectangular , if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus ( M ) i,j denotes the ( i, j ) th element of the matrix M .

In the paper [22] from 1975 the convergence property was proved for a HMM for which both the state space and the observation space are finite, the hidden Markov chain is ergodic, the relation between the hidden Markov chain and the observation sequence is given by (1) and the following condition holds.

Condition A: There exists a finite sequence { a 1 , a 2 , ..., a N } of observations such that the product ∏ N n =1 M ( a n ) of stepping matrices is a nonzero, subrectangular matrix.

The restriction to the case, when the relation between the hidden Markov chain and the observation sequence is given by (1), is not a serious restriction since, as was first pointed out by L Baum and T Petrie (see [5]), any HMM with 'random observations' can be represented by another HMM for which (1) holds, simply by 1) enlarging the original state space to the product space of the state space and the observation space, 2) enlarging the tr.pr.m and 3) defining g (( x, a )) = a . This was also pointed out in [22]

Also in [22], a simple counterexample to Blackwell's conjecture was given, an example which was not difficult to construct, once condition A was found.

In the paper [29] from 2006, Kochman and Reeds formulated a slightly weaker condition than Condition A, - a condition also formulated by using the stepping matrices associated to the elements of the observation space.

Thus, consider a HMM with finite state space and finite observation space A and let K be the set of matrices defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The condition introduced by Kochman and Reeds reads simply as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We call the condition of Kochman and Reeds 'the rank 1 condition' or simply Condition KR.

In [29], Kochman and Reeds proved the existence of a unique invariant probability measure, if the hidden Markov chain is irreducible and Condition KR holds, and, if furthermore, the hidden Markov chain is aperiodic, they proved that the filtering process converges in distribution.

In [29], the authors also observed that, if the hidden Markov chain is irreducible and aperiodic and Condition A is satisfied, then there exists a finite sequence { b 1 , b 2 , ..., b N } of observations such that the product ∏ N n =1 M ( b n ) of stepping matrices, after rearrangement of the labelling of the states if necessary, can be written in the following block structure:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In (5) all the elements of A , B , C and D are strictly positive, the elements of the 0 -blocks are 0 and the formats of the blocks along the diagonal are quadratic. By applying Perron's theorem (see e.g. [17], vol II, Theorem 8.1) to the matrix A , Kochman and Reeds prove that - after suitable normalisation the nth power of the matrix Λ tends to a rank 1 matrix and thereby they have showed that Condition A implies Condition KR.

The set of HMMs with finite state space and observation space, for which Condition KR holds but not Condition A, is probably quite small. In fact, it seems likely, that the problem of finding the set of HMMs which satisfy Condition KR but not Condition A, is equivalent to the problem of finding those HMM which do not satisfy Condition KR.

In the paper [26] published 2011, the convergence theorem for HMMs with finite state space proved in [29], is generalised to HMMs with denumerable state space. The starting point of [26] is the relation (3) between the tr.pr.m of the hidden Markov chain and the stepping matrices induced by the elements of the observation space.

A difficulty one needs to handle when analysing the filtering process of a HMM with a denumerable and non-finite state space is that the state space of the filtering process becomes a nonlocally compact space . To see this, note that in this case the state space of the filtering process is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If we let B ( x 0 , r 0 ) denote the closed ball under the l 1 -topology , with center x 0 and radius r 0 &gt; 0, it is easily proved and well-known that B ( x 0 , r 0 ) is not a compact set, from which follows that the set K is not locally compact under the topology induced by the l 1 -norm . This also implies that the only real-valued continuous function on K with compact support is the zero-function.

A nice property regarding probabilities on the set K, where thus K is defined by (6), is that the set of probability measures on K with equal barycenter is a tight family of probability measures. Moreover, if one uses the Kantorovich distance (Vasershtein distance) to measure the distance between the probabilities on the set K , then the distance between the sets of probabilities with barycenter x and y respectively, is equal to || x -y || . In [26], these two facts, together with an equicontinuity property for the filtering process, made it possible to verify the convergence property, if also a certain contraction condition, called Condition B, was satisfied.

A slight reformulation of Condition B reads as follows. Let π be a unique stationary probability vector for the hidden Markov chain of the HMM under consideration and let P denote the tr.pr.f of the filtering process. (We call P the filter kernel.)

Condition ˜ B : To every ρ &gt; 0 , there exists an integer N and a constant α &gt; 0 , such that, if { Z n,µ , n = 1 , 2 , ... } and { Z ′ n,ν , n = 1 , 2 , ... } are two independent Markov chains generated by the filter kernel P and the initial distributions µ and ν respectively, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if both µ and ν have barycenter π . We present the exact formulation of Condition B at the end of Section 11.

In [26], a somewhat stronger condition called Condition B1 was also introduced, a condition which is a more direct generalisation of the rank one condition of Kochman and Reeds. In brief, Condition B1 says essentially, that there shall exist an infinite sequence a 1 , a 2 , ..., a n , ... of observations such that the normalised product of stepping matrices

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also in [26], a sufficient condition for when there are more than one invariant probability measure was given.

In the paper [10] from 2010, P Chigansky and R van Handel prove the convergence property for HMMs with denumerable state space under a contraction condition which they call Condition C, a condition which they also prove is necessary. (For the formulation of Condition C, see [10] page 2325.) In case the state space and the observation space are finite, they also verify that Condition C is equivalent to Condition KR, thereby proving that Condition KR is a necessary condition for convergence in distribution of filtering processes associated to a HMM with finite state space and finite observation space. They also verify that both Condition B and Condition B1 of [26] imply Condition C.

The work of Chigansky and van Handel in [10] has clear resemblance to the work of Kunita in [30]. Just as in [30], Chigansky and van Handel considers two extremal invariant probability measures for the filtering process. By using Condition C and the partial ordering for probabilities on the set of probabilities on the state space with the same barycenter induced by integration of convex functions, Chigansky and van Handel are able to prove that the two extremal invariant measures for the filtering process must be equal; at the same time they obtain that the convergence property holds.

In spite of the fact that Condition C has been proven to be both a necessary and sufficient condition for convergence in distribution of the filtering process of a denumerable HMM for which the hidden Markov chain is strongly ergodic, the theory regarding the convergence property for HMMs with denumerable state space is not quite complete, since, in some quite concrete situations, it is not clear how to verify any of Condition B, Condition B1 or Condition C.

To illustrate the difficulty, consider a positively recurrent, aperiodic random walk on the integers and suppose that our observation system is such, that we only can tell whether the Markov chain is in an odd or even state.

For this example it is not clear how to verify for example Condition B1 introduced above. One reason for this difficulty is that in this case, the two stepping matrices that one obtains, will be infinite dimensional matrices, and, as far as we know, the generalisations to infinite dimensional matrices of the Perron-Frobenius theorem for finite dimensional matrices that exist (see e.g. [41]), do not seem to be sufficient for the verification of for example Condition B1.

In [26], Condition A, which was originally formulated for a HMM with finite state space, was generalised to the case when a HMM has a denumerable state space. However, in order to prove the convergence property, it was necessary to require, that there exists a sequence of observations, such that the product of the corresponding stepping matrices is a subrectangular matrix with only finitely many nonzero columns. Thereby, it was again possible to apply Perron's theorem for finite dimensional matrices in order to verify Condition B1.

In this paper we shall thus consider HMMs for which both the state space and observation space are complete, separable, metric spaces. An important decision we had to make was to decide which topology and which σ -algebra we should use for the set of probabilities on the state space of the HMM. For reasons described below, we decided to use the total variation distance as metric for this set, and therefore it was natural to choose, as topology for this set, the topology determined by the total variation distance and as σ -algebra the Borel field induced by this topology.

This choice of topology and σ -algebra is in contrast to previous work on convergence in distribution for filtering processes associated to a HMM with nondenumerable state space. As far as we know, in previous work the topology on the set of probability measures on the state space used, when proving the convergence property or proving the existence of a unique invariant probability measure, has always been the weak topology and the σ -algebra has been the Borel field induced by the weak topology. (See e.g [30], [36], [13], [38], [39].) One natural reason for this latter choice is that, if the hidden Markov chain has an invariant probability measure, then there also exists at least one invariant probability measure for the filtering process. (See e.g [39], Lemma A.5.) Unfortunately we have failed to prove a similar result when the topology is the stronger topology determined by the total variation distance.

An important inequality, used in [26] as well as in [22], is the inequality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus γ ( · ) is a generic symbol for the Lipschitz constant of a Lipschitz continuous function, and T denotes the transition operator associated to the tr.pr.f of the filtering process.

When trying to prove the inequality (7) for the case when the state space and the observation space of a HMM are complete, separable, metric spaces, it turned out, that it was necessary to assume

1) that there exist a σ -finite measure λ , say, on the state space and a σ -finite measure τ , say, on the observation space,

2) that the set of initial distributions on the state space are restricted to the set of absolutely continuous probability distributions with respect to λ ,

3) that the transition probability function M of the HMM has a probability density kernel with respect to the product measure λ ⊗ τ , and

4) that the σ -algebra for the set of probabilities on the state space, is the Borel field generated by the metric defined by the total variation distance .

A regularity condition that we need is - loosely speaking - that if two observations are close, then the two conditional distributions that these two observations give rise to, shall also be close. This condition is thus a kind of continuity condition . (See Definition 3.1.) If this condition holds and the tr.pr.f M has a density, then we call the HMM regular .

Now, if we consider a regular HMM, let K denote the set of probabilities on the state space which are absolutely continuous with respect to the σ -finite measure λ , and let E denote the σ -algebra on K generated by the total variation distance, then, by using the tr.pr.f M , we can define a tr.pr.f on the measurable space ( K, E ), a tr.pr.f which we call the fi lter kernel and usually denote by P . (See Definition 3.2.) The filter kernel P , together with an initial distribution µ on ( K, E ), generates a Markov chain on the space ( K, E ) which we call the filtering process generated by the HMM and the initial distribution µ .

A complication when trying to extend the convergence result obtained in [26], - a complication we have not been able to overcome -, is due to the fact that the set of probability measures on ( K, E ) having the same barycenter is not a tight set . For this reason, in our main theorem (see Theorem 4.1 below), we partly have to be content with proving that the Kantorovich distance between the distributions of two filtering process with different initial distributions tends to zero.

The basic assumption we make about a HMM, besides being regular, is that it shall be strongly ergodic , that is that there shall exist a unique invariant measure π , such that for all starting points s in the state space

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus P n ( s, · ) denotes the distribution of the hidden Markov chain at time n when starting at s and || · || denotes the total variation distance.

The special assumption regarding a regular HMM that we make in order to be able to obtain limit results for the distributions of the filtering process is formulated as a coupling condition .

Condition E : To every ρ &gt; 0 , there exist an integer N and a number α , such that for any two probability measures µ and ν on ( K, E ) with barycenter equal to the stationary measure π , there exists a coupling ˜ µ N , say, of µ P N and ν P N , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

What we state in our main theorem (Theorem 4.1) is that, if the HMM is regular , the hidden Markov chain is strongly ergodic and Condition E is satisfied, then the filter kernel is weakly contracting , that is, in the limit, the distribution of the filtering process is independent of the initial distribution; if moreover either the hidden Markov chain is uniformly ergodic , or the filter kernel has an invariant probability measure, or there exists an element x 0 ∈ K such that { P n ( x 0 , · ) , n = 1 , 2 , ... } is a tight sequence, then the filter kernel is weakly ergodic , that is, the filtering process converges in distribution to a unique limit measure independent of the initial distribution.

As pointed out above, in previous papers dealing with convergence in distribution or the existence of invariant probability measures for a filtering process associated to a HMM with a complete separable metric space as state space, the topology for the probabilities on the state space has been the weak topology and the σ -algebra has been the Borel field induced by the weak topology. Therefore previous results are not quite comparable to ours. Let us though just mention, that it seems, as if in most papers where a correct proof of the convergence property has been given, an important assumption has been, that the probability density kernel m , which determines both the HMM and the probability distribution for the next observation, shall be strictly positive . Such an assumption is not necessary to make in order to verify Condition E.

At this point we want to mention a related problem, namely the problem to characterise, when the filtering process of a HMM has the fi lter stability property. This property has to do with a computation problem regarding the filtering process; since one usually does not know the initial distribution, it is important to know, if, in the long run - with high probability (with probability one), the total variation distance between the distribution computed with the correct but unknown initial distribution and the distribution computed with the guessed initial distribution tends to zero. With mathematical notations, if x and y are two initial distributions and a 1 , a 2 , a 3 , ... is a sequence of observations obtained when x is the initial distribution, does it hold that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus h ( x, ( a 1 , a 2 , ...a n )) denotes the 'true' conditional distribution at time n of the hidden Markov chain computed using x as the initial distribution, h ( y, ( a 1 , a 2 , ...a n )) denotes the 'guessed' conditional distribution at time n of the hidden Markov chain computed using y as the initial distribution, and || · || is e.g. the l 1 -norm ? This problem has been much studied in the last two decades. (See e.g. [3], [6], [38], [2].) We will not discuss this problem further in this paper; we only want to mention that the inequality proved in Section 12 (see Theorem 12.1) is similar to inequalities used in the literature, when proving the filter stability property for filtering processes.

The plan of this paper is as follows. Recall, that K denotes the set of probability measures on the state space of the HMM under consideration, which are absolutely continuous with respect a given σ -finite measure λ , and that E is the σ -algebra generated by the total variation distance.

In the next section, Section 2, we introduce some basic definitions and notations. In Section 3 we make a precise definition of the concept regular HMM and define the fi lter kernel of a regular HMM. We also introduce the notion compositions of HMMs and the notion iterations of a HMM and state some simple facts regarding compositions of HMMs.

In Section 4 we formulate the main theorem and in Sections 5 to 10 we prove the main theorem.

In Section 5 we prove that the filter kernel of any regular HMM is Lipschitz equicontinuous (see Definition 2.2) and in Section 6 we introduce the Kantorovich distance for probability measures on the space ( K, E ).

In Section 7 we formulate and prove an auxiliary theorem for Markov chains on a bounded, complete, separable, metric space.

In Section 8 we prove a simple result concerning the barycenters of the filtering process induced by a regular HMM and in Section 9 we prove an inequality for two different probability measures on ( K, E ) with unequal barycenters. Both these results are crucial to us, when proving the main theorem.

In section 10 we conclude the proof of the main theorem by verifying that the hypotheses of the auxiliary theorem are fulfilled.

In Section 11 we introduce the notion random mapping associated to a regular HMM . The notion random mapping is the same as the notion random system with complete connections (see e.g [19]); other names for this concept is learning model (see e.g [33]) or iterated function system with place-dependent probabilities (see e.g [4]). That there is a strong connection between the theory of random systems with complete connections and the theory of HMMs (partially observed Markov chains), can be observed already in the paper [7] by Blackwell. (See also e.g [19], section 2.3.3.1.)

In Section 11 we also define the Vasershtein coupling of a random mapping and introduce a condition called Condition E1, and by using the Vasershtein coupling we show that Condition E1 implies Condition E.

At the end of Section 11 we consider strongly ergodic HMMs with denumerable state space, finite or infinite, and show, that the 'rank 1 condition' introduced in the paper [29] and Condition B introduced in [26], both imply Condition E1.

In Section 12, we prove some inequalities for iterations of positive, integral kernels with rectangular support. These results follow rather easily from a theorem by E Hopf from 1963. (See [18].) In Section 12 we also introduce yet another condition, which we call Condition P, and show that Condition P implies Condition E1. Condition P can be regarded as a generalisation of Condition A mentioned above.

Finally in Section 13, we present two examples. In both examples we start with a hidden Markov chain on a complete, separable, metric state space such the tr.pr.f of the Markov chain has a probability density function p with respect to a σ -finite measure λ .

In the first example we assume, that the state space is partitioned into a denumerable set of subsets and that at each time epoch it is only possible to determine in which subset the hidden Markov chain is located. We prove that if

1) the tr.pr.f of the Markov chain has a probability density kernel with respect to a σ -finite measure on the state space and 2) there exists a subset belonging to the partition such that on this subset the probability density kernel is bounded from above and below by two positive constants, then Condition P is satisfied. Furthermore, by using a result in [37], we prove that there exists an element x 0 ∈ K , such that { P n ( x 0 , · ) , n = 1 , 2 , ... } is a tight sequence, which together with the main theorem implies that the filter kernel is weakly ergodic.

In the other example we assume that the observation space is a complete, separable, metric space, not necessarily denumerable, on which there is a σ -finite measure τ . We assume that the tr.pr.f M , which determines the HMM, has a probability density kernel m , which can be written as a product m = pq of two probability density kernels p and q respectively, where thus p is the density kernel of the tr.pr.f of the hidden Markov chain and q is the probability density kernel of a tr.pr.f Q from the state space to the observation space.

We prove that Condition P is satisfied, if there exists a subset F 0 of the state space and a subset B 0 of the observation space, such that, 1) if the hidden Markov chain takes a value in F 0 , then the probability that the next observation is in B 0 is positive, and, 2) if an observation in B 0 is obtained, then it follows that the position of the hidden Markov chain must be in the set F 0 .

We end this introductionary section with a few remarks. First, in Section 11 of [26], we gave an example of a HMM with finite state space and observation space such that the filtering process becomes a periodic Markov chain, in spite of the fact that the hidden Markov chain is uniformly ergodic. It is easy to generalise this example to a regular HMM for which the state space of the HMM is a finite interval, the observation space is finite and the hidden Markov chain is uniformly ergodic.

Secondly, as pointed out above, in [10] the authors proved, that the 'rank 1 condition' of Kochman and Reeds, introduced in [29], is also a necessary condition for weak ergodicity of the filtering process associated to HMMs with finite state space and observation space, when the hidden Markov chain is uniformly ergodic. We believe that similarly, if we have a regular HMM with uniformly ergodic hidden Markov chain, then Condition E is a necessary condition for the converge property to hold.

Thirdly, there are many other open problems left. One important problem is to generalise the conclusions obtained in this paper to HMMs, which are not necessarily regular. Another problem is to investigate whether, in the main theorem of this paper (Theorem 4.1), one can replace the conclusion 'weakly contracting' by the conclusion 'weakly ergodic'. This would follow if we could verify Condition E of [37].

Still another problem we want to mention, is whether the technique invented by Kunita and which was used by Chigansky and van Handel to prove the convergence property for HMMs with denumerable state space, can be used also for HMMs for which the state space is a complete, separable, metric space.

## 2 Basic definitions and notations

In this section we introduce the basic concepts of the paper.

A hidden Markov model (HMM), as described in the classical paper [34], consists of a finite state space S , a finite observation space A , a tr.pr.m P on S , a tr.pr.m R from S to A and an initial distribution p 0 . In the more modern literature, see e.g. [9], one allows both the state space S and the observation space A to be measurable spaces, ( S, F ) and ( A, A ) say, and then, of course, the tr.pr.ms P and R must be replaced by tr.pr.fs.

Our definition of a HMM is slightly more general than the one given in [9], and will be based on a tr.pr.f from the state space to the product of the state space and the observation space. First though, let us point out, that if a measurable set ( X, X ) and a metric φ on X are given, then we always assume implicitly, that there is a topology on X which is determined by the metric φ , and that the σ -algebra X is the Borel field induced by this topology. We call such a space a metric space and denote it ( X, X , φ ) or simply ( X, X ).

Definition 2.1 Let ( S, F ) and ( A, A ) be two measurable spaces, let M : S × ( F ⊗ A ) → [0 , 1] be a tr.pr.f from ( S, F ) to ( S × A, F ⊗ A ) and define the tr.pr.f P : S ×F → [0 , 1] by P ( s, F ) = M ( s, F × A ) . Then we call

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) . We call ( S, F ) the state space , we call ( A, A ) the observation space , we call M the Hidden Markov Model kernel of H (the HMM-kernel ) and we call P the Markov kernel of H .

In case the state space is a complete, separable, metric space ( S, F , δ 0 } , λ is a positive σ -finite measure on ( S, F ) , the observation space is a complete, separable, metric space ( A, A , ̺ ) , τ is a σ -finite positive measure on ( A, A ) and m : S × S × A → [0 , ∞ ) is a F ⊗ F ⊗ A measurable function such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we call H a HMM with densities and we call m the probability density kernel of the HMM-kernel M . We denote a HMM with densities by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the function p : S × S → [0 , ∞ ) is the function defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We call λ and τ base measures and we call the tr.pr.f P : S ×F → [0 , 1] , defined by P ( s, F ) = ∫ F p ( s, t ) λ ( dt ) , the Markov kernel determined by ( p, λ ) .

If the state space S is denumerable we always assume that the associated σ -algebra F is the power set of S , that δ 0 is the discrete metric and λ is the counting measure.

Similarly, if the observation space A is denumerable, we always assume that the associated σ -algebra A is the power set of A , that ̺ is the discrete metric and that τ is the counting measure. ✷

Remark 1 . Recall that if ( X 1 , X 1 ) and ( X 2 , X 2 ) are two complete, separable measurable spaces and µ is a probability on ( X 1 × X 2 , X 1 ⊗ X 2 ) then µ is determined by its values on rectangular sets B 1 × B 2 , B 1 ∈ X 1 , B 2 ∈ X 2 . ✷ Remark 2 . Since the tr.pr.f P is determined by M , and the density kernel p is determined by m , we could have excluded P in the expression (8) and p in the expression (9). We have included P and p for sake of clarity. ✷

We shall next present our choice of notations for some well-known notions. Some of these notions will not be needed until later sections.

Let ( X, X , φ ) be a metric space. We let P ( X, X ) denote the set of probabilities on ( X, X ), we let Q ( X, X ) denote the set of finite, non-negative measures on ( X, X ) and let Q ∞ ( X, X ) denote the set of σ -finite , positive measures on ( X, X ). If µ, ν ∈ Q ( X, X ), we let δ TV ( µ, ν ) denote the total variation between µ and ν defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We shall also often use the notation || µ -ν || instead of δ TV ( µ, ν ). If ν ∈ Q ( X, X ) we write || ν || = ν ( X ) . We always assume implicitly, that the topology on Q ( X, X ) is the toplogy generated by the total variation metric δ TV .

We let B u [ X ] denote the set of real, X measurable functions on X and let B [ X ] denote the set of real, bounded , X measurable functions on X . We may write B [ X, X ] instead of B [ X ]. If u ∈ B [ X ], we set || u || = sup {| u ( x ) | , x ∈ X } , we set osc ( u ) = sup { u ( x ) -u ( y ) : x, y ∈ X } and, if u ∈ B [ X ] and A ⊂ X , we set osc A ( u ) = sup { u ( x ) -u ( y ) : x, y ∈ A } . If u ∈ B u [ X ] and ν ∈ P ( X, X ) then, when convenient, we write ∫ X u ( x ) ν ( dx ) = 〈 u, ν 〉 if the integral exists. If λ ∈ Q ∞ ( X, X ) and ν ∈ Q ( X, X ) are such that there exists a function f ∈ B u [ X ] such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we write ν ∈ Q λ ( X, X ) and we call f a representative of ν . If also ν ∈ P ( X, X ), we write ν ∈ P λ ( X, X ).

̸

We let C [ X ] denote the set of real, bounded, continuous functions on X . If u ∈ C [ X ], we define γ ( u ) = sup { u ( x 1 ) -u ( x 2 ) φ ( x 1 ,x 2 ) : x 1 = x 2 } , we define Lip [ X ] = { u ∈ C [ X ] : γ ( u ) &lt; ∞} and we define Lip 1 [ X ] = { u ∈ Lip [ X ] : γ ( u ) ≤ 1 } .

If Q : X ×X → [0 , 1] is a tr.pr.f on ( X, X ), then we define Q n : X ×X → [0 , 1] recursively by Q 1 = Q and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We call the mapping T : B [ X ] → B [ X ] defined by Tu ( x ) = ∫ X u ( y ) Q ( x, dy ) the transition operator associated to the tr.pr.f Q . The tr.pr.f Q also induces a map ˘ Q : P ( X, X ) →P ( X, X ) by ˘ Q ( µ )( F ) = ∫ X Q ( x, F ) µ ( dx ). We shall usually write ˘ Q ( µ ) = µQ . As is well-known

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(See [35], Section 1.2.) Furthermore, if µ, ν ∈ P ( X, X ) and u ∈ B [ X ], it is well-known that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

an inequality we shall have use of later.

If ( X 1 , T 1 ) and ( X 2 , T 2 ) are two topological spaces, the topology on X 1 × X 2 will always be the product topology.

The terminology below is not standard and therefore we make a more formal definition.

Definition 2.2 Let ( X, X , φ ) be a metric space and Q a tr.pr.f on ( X, X ) . I . If the associated transition operator T satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we call Q Lipschitz-continuous .

II. If Q is Lipschitz-continuous and also there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that the associated transition operator T satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we call Q Lipschitz equicontinuous . The smallest constant C for which (12) holds is called the bounding constant . ✷

We shall now introduce some terminology concerning the limiting behaviour of the distributions of a Markov chain on a metric space.

Definition 2.3 Let ( X, X , φ ) be a metric space and Q a tr.pr.f on ( X, X ) . 1) If there exists a probability measure π ∈ P ( X, X ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we call the tr.pr.f Q strongly ergodic , and we call π the limit measure. 2) If furthermore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we call the tr.pr.f Q uniformly ergodic .

Definition 2.4 Let H = { ( S, F ) , P, ( A, A ) , M } be a HMM such that ( S, F ) is a metric space. If the Markov kernel P is strongly ergodic (with limit measure π ), then we also call H strongly ergodic (with limit measure π ) and, if furthermore the Markov kernel P is uniformly ergodic, we call H uniformly ergodic.

Definition 2.5 Let ( X, X , φ ) be a metric space and let Q be a tr.pr.f on ( X, X ) . 1) If

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all x, y ∈ X , then we call the tr.pr.f Q weakly contracting . 2) If furthermore there exists a probability measure π ∈ P ( X, X ) , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we call the tr.pr.f Q weakly ergodic and we call π the limit measure.

## 3 Regular HMMs and the filter kernel

In this section we shall introduce a more restricted class of HMMs which we call regular HMMs. We shall define iterations of regular HMMs, we shall define the fi lter kernel of a regular HMM and shall state some simple facts regarding regular HMMs.

We start with a HMM H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } with densities. First, let us for each a ∈ A define a mapping M a : Q λ ( S, F ) →Q λ ( S, F ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We shall usually write xM a instead if M a ( x ).

We also define a mapping M : Q λ ( S, F ) × A →Q λ ( S, F ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In order to be able to verify that certain sets are measurable, it has been necessary for us to introduce a more restricted class of HMMs with densities.

Definition 3.1 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a HMM with densities. If the function M : Q λ ( S, F ) × A → Q λ ( S, F ) defined by (14) and (13) is continuous then we call H a regular HMM. ✷

A trivial example of a regular HMM is a HMM with densities for which the observation space is denumerable, the metric ̺ is the discrete metric and τ is the counting measure, since in this case

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For a less trivial example see Example 13.2 in Section 13.

Our next aim is to introduce a notion for regular HMMs, which we call the filter kernel . Thus, let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM. In order to simplify the notations we shall let K be defined as the set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let δ TV be the metric determined by the total variation on K and let E be the σ -algebra on K generated by δ TV . In agreement with our notations introduced above, we let P ( K, E ) denote the set of probability measures on ( K, E ).

We now define g : K × A → [0 , ∞ ), by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we define G : K ×A→ [0 , 1] by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we define h : K × A → K by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since H is assumed to be regular, it follows immediately that g is continuous. That G is a tr.pr.f follows from the integral definition of G and the fact that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That h is continuous on the set { ( x, a ) : || xM a || &gt; 0 } follows as a simple consequence of the following lemma.

Lemma 3.1 Let x, y belong to a normed vector space and suppose that || x || &gt; 0 and || y || &gt; 0 . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The inequality of Lemma 3.1 is easily proved by using the triangle inequality. We omit the details. (For details see e.g. [25], section 3.)

Since M ( x, a ) is a continuous function it follows that the set { ( x, a ) : || xM a || = 0 } is a closed set, and it is then easily checked that { ( x, a ) : h ( x, a ) ∈ B } ∈ K⊗A , if B is an open set in E , from which follows that h : K × A → K is a measurable function.

Next, for each x ∈ K , we define A + x = { a ∈ A : || xM a || &gt; 0 } , which is an open set for all x ∈ K . We now define the tr.pr.f P on ( K, E ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we define T : B [ K ] → B [ K ] by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That P ( x, · ) is a probability measure in P ( K, E ) for every x ∈ K follows from the integral definition of P .

To verify that P ( · , E ) is measurable for each E ∈ E we argue as follows. Define P ′ : K ×E → [0 , 1] by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where G is defined by (16) and B ( x, E ) = { a ∈ A : h ( x, a ) ∈ E } . Clearly

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since G : K ×A→ [0 , 1] is a tr.pr.f and h : K × A → A is measurable, it follows that P ′ : K × E → [0 , 1] is a tr.pr.f on ( K, E ) (see e.g [27], Lemma 1.41) and since P ′ = P we can conclude that P : K ×E → [0 , 1] is a tr.pr.f.

That T is the transition operator associated to P , is evident from (19) and (20).

Definition 3.2 We call P : K ×E → [0 , ∞ ) , defined by (19), the fi lter kernel induced by the regular HMM H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } . If { Z n,µ , n = 0 , 1 , 2 , ... } denotes the Markov chain generated by µ ∈ P ( K, E ) and the filter kernel P , we call { Z n,µ , n = 0 , 1 , 2 , ... } the fi ltering process induced by H and the initial distribution µ .

We shall also need the map ˘ P : P ( K, E ) →P ( K, E ) defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We usually write µ P instead of ˘ P ( µ ). From (10) follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We shall next introduce a notion we call compositions of HMMs. Let H 1 = { ( S, F ) , P 1 , ( A 1 , A 1 ) , M 1 } and H 2 = { ( S, F ) , P 2 , ( A 2 , A 2 ) , M 2 } be two HMMs with the same state space. Define A 1 , 2 = A 1 × A 2 , A 1 , 2 = A 1 ⊗ A 2 , define M (1 , 2) : S ×F ×A 1 , 2 → [0 , 1] by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

define P (1 , 2) : S ×F ×A 1 , 2 → [0 , 1] by

P

,

(1

2)

(

s, F

) =

M

(1

and define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Obviously H 1 , 2 is also a HMM; we call H 1 , 2 the composition of H 1 and H 2 . For simplicity we write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Fubini's theorem follows that if H 1 , H 2 and H 3 are three HMMs with the same state space, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If H is a HMM and H n = H , n = 1 , 2 , ..., N , where N ≥ 2, we set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We call H N the Nth iterate or the Nth iteration of H . Loosely speaking, the Nth iteration H N of a HMM H is the HMM obtained from H , when one collects the observations in groups of N instead of collecting them one by one.

Next some simple facts regarding HMMs with densities and regular HMMs. Thus, let H 1 = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p 1 , λ ) , ( A 1 , A 1 , ̺ 1 ) , ( m 1 , τ 1 ) } and H 2 = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p 2 , λ ) , ( A 2 , A 2 , ̺ 2 ) , ( m 2 , τ 2 ) } be two HMMs with densities and with the same state space. We define m (1 , 2) : S × S × A 1 × A 2 → [0 , ∞ ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Again by using Fubini's theorem, it follows that H 1 ∗H 2 is a HMM with densities such that the HMM-kernel M (1 , 2) : S ×F ⊗A 1 ⊗A 2 → [0 , 1] satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, if both H 1 and H 2 are regular , then it is elementary to prove that also H 1 ∗ H 2 is regular.

Next let us note that the following 'scaling property' holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If we let P 1 and P 2 denote the induced filter kernels, let T 1 and T 2 denote the associated transition operators, let P (1 , 2) denote the filter kernel of H 1 ∗H 2 and

,

2)

(

s, F

×

A

1

×

A

2

)

let T (1 , 2) denote the associated transition operator, then, by using the scaling property (22), it is not difficult to prove that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since these relations are of importance for our proof of the main theorem (Theorem 4.1), we prove (23) and (24).

The equality (24) follows from the equality in (23) if one uses the identity (21). To prove (23), let u ∈ B [ K ] and set u 2 = T 2 u . From (20) we find that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus x ( a 1 ) and A + 2 ,x ( a 1 ) are defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and that

and

respectively.

It is easily checked that the set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

satisfies

Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and hence (23) holds.

By induction follows that if H is a regular HMM and H n = H , n = 1 , 2 , ..., N , where N ≥ 2, then H N is also regular, and if we let P ( N ) denote the filter kernel induced by H N and let T ( N ) denote the transition operator associated to P ( N ) , then it follows from (24) and (23) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The second of these equalities is used in order to prove that the filter kernel of a regular HMM is Lipschitz equicontinuous and not only Lipschitz continuous, a fact which is crucial to us, when proving the main theorem.

We end this section emphasizing that whenever we introduce a HMM H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } with densities, then K will denote the set P λ ( S, F ) and E will denote the σ -algebra on K generated by the total variation metric.

## 4 The main theorem

In this section we shall formulate the main theorem. We shall first recall the well-known concept barycenter .

Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a HMM with densities and let µ ∈ P ( K, E ). The barycenter of µ , which we denote by b ( µ ), is a probability measure in K defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That the function b ( µ ) : F → [0 , 1] is a probability in K is easily verified.

We let P ( K | x ) denote the set of probability measures in P ( K, E ) for which the barycenter is equal to x .

We shall next recall the concept coupling . Let µ be a probability measure on the measurable space ( X 1 , X 1 ) and let ν be a probability measure on the measurable space ( X 2 , X 2 ). If ˜ µ is a probability measure on the product space ( X 1 × X 2 , X 1 ⊗X 2 ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we call ˜ µ a coupling of µ and ν .

Definition 4.1 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a strongly regular HMM with limit measure π and let P be the induced filter kernel. We define Condition E as follows :

To every ρ &gt; 0 , there exist an integer N and a number α such that, for any two measures µ and ν in P ( K | π ) , there exists a coupling ˜ µ N , say, of µ P N and ν P N , such that, if we set D ρ = { ( x, y ) ∈ K × K : δ TV ( x, y ) &lt; ρ } , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 4.1 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a strongly ergodic, regular HMM with limit measure π and let P be the induced filter kernel. Suppose also that H fulfills Condition E. Then P is weakly contracting.

If furthermore, either

1) there exists a measure µ ∈ P ( K, E ) which is invariant with respect to P or 2) there exists an element x 0 ∈ P λ ( S, F ) such that the sequence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and is a tight sequence, or

3) H is also uniformly ergodic ✷

- then P is weakly ergodic.

Remark . In the paper [26] it was proved that, if the state space of a strongly ergodic, regular HMM with limit measure π is denumerable, then { P n ( π, · ) , n = 1 , 2 , ... } is a tight sequence. We believe the same is true, if the state space is a complete, separable, metric space. Therefore, we believe that the second part of the theorem could be omitted and that the conclusion in the first part of the theorem ought to be that the filter kernel P is 'weakly ergodic' instead of just 'weakly contracting'. ✷

## 5 A universal inequality

Lemma 5.1 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM, let P be the induced filter kernel. Then P is Lipschitz equicontinuous with bounding constant ≤ 3 .

Proof . We shall first show that for all x, y ∈ K and all u ∈ Lip [ K ]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus T is the transition operator associated to P .

Recall, that for x ∈ K , the set A + x is defined as A + x = { a : || xM a || &gt; 0 } , where thus, for each a ∈ A , the mapping M a : S × F → [0 , ∞ ) is defined by M a ( s, F ) = ∫ F m ( s, t, a ) λ ( dt ) and || xM a || is defined by || xM a || = ∫ S M a ( s, S ) x ( ds ) . Recall also, that T : B [ K ] → B [ K ] is defined by T u ( x ) = ∫ A + x u ( xM a || xM a || ) || xM a || τ ( da ) .

Next, let us note, that if x, y ∈ K and a ∈ A , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, if x and y in K , and f and g in B u [ S ] are representatives of x and y respectively, we find that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We shall below have use of the following proposition, the proof of which is an immediate consequence of Lemma 3.1.

Proposition 5.1 Let x, y ∈ K and a ∈ A be such that || xM a || &gt; 0 and || yM a || &gt; 0 . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now let x, y ∈ K , and define B ⊂ A by B = { a ∈ A : || xM a || &gt; 0 , || yM a || &gt; 0 } . Clearly B is an open set, since we have assumed that H is regular. Define B 1 and B 2 by B 1 = A + x \ B, B 2 = A + y \ B . Obviously B,B 1 , B 2 are disjoint, measurable sets. For u ∈ Lip [ K ] we now find that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and by using Proposition 5.1, (27) and (28), it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and thereby the inequality (26) is proved.

From (26) it immediately follows that γ ( T u ) ≤ 2 γ ( u ) + || u || for all u in Lip [ K ] , from which follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since sup {|| x -y || : x, y ∈ K } = 2, and from (29) then follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That the inequality γ ( T n u ) ≤ 3 γ ( u ) also holds for n ≥ 2 and all u ∈ Lip [ K ] is an immediate consequence of equality (25) and the fact that the inequality (30) holds for all regular HMM. Hence the filter kernel P is Lipschitz equicontinuous with bounding constant ≤ 3 . ✷

Remark . It is easy to construct an example which shows that the bounding constant can not be less than 2. (See [25].) We believe the bounding constant is in fact exactly 2.

## 6 The Kantorovich distance on the space P ( K, E )

Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a HMM with densities and, as

usual, let K = P λ ( S, F ), and let E be the σ -algebra on K generated by δ TV . 2 2 ), we let

Now, let K = K × K and E = E ⊗ E . If µ and ν belong to P ( K, E P ( K 2 ; µ, ν ) denote the subset of P ( K 2 , E 2 ) defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The Kantorovich distance d K ( µ, ν ), for µ, ν ∈ P ( K, E ), is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since 0 ≤ δ TV ( x, y ) ≤ 2 for x, y ∈ K , it is clear that d K ( µ, ν ) is well-defined. From the Kantorovich-Rubenstein theorem (see [15], Theorem 11.8.2, see also [28]), it follows that the Kantorovich distance d K can also be defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That d K is a metric on P ( K, E ) follows from (32).

Since ( K, E ) is a bounded space, it is clear that the metric d K is equivalent to the metric β defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, as is well-known and shown in e.g Chapter 11 of [15], the topology induced by β is equivalent to the weak topology; hence the topology induced by d K is also equivalent to the weak topology.

Let us also note, that if P denotes the filter kernel of a regular HMM, then it follows from (32) and Definition 2.5, that the statement ' P is weakly contracting ' is equivalent to the statement

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 7 An auxiliary theorem

In this section ( K, E ) will denote an arbitrary, bounded, complete, separable, metric space, with metric δ and where E is the Borel field associated to the topology generated by δ . The purpose of this section is to state and prove a limit theorem for Markov chains in bounded, complete, separable, metric spaces.

Let Q : K ×E → [0 , 1] be a tr.pr.f on ( K, E ) and let T : B [ K ] → B [ K ] denote the transition operator associated to Q . We define T 0 u ( x ) = u ( x ). Recall that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since T is an 'averaging' operator.

We shall next define two properties that will be part of the hypotheses of Theorem 7.1.

Definition 7.1 Let Q be a tr.pr.f on ( K, E ) , and let T be the associated transition operator.

A. If for every ρ &gt; 0 , there exists a number α , 0 &lt; α &lt; 1 , and an integer N such that, if the integer n ≥ N , then for all u ∈ Lip [ K ]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we say that Q has the strong shrinking property . We call α a shrinking number associated to ρ .

B. If for every ρ &gt; 0 , there exists a number α , 0 &lt; α &lt; 1 , such that for every nonempty, compact set E ⊂ K , every η &gt; 0 and every κ &gt; 0 , there exist an integer N and another nonempty, compact set F ⊂ K such that, if the integer n ≥ N , then for all u ∈ Lip [ K ]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we say that Q has the shrinking property . We call α a shrinking number associated to ρ . ✷

Theorem 7.1 Let ( K, E ) be a complete, separable, bounded, metric space with metric δ , let Q be a tr.p.f on ( K, E ) and suppose that Q is Lipschitz equicontinuous.

- A. Suppose also that Q has the shrinking property. Then Q is weakly contracting (as defined in Definition 2.5, part 1).
- B. Suppose furthermore that either
- a) there exists an invariant probability measure with respect to Q or
- b) there exists x ∗ ∈ K such that { Q n ( x ∗ , · ) , n = 1 , 2 .... } is a tight sequence or
- c) Q has the strong shrinking property,
6. then Q is weakly ergodic (as defined in Definition 2.5, part 2).

Proof . Set D = sup { δ ( x, y ) : x, y ∈ K } . Since K is assumed to be bounded we have D &lt; ∞ ; it is clearly no loss of generality to assume that D = 2, since the shrinking properties also hold if we replace the given metric δ by 2 δ/D .

In order to prove that Q is weakly contracting, we need to show, that for all x, y ∈ K

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ǫ &gt; 0, x, y ∈ K and u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ] be given. In order to prove (34) we shall show, that we can find an integer N , which may depend on x and y , but which does not depend on u , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is not difficult to do, if one uses the shrinking property. We first choose the number ρ sufficiently small, more precisely we set ρ = ǫ. Next, let α be a shrinking number associated to ρ . Since { x, y } is a compact set, it follows from the shrinking property, that if we define η = η 1 = ǫ/ 2 and κ = κ 1 = ǫ/ 2, then we can find an integer N 1 and a compact set E 1 such that, if n ≥ N 1 , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we have used the fact that γ ( u ) ≤ 1, osc ( u ) ≤ 2 and ρ = ǫ .

We now choose M = min { m : (1 -α ) m &lt; ǫ } . For i = 2 , 3 , ..., M, we define the numbers η i by η i = ǫ/ 2 i , the numbers κ i by κ i = ǫ/ 2 i and having defined the compact sets E i , for i = 1 , 2 , ..., j -1 , and the integers N i , for i = 1 , 2 , ..., j -1, it follows from the shrinking property, that we can find a compact set E j and an integer N j , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if n ≥ N j . By using (36) repeatedly it follows, that if the integer n satisfies n ≥ N 1 + N 2 + ... + N j , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, if j = M and the integer n satisfies n ≥ N 1 + N 2 + ... + N M , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where N = N 1 + N 2 + ... + N M , and by using the fact that osc ( Tu ) ≤ osc ( u ), the fact that osc ( u ) ≤ 2 and the fact that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we find that, if n ≥ N , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, since M is defined in such a way that (1 -α ) M &lt; ǫ, it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if n ≥ N . Hence (35) holds from which follows that (34) is satisfied. Hence Q is weakly contracting . Thereby, the first part of Theorem 7.1 is proved.

It remains to prove Part B of Theorem 7.1. In order to do this we first prove the following lemma which is easily proved by using (34), compactness and the Lipschitz equicontinuity property. We include a proof for sake of completeness.

Lemma 7.1 As before, let ( K, E ) be a complete, separable, bounded, metric space with metric δ , let Q be a tr.p.f on ( K, E ) and suppose that Q has the shrinking property. Suppose also that Q is Lipschitz equicontinuous. Then, to every nonempty, compact set E ∈ E and every ǫ &gt; 0 , we can find an integer N , such that, for any function u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all n ≥ N .

Proof of Lemma 7.1 . Let E ∈ E and ǫ &gt; 0 be given, where E is a nonempty, compact set. Since we have assumed that Q has the Lipschitz equicontinuity property, there exists a constant C , such that for all n ≥ 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all x, y ∈ K and all u ∈ Lip [ K ].

Next, set ǫ 1 = ǫ/ 3 C . Since E is compact we can find a finite set Ψ = { x i , i = 1 , 2 , ..., M } consisting of M elements such that, for every x ∈ E , inf { δ ( x, x i ) : x i ∈ Ψ } &lt; ǫ 1 .

Further, let x i , x j ∈ Ψ be two arbitrary elements. From (34) follows that for every pair x i , x j in Ψ, we can find an integer N x i ,x j such that, if n ≥ N x i ,x j , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

for all u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ]. Therefore, if we define N = max { N x i ,x j : ( x i , x j ) ∈ Ψ × Ψ , x i = x j } , it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if n ≥ N , x i , x j ∈ Ψ and u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ].

Now, let x, y ∈ E be chosen arbitrarily, choose x i ∈ Ψ such that δ ( x, x i ) &lt; ǫ 1 and choose x j such that δ ( y, x j ) &lt; ǫ 1 . Let u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ]. Using the triangle inequality, (38) and that ǫ 1 = ǫ/ 3 C , we now find that, if n ≥ N , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if n ≥ N , and thereby the lemma is proved. ✷ .

We shall now complete the proof of Theorem 7.1 by proving Part B of the theorem.

Let us first consider the case when the tr.pr.f Q has at least one invariant probability measure. That Q then must have precisely one invariant probability measure is then easily proved by a contradiction argument, if one uses Lemma 7.1 and the fact that Lip [ K ] is measure determining. We omit the details.

Now let ν denote the unique invariant measure of Q . In order to prove that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all x ∈ K and all u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ], we argue as follows. Let x ∈ K and u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ] be given. Since ν is invariant, we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, let ǫ &gt; 0 be given and choose the compact set C so large that x ∈ C and ν ( C ) &gt; 1 -ǫ . This we can do since ( K, E ) is a complete, separable, metric space and therefore every probability measure is tight. (See [8], Theorem 1.4.) From Lemma 7.1 it follows that we can choose an integer N , independent of u , so large that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By using the inequalities (40) and (41) it now follows, that if n ≥ N , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from which follows that (39) holds for all u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ] and all x ∈ K . That (39) holds for all u ∈ Lip [ K ] and all x ∈ K , then follows from the fact that if u ∈ Lip [ K ] and γ ( u ) &gt; 0 then v = u/γ ( u ) ∈ Lip 1 [ K ]. Then, by using the same argument as used in [8] when proving that (ii) of Theorem 2.1 in [8] implies (iii) of Theorem 2.1, it follows that lim sup n →∞ Q n ( x, F ) ≤ ν ( F ) for all closed sets F ∈ E . Now, by referring to Theorem 2.1 of [8], we find that (39) holds for all u ∈ C [ K ] and all x ∈ K . Hence Q is weakly ergodic with limit measure ν .

Next, let us assume that there exists an element x ∗ ∈ K such that { Q n ( x ∗ , · ) , n = 1 , 2 .... } is a tight sequence. To prove weak ergodicity under this assumption, it follows from the preceding result, that it suffices to prove that there exists an invariant probability measure. To do this we shall use well-known arguments together with the fact that Q is Lipschitz-continuous.

As usual, let T denote the transition operator associated to Q . For n = 1 , 2 , ... we define T ( n ) by T ( n ) = (1 /n ) ∑ n k =1 T k and we define Q ( n ) by Q ( n ) = (1 /n ) ∑ n k =1 Q k . Now, since { Q n ( x ∗ , · ) , n = 1 , 2 .... } is a tight sequence, it follows immediately that also { Q ( n ) ( x ∗ , · ) , n = 1 , 2 .... } is a tight sequence. Therefore we can extract a subsequence n j , j = 1 , 2 , ... such that { Q ( n j ) ( x ∗ , · ) , , j = 1 , 2 , ... } converges weakly towards a probability measure ν , say. Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all u ∈ C [ K ].

Now assume that u ∈ Lip [ K ]. By considering the sequence { T ( n j +1) u ( x ∗ ) , j = 1 , 2 , ... } it is easily proved that on the one hand

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and on the other hand

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we thus have used the fact that Tu ∈ Lip [ K ] if u ∈ Lip [ K ]. Hence, if u ∈ Lip [ K ], then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds, and since the set of Lipschitz continuous functions is measure determining, it follows, that (43) holds for u ∈ C [ K ], which was what we wanted to prove.

To complete the proof of Theorem 7.1 it remains to prove that Q is weakly ergodic, if Q has the strong shrinking property. We shall first prove that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ǫ &gt; 0 be given. Choose ρ = ǫ . From the strong shrinking property follows, that we can find a number α &gt; 0 and an integer N , such that, if u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ] and n &gt; N , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now define M = min { m : (1 -α ) m &lt; ǫ/ 2 } . Then, if n &gt; NM , it follows from (45) and the fact that osc ( u ) ≤ 2 if u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ], that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ], and since ǫ is arbitrarily chosen, (44) follows.

Next, let x 0 ∈ K be given. We shall now prove, that to every ǫ &gt; 0 we can find an integer N such that, for every integer m ≥ 1, and every integer n ≥ N ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, let ǫ &gt; 0 and the integer m ≥ 1 be given. Set ν x 0 = δ x 0 Q m . Then, if u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ], we find, for n = 1 , 2 , ... , that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the limit relation (44) it follows, that we can find an integer N , which is independent of the integer m , such that for any u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ] and all y ∈ K | T n u ( x 0 ) -T n u ( y ) | &lt; ǫ, if n ≥ N , which implies that (46) holds for all n ≥ N . From the definition of the Kantorovich distance it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if n, m ≥ N . This shows that { d K ( Q n ( x 0 , · ) , Q m ( x 0 , · )) } is a Cauchy sequence.

Since we have assumed that ( K, E ) is a complete, separable, metric space it follows that ( P ( K, E ) , T , d K ) is also a complete, separable, metric space, if we let T denote the Borel field generated by the Kantorovich metric d K . (See e.g [15], Corollary 11.5.5 and Theorem 11.8.2.) Therefore it follows that there exists a probability measure µ , say, in P ( K, E ), such that lim n →∞ d K ( Q n ( x 0 , · ) , µ ) = 0 .

But since lim n →∞ sup { osc ( T n u ) : u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ] } = 0 because of (44), it now also follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that for all u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

But if (47) holds for all u ∈ Lip 1 [ K ], as was shown above, it also holds for all u ∈ Lip [ K ]. Again referring to the proof of Theorem 2.1 in [8], we can conclude that lim sup n →∞ Q n ( x, F ) ≤ ν ( F ) for all closed sets F ∈ E and then referring to Theorem 2.1 of [8], it follows again that (39) holds for all u ∈ C [ K ] and all x ∈ K . Hence Q is weakly ergodic with limit measure ν . Thereby Theorem 7.1 is proved. ✷ .

## 8 The barycenter of the filtering process

From the auxiliary theorem of the previous section and Lemma 5.1 it follows, that in order to prove Theorem 4.1, it remains to verify, that, if the Markov kernel P of the HMM under consideration is strongly ergodic, then the shrinking property is satisfied, and, if P is uniformly ergodic, then the strong shrinking property is satisfied. In order to accomplish this we shall need two results on barycenters both of which are of some independent interest. The first of these we shall state and prove in this section.

Theorem 8.1 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM and let P be the filter kernel. Let P be the Markov kernel of H . Then for all x ∈ K

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark . The theorem is essentially due to Kunita. (See [30]. See also [10], Lemma A.5.) ✷

Proof . Let F ∈ F and I F : S → { 0 , 1 } denote the indicator function of F . From the definition of the barycenter we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from which follows that b ( δ x P ) = xP . That b ( δ x P n ) = xP n , for n ≥ 2, then follows from the relation (25). ✷

The following lemma is not needed in the proof of the main theorem, but will be needed later, when we want to verify that Condition E holds. We present it here, since it gives some insight into the sets of probability measures on ( K, E ) with equal barycenter.

Lemma 8.1 Let ( S, F , δ 0 ) be a complete, separable metric space, let λ be a σ -finite measure on ( S, F ) , let K = P λ ( S, F ) , let E denote the σ -algebra generated by the total variation metric and let π ∈ K . For F ∈ F define E ( F ) = { x ∈ K : x ( F ) ≥ π ( F ) / 2 } . Then, for all µ ∈ P ( K | π ) and all F ∈ F ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof . The inequality (48) holds trivially if π ( F ) = 0. Thus assume F ∈ F is such that π ( F ) &gt; 0. Clearly E ( F ) ∈ E . Set E ( F ) = E. Since µ ∈ P ( K | π ) we have ∫ K 〈 I F , x 〉 µ ( dx ) = π ( F ) . Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence µ ( E )(1 -π ( F ) / 2) ≥ π ( F ) / 2 and hence µ ( E ( F )) &gt; π ( F ) / 2 which is more than we needed to prove. ✷

## 9 On the Kantorovich distance between sets with different barycenters

Let ( S, F ) be a complete, separable, measurable space with metric δ 0 , let λ denote a σ -finite, nonnegative measure on ( S, F ) and set K = P λ ( S, F ). As before, let δ TV denote the metric on K induced by the total variation and let E denote the σ -algebra generated by δ TV . Instead of writing δ TV ( x, y ) we shall in this section usually write || x -y || . Let P ( K, E ) denote the set of probability measures on ( K, E ), let Q ( K, E ) denote the set of positive and finite measures on ( K, E ) and for r &gt; 0 let Q r ( K, E ) denote the set of positive, finite measures on ( K, E ) with total mass equal to r .

Let d K : P ( K, E ) × P ( K, E ) → [0 , 2] denote the Kantorovich distance on P ( K, E ) (see Section 6). Recall that the Kantorovich distance on P ( K, E ) has two equivalent definitions namely either by the formula (31) or by the formula (32).

For the set Q r ( K, E ) we also define a metric, which we also denote by d K , simply by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also in this case we call d K the Kantorovich distance.

As in Section 4, we let P ( K | x ) denote the set of probability measures on ( K, E ) for which the barycenter is equal to x . For µ ∈ Q r ( K, E ) we also define a barycenter b ( µ ) simply by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, if µ ∈ Q r ( K, E ) then b ( µ ) ∈ Q λ ( S, F ) and || b ( µ ) || = r . For x ∈ K and r &gt; 0, we let Q r ( K | x ) denote the set of measures in Q r ( K, E ) which have barycenter equal to rx .

The purpose of this section is to prove the following result:

Theorem 9.1 Let r &gt; 0 , let x, y ∈ K and let µ ∈ Q r ( K | x ) . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof . Let us first note that if x, y ∈ K , then d K ( δ x , δ y ) = || x -y || , where thus δ x and δ y denote the Dirac measures at x and y respectively. This follows from (31).

The following lemma gives a lower bound for the Kantorovich distance between two measures in Q r ( K, E ) in terms of their barycenters.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Proof . The conclusion of the lemma is trivially true if b ( µ ) = b ( ν ) . We thus assume that b ( µ ) = b ( ν ). From the definition of the Kantorovich distance in Q r ( K, E ) and the definition of the barycenter of a measure in Q r ( K, E ), it follows that it suffices to prove the inequality if r = 1, that is when µ, ν ∈ P ( K, E ).

Thus, let µ, ν ∈ P ( K, E ) and set x = b ( µ ) and y = b ( ν ) . Let F 1 , F 2 ∈ F be such that F 2 = S \ F 1 and such that x ( F ∩ F 1 ) ≥ y ( F ∩ F 1 ) , ∀ F ∈ F such that F ⊂ F 1 and x ( F ∩ F 2 ) &lt; y ( F ∩ F 2 ) , ∀ F ∈ F such that F ⊂ F 2 . Define the function J : S → [ -1 , 1] by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus I F 1 and I F 2 denote the indicator functions of the sets F 1 and F 2 .

Next, define v ∈ B [ K ] by v ( z ) = 〈 J, z 〉 . Since osc ( J ) ≤ 2, it follows from (11), that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and hence v ∈ Lip 1 [ K ]. From the definition of the Kantorovich distance it then follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and from the definition of the barycenter and (49), it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which together with (50) implies that d K ( µ, ν ) ≥ || b ( µ ) -b ( ν ) || .

✷

We now continue our proof of Theorem 9.1 by proving that, if the measure µ ∈ Q ( K, E ) is a weighted finite sum of Dirac measures, then for every y ∈ K we can find a measure ν ∈ Q ( K, E ), such that µ ( K ) = ν ( K ), b ( ν ) = yµ ( K ) and d K ( µ, ν ) = || b ( µ ) -b ( ν ) || . As usual, if ξ denotes an arbitrary element in K , we let δ ξ denote the Dirac measure at ξ .

Lemma 9.2 Let N be a positive integer and let ξ k , k = 1 , 2 , ..., N, be elements in K . Let β k &gt; 0 , k = 1 , 2 , ..., N , let the measure ϕ ∈ Q ( K, E ) be defined by ϕ = ∑ N k =1 β k δ ξ k and define the element a ∈ Q λ ( S, F ) by a = ∑ N k =1 β k ξ k . Let b ∈ Q λ ( S, F ) be an element satisfying || b || = || a || .

Then, there exist elements ζ k , k = 1 , 2 , ..., N, in K , such that b = ∑ N k =1 β k ζ k , and such that, if we define Ψ = ∑ N k =1 β k δ ζ k , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof . First let us observe that, if ψ ∈ Q ( K, E ) is defined by ψ = ∑ N k =1 β k δ ζ k , where β k , for k = 1 , 2 , ..., N, is a positive number, and ζ k , for k = 1 , 2 , ..., N, belongs to K , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This follows from the fact that, if µ ∈ Q ( K, E ) is defined by µ = δ z 0 and F ∈ F , then ∫ K 〈 I F , z 〉 µ ( dz ) = 〈 I F , z 0 〉 = z 0 ( F ) .

Next, let ζ 1 , ζ 2 , ..., ζ N denote an arbitrary set of N elements in K and define θ ∈ Q ( K, E ) by θ = ∑ N k =1 β k δ ζ k . Clearly θ ( K ) = ∑ N k =1 β k and hence θ ( K ) = ϕ ( K ) = || a || . We now define the measure ˜ ϕ on ( K 2 , E 2 ) by ˜ ϕ ( { ( ξ k , ζ k ) } ) = β k , k = 1 , 2 , ..., N. Then clearly ˜ ϕ ( A × K ) = ϕ ( A ) , ∀ A ∈ E , and ˜ ϕ ( K × A ) = θ ( A ) , ∀ A ∈ E , from which follows that the Kantorovich distance d K ( ϕ, θ ) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By combining (52) and (51) with Lemma 9.1, it follows, that in order to prove Lemma 9.2, it suffices to find probability measures ζ k , k = 1 , 2 , ..., N, belonging to K , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That we can do this when N = 1, that is, when ϕ = β 1 δ ξ 1 , is trivial. Simply define ζ 1 = b/β 1 ; then β 1 || ξ 1 -ζ 1 || = || a -b || , as we want it to be. The case when b = a is also trivial. Just take ζ k = ξ k , k = 1 , 2 , ..., N . In the remaining part of the proof we therefore assume that a = b .

̸

We shall now prove - by induction -, that we can find probability measures ζ k ∈ K, k = 1 , 2 , ..., N, such that (53) and (54) hold. Thus, let us assume, that, if N = M -1, where M ≥ 2, if a = ∑ N k =1 β k ξ k where β k &gt; 0 , k = 1 , 2 , ...N, and ξ k ∈ K,k = 1 , 2 , ..., N , if b ∈ Q λ ( S, F ) and also || a || = || b || , then we can find ζ k , k = 1 , 2 , ..., N in K , such that (53) and (54) hold.

Now, let N = M , let β k &gt; 0 , k = 1 , 2 , ..., M, let ξ k ∈ K,k = 1 , 2 , ..., M, set a = ∑ M k =1 β k ξ k and suppose that b ∈ Q λ ( S, F ) and that || b || = || a || . Our aim is thus to find elements ζ k , k = 1 , 2 , ..., M in K , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and also

and also then and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (58) and the definition of b 1 it then follows that || b 1 || = || b || -β M = || a || -β M = || a 1 || and then, using the induction hypothesis, it follows that we can find probability measures ζ k , k = 1 , 2 , ..., M -1 , such that b 1 = ∑ M -1 k =1 β k ζ k and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and consequently, by using (59) and (60), it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and hence (55) and (56) hold with N = M .

To determine a vector ζ M ∈ K such that, if we define b 1 by (57), then (58) and (59) hold, we proceed as follows.

First, let F 1 , F 2 ∈ F be such that F 2 = S \ F 1 and such that a ( F ∩ F 1 ) ≥ b ( F ∩ F 1 ) for all F ∈ F satisfying F ⊂ F 1 and such that a ( F ∩ F 2 ) &lt; b ( F ∩ F 2 ) for all F ∈ F satisfying F ⊂ F 2 . ( F 1 , F 2 constitutes a Hahn decomposition.) We write F 1 = { F ∈ F : F ⊂ F 1 } and F 2 = { F ∈ F : F ⊂ F 2 } .

Next define a measure c ∈ Q λ ( S, F ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and set

Recall that we have assumed that a = b and hence || a -b || = 0 . We define

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us also define a 1 ∈ Q λ ( S, F ) by a 1 = ∑ M -1 k =1 β k ξ k . Clearly || a 1 || = || a ||-β M . Now suppose that we can find a probability measure ζ M ∈ K , such that, if we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Obviously ∆ 0 ≤ ∆. We now define ζ M as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have to verify that ζ M ∈ K . We first show that ζ M ∈ Q λ ( S, F ). For F ∈ F 1 we find, from the definition of c , (see (61)), that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, if F ∈ F 2 , then obviously ζ M ( F ) ≥ 0. Hence ζ M ∈ Q ( S, F ). Since a, b, c and ξ M belong to Q λ ( S, F ), it follows that also ζ M ∈ Q λ ( S, F ).

̸

To prove that ζ M ∈ K , we need to show that ζ M ( S ) = 1. Since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we find that ζ M ( S ) = ξ M ( F 1 ) + ξ M ( F 2 ) = 1, and hence ζ M ∈ K . We also find that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, if b 1 is defined by (57), we find, that if F ∈ F 1 , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, if F ∈ F 2 , then, since ∆ 0 ≤ ∆, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence (58) is satisfied.

It thus remains to show that (59) is satisfied. Since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if F ∈ F 1 , and, as we just showed, b 1 ( F ) ≥ a 1 ( F ), if F ∈ F 2 , we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and since || a -b || = 2∆ and β M || ξ M -ζ M || = 2∆ 0 because of (62), the equality (59) holds and thereby the proof of the lemma is completed. ✷

Using Lemma 9.2 and Lemma 9.1 it is now easy to conclude the proof of Theorem 9.1. Thus let x, y ∈ K and suppose µ ∈ Q r ( K | x ). What we want to prove is that to every ǫ &gt; 0 we can find a measure ν ∈ Q r ( K | y ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, let ǫ &gt; 0 be given. From the general theory of measures we know, since ( K, E ) is a complete, separable, metric space, that we can find a measure µ 1 ∈ Q r ( K, E ) of the form µ 1 = ∑ N k =1 β k δ ξ k such that d K ( µ, µ 1 ) &lt; ǫ/ 2, where thus ξ k , k = 1 , 2 , ..., N belong to K and β k &gt; 0 for k = 1 , 2 , ..., N . From Lemma 9.1 now follows that we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and from Lemma 9.2 follows that we can find a measure ν ∈ Q r ( K | y ), such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the triangle inequality then follows, that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, d K ( µ, ν ) &lt; r || x -y || + ǫ and thereby Theorem 9.1 is proved. ✷ By using Theorem 8.1 and Theorem 9.1 we obtain the following corollary.

Corollary 9.1 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM and let P be the filter kernel.

A. Suppose H is strongly ergodic with limit measure π . Then, to every η &gt; 0 and every finite set M of elements in K , we can find an integer N , such that for every x ∈ M there exists a probability ν x ∈ P ( K | π ) , such that for every u ∈ Lip [ K ]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

B. If furthermore H is uniformly ergodic, then, to every η &gt; 0 , we can find an integer N , such that, for every x ∈ K , there exists a measure ν x ∈ P ( K | π ) , such that the inequality (63) holds for every u ∈ Lip [ K ] .

Proof . Suppose H is strongly ergodic and that M = { x i , i = 1 , 2 , ..., M } is a finite set of elements in K . From Theorem 8.1 follows, that to every η &gt; 0, we can find an integer N , such that, for every x i ∈ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Theorem 9.1 then follows that, to every x i ∈ M , we can find a probability measure ν i ∈ P ( K | π ), such that d K ( δ x i P N , ν i ) &lt; η , from which follows, that (63) holds, if u ∈ Lip [ K ] and x ∈ M . Thereby part A is proved.

Next suppose that H is uniformly ergodic with limit measure π . From Theorem 8.1 follows that, to every η &gt; 0, we can find an integer N , such that, for all x ∈ K ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Theorem 9.1 then follows that, to every x ∈ K , we can find a probability measure ν x ∈ P ( K | π ), such that d K ( δ x P N , ν x ) &lt; η , from which follows that (63) holds for all x ∈ K , if u ∈ Lip [ K ]. Thereby Part B of the corollary is also proved. ✷

## 10 Verifying the shrinking property

From Lemma 5.1 we know that the filter kernel of a regular HMM is Lipschitz equicontinuous. Therefore, by Theorem 7.1, in order to prove Theorem 4.1, it suffices to prove, that the filter kernel of the HMM under consideration in Theorem 4.1 has the shrinking property, and, if also the HMM is uniformly ergodic, then the filter kernel has the strong shrinking property.

We first prove the following lemma.

Lemma 10.1 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM which is strongly ergodic with limit measure π . As usual, let P denote the filter kernel induced by H . Suppose Condition E holds. Then,

A: for every ρ &gt; 0 , there exists a number α &gt; 0 and an integer N , such that for any two probability measures µ and ν in P ( K | π )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if u ∈ Lip [ K ] and n ≥ N ;

B: for every ρ &gt; 0 , there exists a number α &gt; 0 and an integer N , such that for any two probability measures µ and ν in P ( K | π ) and any κ &gt; 0 , there exists a compact set F such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if u ∈ Lip [ K ] and n ≥ N.

Proof . Let ρ &gt; 0 be given and let µ, ν ∈ P ( K | π ). Since Condition E is satisfied, there exist a number α &gt; 0 and an integer N - independent of µ and ν - and a coupling ˜ µ of µ P N and ν P N such that, if D ρ = { ( x, y ) ∈ K 2 : δ TV ( x, y ) &lt; ρ/ 3 } , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, if u ∈ Lip [ K ], n ≥ N and we set v = T n -N u , we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next set

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the fact that γ ( T m u ) ≤ 3 γ ( u ) , ∀ m ≥ 1 because of Lemma 5.1, and that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if

we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

min { osc F ( v ) , γ ( v )( ρ/ 3) } ˜ µ ( B 3 ) + osc F ( v )(1 -˜ µ ( B 3 )) + osc ( v )˜ µ ( B 5 )

and by using (67), (68), the fact that γ ( v ) ≤ 3 γ ( u ) because of Lemma 5.1 and the fact that osc ( T n u ) ≤ osc ( u ) for all integers n ≥ 1, we find that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which together with (66) and the fact that v = T n -N u implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and hence Part B is proved. ✷

To complete the proof of Theorem 4.1 it suffices to prove the following two propositions.

Proposition 10.1 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM which is uniformly ergodic with limit measure π . Suppose Condition E holds. Then the strong shrinking property holds.

Proposition 10.2 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM which is strongly ergodic with limit measure π . Suppose Condition E holds. Then the shrinking property holds.

and

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which combined with (66) implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and hence part A is proved.

Next let κ &gt; 0 also be given. Since ( K, E ) is a complete, separable, metric space, there exists a compact set F ∈ E such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proofs . We first prove Proposition 10.1. Let ρ &gt; 0 be given. What we want to prove is that we can find an integer N and a number α &gt; 0 such that, if the integer n ≥ N , then, for all u ∈ Lip [ K ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Set ρ 1 = ρ/ 6. From Part A of Lemma 10.1 we know that we can find a number α &gt; 0 and an integer N 2 , such that, for any two probability measures µ and ν in P ( K | π ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if u ∈ Lip [ K ] and n ≥ N 2 . Since we have assumed that H is uniformly ergodic with limit measure π , it follows from Part B of Corollary 9.1, that we can find an integer N 1 , such that for any two probability measures x and y in K there exists probability measures ν x and ν y in P ( K | π ), such that for all u ∈ Lip [ K ]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, set N = N 1 + N 2 , let n ≥ N , set m = n -N 1 and let x and y be two arbitrary probability measures in K . From (70), (71), (69) and (30) follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and hence the strong shrinking property holds and thereby Proposition 10.1 is proved.

We now prove Proposition 10.2. Let ρ &gt; 0 be given. What we want to prove is, that we can find a number α &gt; 0, such that for any nonempty, compact set E ∈ E , any η &gt; 0 and any κ &gt; 0, we can find a nonempty compact set F and an integer N , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all u ∈ Lip [ K ].

Thus, let also E ∈ E be a given, nonempty, compact set, and let also η &gt; 0 and κ &gt; 0 be given. Set η 1 = η/ 12. Since E is a nonempty, compact set in a metric space, we can find a finite set M = { x i , i = 1 , 2 , ..., M } of elements in K such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and Since M is a finite set, it follows from part A of Corollary 9.1, that there exists an integer N 1 such that for every x i in M there exists a measure ν i ∈ P ( K | π ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Set V = { ν 1 , ν 2 , ..., ν M } .

From Part B of Lemma 10.1 we know, that we can choose α &gt; 0 and the integer N 2 in such a way, that if ν i and ν j belong to V , then there exists a compact set F i,j ∈ E , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if u ∈ Lip [ K ] and m ≥ N 2 .

By defining F = ∪ 1 ≤ i&lt;j ≤ M F i,j it clearly follows that we also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if u ∈ Lip [ K ] , m ≥ N 2 and ν i , ν j ∈ V .

Now set N = N 1 + N 2 , let n ≥ N , set m = n -N 1 and let x and y be two arbitrary probability measures in E . Let x i ∈ M satisfy δ TV ( x, x i ) &lt; η 1 and let x j ∈ M satisfy δ TV ( y, x j ) &lt; η 1 . From the triangle inequality then follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (73) and the triangle inequality follows also that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By combining (75), (76) and (74) we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since x and y are arbitrarily chosen in the given set E , and γ ( T n u ) ≤ 3 γ ( u ), for all n ≥ 1, it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, since η 1 = η/ 12 and m -N 2 = n -N , we find that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if u ∈ Lip [ K ], which was what we wanted to prove. Thereby the proof of Theorem 4.1 is completed. ✷

Remark . Consider the following condition. Condition E : There exists z ∈ K , such that for every ρ &gt; 0 and every open set O containing z , there exists an element x ∈ K such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the proof of Proposition 2.1 of [37] and Lemma 5.1, it follows that, if a HMM is strongly ergodic and Condition E holds, then there exists an element z ∈ K such that { P n ( z, · ) , n = 1 , 2 , ... } is a tight sequence. Therefore, if we could verify Condition E then we could replace the conclusion 'weakly contracting' by the conclusion 'weakly ergodic' in the first part of Theorem 4.1 and we could omit the second part. ✷

## 11 The random mapping associated to a HMM

The purpose of the remaining part of the paper is to introduce some further conditions, which in concrete applications probably will be easier to verify than Condition E. We will conclude the paper with two simple - and rather concrete examples.

In this section we shall introduce a notion which we call the random mapping associated to a regular HMM . The motivation for this is twofold. One reason is that we obtain useful notations. The other reason is that by introducing random mappings we build a bridge between the theory of filtering processes and the theory of random systems with complete connections.

Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM. As usual, let K = P λ ( S, F ) and let E denote the Borel field on K induced by the total variation distance. Furthermore, as defined in Section 3, let M a : Q λ ( S, F ) → Q λ ( S, F ) be defined by M a ( x )( F ) = ∫ S ∫ F m ( s, t, a ) x ( ds ) λ ( ds ), let g : K × A → [0 , ∞ ) be defined by g ( x, a ) = || xM a || , let G : K × A → [0 , ∞ ) be defined by G ( x, B ) = ∫ B g ( x, a ) τ ( da ) and let h : K × A → K be defined by h ( x, a ) = xM a / || xM a || if || xM a || &gt; 0 and h ( x, a ) = x if || xM a || = 0. (See (15), (16), (17) and(18).)

Definition 11.1 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM and let g : K × A → [0 , ∞ ) , G : K ×A→ [0 , 1] and h : K × A → K be defined by (15), (16), (17) and (18) respectively. We call the 4-tuple

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the random mapping associated to H and we call G the tr.pr.f generated by ( g, τ ) . ✷

Next, for x ∈ K , as in Section 3, we set A + x = { a ∈ A : || xM a || &gt; 0 } and, if E ∈ E , we set B ( x, E ) = { a ∈ A : h ( x, a ) ∈ E } . From the definition of the filter kernel P (see (19)) we find that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, if u ∈ B [ K ], we find that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Historical remark . The random mapping associated to a regular HMM can be considered as a random system with complete connections . (See e.g [20] for the definition of a random system with complete connections.) As mentioned in the introduction other names for the concept random system with complete connections are learning model and iterated function system with placedependent probabilities . The terminology random mapping is inspired by the notion 'random function' used in the paper [12] by P Diaconis and D Freedman.

That there is a random mapping - or a random system with complete connections - associated to a regular HMM, is not a new observation. Already in

1957, Blackwell proves a theorem ([7], Theorem 2) for random systems with complete connections, which he applies to the filtering process he is considering. (Theorem 2 of [7] was in fact proved already 1937 by W Doeblin and R Fortet in the classical paper [14].) In section 2.3.3.1 of the book [19] from 1969 the connection between partially observed Markov chains (HMMs) and random systems with complete connections is described and also in the book [20] this connection is mentioned at several places. In the paper [21] from 1973, a HMM with finite state space is considered and it is proved that the associated random mapping is a so called distance diminishing model as defined by F Norman in Chapter 2 of [33], if the tr.pr.m of the hidden Markov chain is strictly positive ; from this fact it follows that the filtering process converges in distribution with geometric convergence rate . In the paper [1] from 2012 by C Anton Popescu a similar result is proved. The connection between filtering processes and random systems with complete connections is also utilized in [22]. ✷

Our next aim is to define the Vasershtein coupling of the random mapping. associated to a regular HMM.

As before, let K 2 = K × K , E 2 = E × E , A 2 = A × A and A 2 = A ⊗ A . Let D = { ( a, b ) ∈ A 2 : a = b } . The set D is measurable, since ( A, A , ̺ ) is a complete, separable, metric space. For x, y ∈ K , define C 1 ( x, y ) = { a : g ( x, a ) ≥ g ( y, a ) } , define C 2 ( x, y ) = A \ C 1 ( x, y ) and define C 2 ( x, y ) = { ( a, b ) ∈ A 2 : a ∈ C 1 ( x, y ) , b ∈ C 2 ( x, y ) } . For B ∈ A 2 , we define Π( B ) = { a ∈ A : ( a, a ) ∈ B } . That A 1 ( x, y ) and A 2 ( x, y ) are measurable is obvious since the function g is continuous, and that Π( B ) ∈ A follows from the fact that the set D is measurable together with the fact that the mapping ϑ : A → A 2 defined by ϑ ( a ) = ( a, a ) is measurable.

Next define ˇ g : K × K × A → [0 , ∞ ) by ˇ g ( x, y, a ) = min { g ( x, a ) , g ( y, a ) } and for x, y ∈ K define ∆( x, y ) = ∫ A ( g ( x, a ) -ˇ g ( x, y, a )) τ ( da ) / 2 . We define ˜ G V : K 2 ×A 2 → [0 , 1] by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last term is omitted if ∆( x, y ) = 0.

Next, define ˜ h : ( K × A ) × ( K × A ) → K 2 by

That ˜ G V is a tr.p.f from ( K 2 , E 2 ) to ( A 2 , A 2 ) is easily verified and that ˜ G V (( x, y ) , · ) is a coupling of G ( x, · ) and G ( y, · ) for all x, y ∈ K where thus G : K ×E → [0 , ∞ ) is the tr.pr.f generated by ( g, τ ), is easily checked - and wellknown. (See [32], Section I.5.) We call ˜ G V : K 2 ×A 2 → [0 , 1] the Vasershtein coupling of ( g, τ ) or of G .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since h : K × A → K is measurable, so is ˜ h : ( K × A ) × ( K × A ) → K 2 . We call the 4-tuple { ( K 2 , E 2 ) , ( A 2 , A 2 ) , ˜ G V , ˜ h } the Vasershtein coupling of the random mapping { ( K, E ) , ( A, A ) , ( g, τ ) , h } .

Remark . The original paper using the Vasershtein coupling is [40]. For an early application of the Vasershtein coupling to random systems with complete connections see [23], where the Vasershtein coupling is used when proving the central limit theorem for the so called state sequence of a random system with complete connections. See also [24], Sections 5-8 for other applications. ✷

Next, for ( x, y ) ∈ K 2 and ˜ E ∈ E 2 , we set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we define ˜ P V : K 2 ×E 2 → [0 , 1] by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since ˜ G V : K 2 × A 2 → [0 , 1] is a tr.pr.f and ˜ h : ( K × A ) × ( K × A ) → K 2 is measurable, it follows from Lemma 1.41 of [27] that ˜ P V is a tr.pr.f on ( K 2 , E 2 ). That ˜ P V (( x, y ) , · ) is a coupling of P ( x, · ) and P ( y, · ) for every x, y in K , follows easily from the fact that ˜ G V ( x, y, · ) is a coupling of G ( x, · ) and G ( y, · ). Therefore, if µ, ν ∈ P ( K, E ) and we define ˜ µ ∈ P ( K 2 , E 2 ) as the product measure of µ and ν , it follows that ˜ µ ˜ P V is a coupling of µ P and ν P .

An important property of the Vasershtein coupling ˜ G V is described in the next proposition.

For sake of convenience we call ˜ P V the V-coupling of P induced by the coupling ˜ G V and we call ˜ µ ˜ P V the V-coupling of µ P and ν P induced by the coupling ˜ G V .

Proposition 11.1 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM, let { ( K, E ) , ( A, A ) , ( g, τ ) , h } be the associated random mapping and let ˜ G V : K 2 ×A 2 → [0 , ∞ ) be the Vasershtein coupling of ( g, τ ) .

Let K 0 ∈ E , let B ∈ A , and let 0 &lt; β, η &lt; ∞ be such that τ ( B ) = β &gt; 0 and g ( x, a ) ≥ η, ∀ x ∈ K 0 , ∀ a ∈ B . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof . Let x, y ∈ K 0 . From the definition (79) of ˜ G V it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which was to be proved. ✷

Next, let again H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM. Set A 1 = A , A 1 = A and, for n = 2 , 3 , ... , define A n and A n recursively by A n +1 = A 1 × A n and A n +1 = A 1 ⊗A n . For ( a 1 , a 2 , ..., a n ) ∈ A n we often write a n = ( a 1 , a 2 , ..., a n ) and, if ( a 1 , a 2 , ..., a n ) ∈ A n , we write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus M a for a ∈ A is defined by (13).

It will be convenient to introduce the following mappings. For n = 1 , 2 , ... , we define h ( n ) : K × A n → K,n = 1 , 2 , ... by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we define g ( n ) : K × A n → [0 , ∞ ) , n = 1 , 2 , ..., by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote the n-product measure of τ ∈ Q ∞ ( A, A ) by τ n , we write τ 1 = τ and, for n = 1 , 2 , ... , we define the tr.pr.f G ( n ) from ( K, E ) to ( A n , A n ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Clearly { ( K, E ) , ( A n , A n ) , ( g ( n ) , τ n ) , h ( n ) } is the random mapping associated to the nth iteration H n of H . (See Section 3 for the definition of an iterated HMM.) Next, let us for x ∈ K and E ∈ E , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (25) and (77) follows that, for n = 2 , 3 , ... ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a representation of P n , which we will have use of below.

We shall now introduce a slightly stronger condition than Condition E, a condition which is formulated by using the functions g ( n ) and h ( n ) of the random mapping associated to the H n .

Definition 11.2 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a strongly ergodic, regular HMM with limit measure π . For n = 1 , 2 , ... let H n denote the nth iteration of H and let { ( K, E ) , ( A n , A n ) , ( g ( n ) , τ n ) , h ( n ) } denote the random mapping associated to H n .

Condition E1 : To every ρ &gt; 0 , there exists an integer N , a set K 0 ∈ E , a set B ∈ A N and positive constants ξ , β and η , such that 1)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

4) if x, y ∈ K 0 and a N ∈ B , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 11.1 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a strongly ergodic, regular HMM with limit measure π . Then Condition E1 implies Condition E.

Proof . Let ρ &gt; 0 be given. Choose the integer N , the set K 0 ∈ E , the set B ∈ A N , the constants ξ &gt; 0, β &gt; 0 and η &gt; 0 such that hypotheses 1), 2), 3) and 4) of Condition E1 hold.

2)

3) if x ∈ K 0 and a N ∈ B , then Let µ and ν belong to P ( K | π ). Let G ( N ) = { ( K, E , ( A N , A N ) , ( g ( N ) , τ N ) , h ( N ) } be the random mapping associated to the Nth iteration of H and let ˜ G ( N ) = { ( K 2 , E 2 ) , ( A 2 N , A 2 N ) , ˜ G ( N ) V , ˜ h ( N ) } be the Vasershtein coupling of the random mapping G ( N ) . Set ˜ B = { ( a N , b N ) ∈ A N × A N : a N = b N , a N ∈ B } .

Since g ( N ) ( x, a N ) ≥ η , if x ∈ K 0 and a N ∈ B , and also τ N ( B ) ≥ β , it follows from Proposition 11.1 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if x, y ∈ K 0 . Now let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and let ˜ P ( N ) V be the V-coupling of P ( N ) induced by ˜ G ( N ) V . From the definition of the V-coupling of a filter kernel (see (80)) and the fact that ˜ B ⊂ ˜ A N ( D ρ ), it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, if we define ˜ µ = µ ⊗ ν and set α = ξ 2 βη , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since ˜ µ ( K 0 × K 0 ) ≥ ξ 2 and therefore, since ˜ µ ˜ P ( N ) is a coupling of µ P N and ν P N , it follows that Condition E holds. ✷

Remark 1 . Suppose that H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } is a strongly ergodic, regular HMM with finite state space, finite observation space, stationary measure π and such that the hidden Markov chain is irreducible. Suppose also that Condition KR is satisfied. (See (4).) Using Condition KR and the fact that the hidden Markov chain is an aperiodic, irreducible Markov chain on a finite state space, it is not difficult to prove that to every ρ &gt; 0 we can find an integer N and a sequence b 1 , b 2 , ..., b N of elements in A such that the product

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of stepping matrices is such that there exist an element i ∈ S and a number η 1 &gt; 0 such that

1) the (i,i)th element of the matrix Λ N satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

2) if x, y ∈ K are such that ( x ) i ≥ ( π ) i / 2 and ( y ) i ≥ ( π ) i / 2 then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(Note that ( π ) j &gt; 0 for all j ∈ S since the hidden Markov chain is irreducible.)

Therefore, if { ( K, E ) , ( A N , A N ) , ( g ( N ) , τ N ) , h ( N ) } denotes the random mapping associated to the Nth iterate of H , and we define B ⊂ A N by B = { ( b 1 , b 2 , ..., b N ) } then clearly τ N ( B ) = 1, since we assume that τ is the counting measure, when the observation space is finite. If we define K 0 ⊂ K by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and set ( π ) i / 2 = ξ , we find that µ ( K 0 ) ≥ ξ because of Lemma 8.1. Furthermore, if we set η = η 1 ξ , we find that, if x ∈ K 0 and a N ∈ B , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, if also y ∈ K 0 , then also

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence Condition E1 is satisfied. ✷

Remark 2 . Suppose H = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } is a strongly ergodic, regular, HMM with denumerable state space, denumerable observation space, stationary measure π and an irreducible hidden Markov chain.

Suppose also the following condition, introduced in [26], holds.

Condition B : For every ρ &gt; 0 there exists an element i 0 ∈ S such that if C ⊂ K is a compact set such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we can find an integer N and a sequence b 1 , b 2 , ...., b N such that if we let M ( b n ) , for n = 1 , 2 , ..., N denote the stepping matrix associated to b n and define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and if x ∈ C ∩ { x : ( x ) i 0 ≥ ( π ) i 0 / 2 } then also

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We shall now show that Condition E1 is satisfied. Thus let ρ &gt; 0. Set ρ 1 = ρ/ 2. Let i 0 ∈ S and the compact set C ⊂ K be such that (87) holds. That such a set exists for any choice of i 0 follows from Lemma 5.7 of [26]. Let K 0 ∈ E be defined by K 0 = C ∩ { x : ( x ) i 0 ≥ ( π ) i 0 / 2 } . Note that ( π ) i 0 &gt; 0 since the hidden Markov chain is irreducible. From Condition B follows that we can find an integer N and a sequence b 1 , b 2 , ...., b N such that if we define Λ N = M ( b 1 ) M ( b 2 ) ...M ( b N ) , then || δ i 0 Λ N || &gt; 0 and if x ∈ K 0 then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now let { ( K, E ) , ( A N , A N ) , ( g ( N ) , τ N ) , h ( N ) } denote the random mapping associated to the Nth iterate of H , and define B ⊂ A N by B = { ( b 1 , b 2 , ..., b N ) } ,

then Then clearly τ N ( B ) = 1, since we assume that τ is the counting measure when the observation space is denumerable. Moreover, if we define ξ = ( π ) i 0 / 3, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we find that if a N ∈ B and x ∈ K 0 , then g ( N ) ( x, a N ) = || x Λ N || ≥ η and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence all the hypotheses determining Condition E1 are fulfilled and hence Condition E1 holds. ✷

## 12 Estimates of iterations of integral kernels

In order to verify Condition E1, we want to find conditions regarding a HMM { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } such that for every ρ &gt; 0 there exists an integer N , and a subset K 0 ∈ E such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if x, y belong to K 0 , where thus xM n a n is the measure in Q λ ( S, F ) defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and m n : S × S × A n → [0 , ∞ ) is defined recursively by m 1 ( s, t, a ) = m ( s, t, a ) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this section we shall prove a theorem in which an estimate for a class of nonnegative kernels is stated.

Let as usual ( S, F , δ ) be a complete, separable, metric space and let λ be a positive, σ -finite measure on ( S, F ). We define the set D λ [ S ] as the set of all non-negative, measurable functions defined on S × S . If k ∈ D λ [ S ] is such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we call k a density kernel . Recall that Q ( S, F ) denotes the set of nonnegative, finite, measures on ( S, F ).

Definition 12.1 Let k ∈ D λ [ S ] . We say that k has rectangular support if there exist F ∈ F and G ∈ F such that λ ( F ) &gt; 0 and λ ( G ) &gt; 0 , and such that if ( s, t ) ∈ F × G then k ( s, t ) &gt; 0 and if ( s, t ) ̸∈ F × G then k ( s, t ) = 0 . We call F × G the rectangular support of k .

Therefore, if we define Remark . In case S is a finite set, then the notion rectangular support is equivalent to the notion subrectangular matrix presented in the introduction. ✷

The following theorem is a generalisation of Lemma 6.2 of [22].

Theorem 12.1 Let k m , m = 1 , 2 , ..., n, n ≥ 1 , be density kernels belonging to D λ [ S ] having rectangular supports F m × G m , m = 1 , 2 , ..., n, where thus λ ( F m ) λ ( G m ) &gt; 0 , m = 1 , 2 , ..., n . Let K m : S ×F → [0 , ∞ ) be defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, for m = 1 , 2 , ..., n, define K m,n : S ×F → [0 , ∞ ) recursively by K n,n = K n and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Set K n = K 1 ,n and, for x ∈ P ( S, F ) , let xK n ∈ Q ( S, F ) be defined by xK n ( E ) = ∫ S K n ( s, E ) x ( ds ) . Now, suppose that there exist numbers κ m ≥ 1 such that for 1 ≤ m ≤ n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose also, that

for all s ∈ F 1 .

Then, if x, y ∈ Q ( S, F ) are such that x ( F 1 ) &gt; 0 and also y ( F 1 ) &gt; 0 , and n ≥ 1 , it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof . We first state the following lemma.

Lemma 12.1 Let n ≥ 1 , let k m , K m , K m,n , m = 1 , 2 , ..., n, and K n be defined, - and have the same properties -, as in Theorem 12.1. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Lemma 12.1 . The lemma is a simple consequence of the following proposition, which is a special version of a result due to E Hopf from 1963. (See Theorem 1 in [18].)

Proposition 12.1 Let ( S, F , δ ) be a complete, separable, metric space and let λ be a positive, σ -finite measure on ( S, F ) and let k ∈ D λ [ S ] be density kernel with rectangular support F × G . Suppose that there exists a number κ ≥ 1 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let u, v ∈ B [ S, F ] be nonnegative functions such that sup { v ( t ) u ( t ) : t ∈ G } &lt; ∞ . Define u 1 : S → [0 , ∞ ) and v 1 : S → [0 , ∞ ) by u 1 ( s ) = ∫ S k ( s, t ) u ( t ) λ ( dt ) and v 1 ( s ) = ∫ S k ( s, t ) v ( t ) λ ( dt ) . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By applying Proposition 12.1 we find that for every E ∈ F

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and then, using the integral representation (88) and Proposition 12.1, the inequality (92) follows easily by induction. ✷ .

To conclude the proof of Theorem 12.1 we argue as follows. (The argument is inspired by an argument in [16].)

Let x, y ∈ Q ( S, F ) be such that both x ( F 1 ) &gt; 0 and y ( F 1 ) &gt; 0. We write K n = U . What we want to prove is that, if n ≥ 1, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let E ∈ F . Then xU ( E ) / || xU || can be written

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Evidently α ∈ P ( S, F ).

In a similar manner we can write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus β ∈ P ( S, F ) is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, by using the inequality (11), we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and since || α -β || ≤ 2 and (93) holds for all E ∈ F , it follows from Lemma 12.1 that (91) holds. ✷

We shall next prove a theorem for HMMs based on Theorem 12.1. First however we introduce yet another condition.

Definition 12.2 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 } , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a strongly ergodic, regular HMM, with stationary measure π . If there exists a set F 0 ∈ F , and a set B 0 ∈ A , such that

1)

2)

and

(iv): for all x, y ∈ K 0 and a N ∈ B then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

3) there exist positive numbers d 0 , D 0 and β 0 , such that for every a ∈ B 0 there exists a subset F 1 ( a ) ∈ F , such that

(a)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(d)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we say that H satisfies Condition P .

Remark . The idea to formulate a condition like Condition P comes from the paper [29] by Kochman and Reeds and their proof of the fact that Condition A of the paper [22] implies their ' rank 1 condition'. Condition P, as introduced above, is a rather straight forward generalisation of a condition introduced in [25], section 9.

Theorem 12.2 Let H = { ( S, F , δ 0 } , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a strongly ergodic, regular HMM, with stationary measure π . Suppose Condition P is satisfied. Then Condition E1 is satisfied. ✷

Proof . Let F 0 , B 0 , m : S × S × A → [0 , ∞ ), d 0 , D 0 , η 0 and F 1 ( a ) , a ∈ B 0 be chosen such that the hypotheses of Condition P are satisfied.

Let ρ &gt; 0 be given. What we want to prove is that there exist an integer N , a set K 0 , a number ξ &gt; 0, a set B ∈ A N , a number β &gt; 0 and a number η &gt; 0, such that

(i):

(ii):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(iii): for all x ∈ K 0 and all a N ∈ B ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The choice of K 0 is simple; we simply set K 0 = { x ∈ K : x ( F 0 ) ≥ π ( F 0 ) / 2 } , where thus F 0 is the set determined by Condition P. Since π ( F 0 ) &gt; 0 it follows from Lemma 8.1 that if we set ξ = π ( F 0 ) / 2, then µ ( K 0 ) ≥ ξ if µ ∈ P ( K | π ) and hence hypothesis 1) of Condition E1 is fulfilled.

Next, set κ = D 0 /d 0 where thus d 0 and D 0 are the constants occurring in hypothesis 3) of Condition P. From the hypotheses of Condition P it follows, that, if a ∈ B 0 and we define m a ∈ D λ [ S ] by m a ( s, t ) = m ( s, t, a ) I F 0 ( s ), then m a has the rectangular support F 0 × F 1 ( a ) and m a also satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now simply define the integer N by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we define the set B in A N by B = B 1 × B 2 × ... × B N , where B i = B 0 , i = 1 , 2 , ..., N .

By defining β = τ ( B 0 ) N we find that τ N ( B ) = β &gt; 0 and hence hypothesis 2) of Condition E1 is fulfilled.

Next, let x ∈ K 0 and a N ∈ B . Then || xM N a N || = ∫ S ∫ S m N ( s, t, a N ) x ( ds ) λ ( dt ) . From condition 3) of Condition P follows that, if s ∈ F 0 , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, if we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and use the fact that x ( F ) ≥ π ( F ) / 2 if x ∈ K 0 , we find that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence hypothesis 3) of Condition E1 is fulfilled.

It remains to show, that, if x, y ∈ K 0 and ( a 1 , a 2 , ..., a N ) = a N ∈ B , then (94) holds. But this follows immediately from Theorem 12.1 and the definition of the integer N . Hence also hypothesis 4) of Condition E1 is fulfilled and hence Condition E1 is satisfied ✷

## 13 Examples

Our first example is obtained by making a denumerable partition of the state space.

Example 13.1 Let H 1 = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a regular HMM, such that A is a denumerable set and such that 1) for each a ∈ A there exists a set S a ∈ F such that λ ( S a ) &gt; 0 , 2) ∪ a S a = S and 3) for each a ∈ A

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where as usual I F denotes the indicator function of a set F ⊂ S .

Theorem 13.1 Let H 1 = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be the HMM defined in Example 13.1 and let P denote the induced filter kernel. Suppose that a) the hidden Markov chain determined by the tr.pr.f P is strongly ergodic with stationary measure π ;

b) there exist an element a 0 ∈ A and two positive numbers d 0 , D 0 satisfying d 0 ≤ D 0 , such that π ( S a 0 ) &gt; 0 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the filter kernel P is weakly ergodic. ✷

Proof . We shall first verify that the hypotheses of Condition P are fulfilled.

First, let F 0 = S a 0 . By assumption π ( S a 0 ) &gt; 0 and therefore it obviously follows that π ( F 0 ) &gt; 0. Hence hypothesis 1) of Condition P is satisfied with this choice of F 0 .

Next set B = { a 0 } . Since τ is the counting measure τ ( B ) = 1 &gt; 0; hence hypothesis 2) of Condition P holds.

Now let F 1 ( a 0 ) = F 0 . Evidently F 1 ( a 0 ) ⊂ F 0 . Since π ( F 0 ) &gt; 0 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

it follows that λ ( F 0 ) &gt; 0. Hence conditions 3a) and 3b) of Condition P are satisfied.

Further, since m ( s, t, a 0 ) = p ( s, t ) if ( s, t ) ∈ F 0 × F 0 and m ( s, t, a 0 ) = 0 if ( s, t ) ∈ F 0 × ( S \ F ), it is clear that conditions 3c) and 3d) of Condition P hold. Hence Condition P is satisfied. From Theorem 12.2, Lemma 11.1 and Theorem 4.1 follows that the filter kernel is weakly contracting. If furthermore the Markov chain is uniformly ergodic then hypothesis 3) of Theorem 4.1 is fulfilled and the filter kernel is weakly ergodic.

In order to prove that the filter kernel is weakly ergodic without this extra assumption, we shall use a result in [37]. We shall show that the following condition is satisfied.

Condition E 1: There exists an element x 0 ∈ K such that for every ǫ &gt; 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where B ( x 0 , ǫ ) = { y ∈ K : δ TV ( x 0 , y ) &lt; ǫ } .

Once we have verified Condition E 1, if follows from Proposition 2.1 of [37] and Lemma 5.1, that { P n ( z, · ) , n = 1 , 2 , ... } is a tight sequence, since obviously Condition E 1 implies Condition E of [37]. (Condition E is also formulated at the end of Section 10.) That the filter kernel is weakly ergodic follows then from Theorem 4.1, since hypothesis 2) of Theorem 4.1 is fulfilled.

To verify Condition E 1 we argue as follows. Set F 0 = S a 0 , define k : F 0 × F 0 → [0 , ∞ ) by k ( s, t ) = p ( s, t ) and define κ = D 0 /d 0 . Since d 0 ≤ p ( s, t ) ≤ D 0 if ( s, t ) ∈ F 0 × F 0 , it follows that there exists a positive function q : F 0 → (0 , ∞ ) satisfying ∫ F 0 q ( t ) λ ( dt ) = 1 and a number β &gt; 0 such that ∫ F 0 K ( s, t ) q ( t ) λ ( dt ) = βq ( s ). (See e.g [18].) Moreover, if we define x 0 ∈ K by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

it follows from Theorem 12.1 that for any x ∈ K such that x ( F 0 ) &gt; 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now let ǫ &gt; 0 be given , and let x ∈ K be chosen arbitrary. Define N 0 by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the definition of N 0 follows that if µ ∈ P ( K, E ) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and define

then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, by Lemma 8.1 it follows easily, that if µ ∈ P ( K, E ) satisfies δ TV ( b ( µ ) , π ) &lt; π ( F 0 ) / 6, then µ ( { z : z ( F 0 ) ≥ π ( F 0 ) / 3 } ) ≥ π ( F 0 ) / 3. and from Theorem 8.1 follows that we can choose N 1 so large that if n ≥ N 1 then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, by combining (97) and (98) we conclude that if n ≥ N 1 + N 0 then P n ( x, B ( x 0 , ǫ )) ≥ ( π ( F 0 ) / 3) 2 α and hence Condition E 1 is satisfied. ✷

Example 13.2 Let H 2 = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be a HMM with densities such that the probability density kernel m : S × S × A → [0 , ∞ ) can be written

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where thus q : S × A → [0 , ∞ ) is a measurable function satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume that sup { p ( s, t ) : s, t } &lt; ∞ and sup { q ( s, t ) : s, t } &lt; ∞ .

For each a ∈ A set S + ( a ) = { t : q ( t, a ) &gt; 0 } . We assume that λ ( S + ( a )) &gt; 0 , ∀ a ∈ A. We also assume that the density function q is such that for every ǫ &gt; 0 , we can find an η &gt; 0 , such that, if ̺ ( a, b ) &lt; η , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proposition 13.1 Let H 2 be defined as in Example 13.2. Then H 2 is regular.

Proof . What we need to prove is that M : Q λ ( S, F ) × A →Q λ ( S, F ) is a continuous function where thus M is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That M : Q λ ( S, F ) × A → Q λ ( S, F ) is a continuous function in the first variable follows easily from the boundedness condition regarding the probability density kernel q .

That M : Q λ ( S, F ) × A →Q λ ( S, F ) also is continuous in the second variable follows easily from (99) and (100) together with the hypothesis that both q : S × A → [0 , ∞ ) and p : S × S → [0 , ∞ ) are uniformly bounded. Since the proof is elementary we omit the details. ✷

Theorem 13.2 Let H 2 = { ( S, F , δ 0 ) , ( p, λ ) , ( A, A , ̺ ) , ( m,τ ) } be the HMM defined in Example 13.2 and let P denote the induced filter kernel. Suppose that a) the HMM H 2 is strongly ergodic with stationary measure π ; b) there exists a set F 0 ∈ F and a set B 0 ∈ A such that (i)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(iv): there exists a constant β 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(v): there exists a constant c 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(vi): there exists a constant c 1 &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the filter kernel P is weakly contracting. If furthermore H 2 is uniformly ergodic, then the filter kernel P is weakly ergodic. ✷

Proof . It suffices to verify that the HMM H 2 satisfies the conditions 1)-3) of Condition P. We shall verify the hypotheses of Condition P, when F 0 , B 0 , β 0 are chosen as in the hypotheses of Theorem 13.2 and F 1 ( a ) = S + ( a ).

Since the sets F 0 and B 0 are such that π ( F 0 ) &gt; 0 and τ ( B 0 ) &gt; 0, conditions 1) and 2) of Condition P are satisfied. Since λ ( F 1 ( a )) ≥ β 0 for all a ∈ B 0 because of hypothesis ( iv ), it follows that condition 3b) of Condition P is satisfied. From hypothesis ( iii ) we know that F 1 ( a ) ⊂ F 0 and from hypothesis ( v ) follows, that, if t ∈ F 1 ( a ) and a ∈ B 0 , then q ( t, a ) ≥ c 0 and from hypothesis ( vi ) we know that p ( s, t ) ≥ c 1 , if s, t ∈ F 0 .

From the assumptions we have made in Example 13.2 regarding the HMM H 2 , we know that there exist constants C 0 and C 1 such that sup t,a q ( t, a ) ≤ C 0 and sup s,t p ( s, t ) ≤ C 1 . Hence, if we define d 0 = c 0 c 1 and D 0 = C 0 C 1 and recall that m ( s, t, a ) = p ( s, t ) q ( t, a ) , we find that, if a ∈ B 0 then d 0 ≤ m ( s, t, a ) ≤ D 0 if ( s, t ) ∈ F 0 × F 1 ( a ) , and that m ( s, t, a ) = 0, if s ∈ F 0 and t ̸∈ F 1 ( a ) . Hence, also condition 3) of Condition P is satisfied, and hence Condition P is satisfied.

The conclusions of the theorem now follows from Theorem 12.2, Lemma 11.1 and Theorem 4.1. ✷

## 14 Acknowledgements

I want to thank Sten Kaijser, Fuzhou Gong and Luc´ aˇ s Mal´ y for valuable discussions and Svante Janson for an important reference.

## References

- [1] Anton Popescu, C.: Applications of Dependence with Complete Connections to Hidden Markov Models, Bulletin of the Transilvania University of Brasov, Series III: Mathematics, Information, Physics, 5 , 2012, Special Issue: Proceedings of the Seventh Congress of Romanian Mathematicians, 23-32, (2012)
- [2] Atar, R.: Exponential decay rate of the filter's dependence of the initial distribution, In: Crisan, D., Rozovskii, B., (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Nonlinear Filtering, pp. 299-318, (2011)
- [3] Atar, R., Zeitouni, O.: Exponential stability for nonlinear filtering, Ann. Inst. H. Poincar´ e , Prob. Stat., 33 , no 3, 697-725, (1997)
- [4] Barnsley, M., Demko, S., Elton J., Gerinomo J.: Invariant measures for Markov processes arising from iterated function systems with placedependent probabilities', Ann Inst H Poincar´ e , Prob Stat, 24 , 367-394, (1988)
- [5] Baum, L. E., Petrie T.: Statistical inference for probabilistic functions of finite state Markov chains, Ann. Math. Stat., 37 , 164-71, (1966)
- [6] Baxendale P., Chigansky P., Liptzer R.: Asymptotic stability of the Wonham filter: Ergodic and nonergodic signals, SIAM J. Control Optim., 43 , 643-669, (2004)
- [7] Blackwell, D.: The entropy of functions of finite-state Markov chains, Trans. First Prague Conf. Inf. Th., Prague, (1957)
- [8] Billingsley, P.: Convergence of probability measures, John Wiley, New York, (1968)
- [9] Capp´ e, O., Moulines E., Ryden T.: Inference in Hidden Markov Models, Springer Series in Statistics, Springer, (2005)
- [10] Chigansky, P., van Handel, R.: 'A complete solution to Blackwell's unique ergodicity problem for hidden Markov chains', Ann Appl Prob , 20 , 2318-45, (2010)

- [11] Choquet, G.: Lectures on Analysis, Volume II, Representation Theory, Benjamin, Inc, New York, (1969)
- [12] Diaconis, P., Freedman, D.: Iterated random functions, SIAM Rev., 41 , 45-76, (1989)
- [13] DiMasi, G. B., Stettner, suppress L.: Ergodicity of hidden Markov models, Math. Control Signals Systems, 17 , 269-296, (2005)
- [14] Doeblin, W., Fortet, R.: Sur des chaines a liaisons completes, Bull. Soc. Math. France, 65 , 132-148, (1937)
- [15] Dudley, R. M.: Real analysis and probability, Cambridge University Press, (2002)
- [16] Furstenberg H., Kesten, H.: Products of random matrices, Ann. Math. Stat., 31 , 457-469, (1960)
- [17] Gantmacher, F.: Matrix theory, Chelsea Publishing, NY, (1965)
- [18] Hopf, E.: An inequality for positive linear integral operators, J. Math. Mech., 12 , 683-692, (1963)
- [19] Iosifescu, M., Theodorescu, R.: Random Processes and Learning, Springer, Berlin, (1969)
- [20] Iosifescu, M., Grigorescu, S.: Dependence with complete connections and its applications, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, (1990)
- [21] Kaijser, T.: A limit theorem for the conditional distributions of Markov chains with incomplete state information, Report LiH-Mat-R-73-7, Department of Mathematics, Link¨ oping University, Link¨ oping, (1973)
- [22] Kaijser, T.; A limit theorem for partially observed Markov chains, Ann. Prob., 3 , 677-96, (1975)
- [23] Kaijser, T.: On a new contraction condition for random systems with complete connections, Rev. Roumaine Math. Pure Appl., 26 , 1075 - 1117, (1981)
- [24] Kaijser, T.: On a theorem of Karlin, Acta Appl. Math., 34 , 51-69, (1994)
- [25] Kaijser, T.: On Markov chains induced by partitioned transition probability matrices, arXiv:0907.4502v1, (2009)
- [26] Kaijser, T.: On Markov chains induced by partitioned transition probability matrices, Acta Math. Sinica, 20 , 441-476, (2011)
- [27] Kallenberg, O.: Foundations of Modern Probability, Second edition, Springer, New York, (2002)
- [28] Kantorovich, L., V.: On the translocation of mass (in Russian), Dokl Akad Nauk USSR 37 , (1942). Translated in: Managements Science, 5 , (1958)
- [29] Kochman, F., Reeds, J.: A simple proof of Kaijser's unique ergodicity result for hidden Markov α -chains, Ann. Appl. Prob., 16 , 1805-1815, (2006)

- [30] Kunita, H.: Asymptotic behaviour of the nonlinear filtering errors of Markov Processes, J. Multivariate Anal., 1 , 365-393, (1971)
- [31] LeGland, F., Oudjane, N.: Stability and uniform approximation of nonlinear filters using the Hilbert metric and application to particle filters', Ann. Appl. Prob., 14 , 144-187, (2004)
- [32] Lindwall, T.: Lectures on the coupling method, Wiley and Sons, New York, (1992)
- [33] Norman, F.: Markov Processes and Learning Models, Academic Press, New York, (1972)
- [34] Rabiner, L. R., Juang, B. H., An introduction to Hidden Markov Models, IEEE, ASSP Magazine, (1986)
- [35] Revuz, D.: Markov chains, North-Holland/American Elsevier, Amsterdam, (1975)
- [36] Stettner, suppress L.: On invariant measures of filtering processes. In: Stochastic Differential Systems (Bad Honnef, 1988). Lecture Notes in Control and Inform. Sci., 126 , 9-24, (1989)
- [37] Szarek, T.: Feller proceses on nonlocally compact spaces, Ann. Prob., 34 , 1849-1863, (2006)
- [38] van Handel, R.: The stability of conditional Markov processes and Markov chains in random environments, Ann. Prob., 37 , 1876-1925, (2009)
- [39] van Handel, R.: On the exchange of intersecting and supremum of σ -fields in filtering theory, Israel J. Math., 192 , 763-784, (2012)
- [40] Vasershtein, L.: Markov processes over denumerable products of spaces describing large systems of automata, Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, 5 , 64-73, (1969)
- [41] Vere-Jones, D.: Ergodic properties of nonnegative matrices, Pacific J. Math., 22 , 361-386, (1967)