## Two magnon bound state causes ultrafast thermally induced magnetisation switching

J. Barker , T.A. Ostler, O. Hovorka, and R.W. Chantrell Department of Physics, University of York, York YO10 5DD, U.K.

## U. Atxitia

Department of Physics, University of York, York YO10 5DD, U.K. and Departamento de Fisica de Materiales, Universidad del Pais Vasco, UPV/EHU, 20018 San Sebastian, Spain

## O. Chubykalo-Fesenko

Instituto de Ciencia de Materiales de Madrid, CSIC, Cantoblanco, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

There has been much interest recently in the discovery of thermally induced magnetisation switching, where a ferrimagnetic system can be switched deterministically without and applied magnetic  eld. Experimental results suggest that the reversal occurs due to intrinsic material properties, but so far the microscopic mechanism responsible for reversal has not been identi ed. Using computational and analytic methods we show that the switching is caused by the excitation of two magnon bound states, the properties of which are dependent on material factors. This discovery allows us to accurately predict the switching behaviour and the identi cation of this mechanism will allow new classes of materials to be identi ed or designed to use this switching in memory devices in the THz regime.

Thermally induced ultrafast magnetisation switching (TIMS) is a recent discovery in which an applied subpicosecond heat pulse causes the magnetic state of a system to switch without any symmetry breaking magnetic eld 1 . The lack of any external directional stimulus has long been intriguing and implies the mechanism to be fundamentally intrinsic to the speci c class of materials in which it is found. The full microscopic understanding is still lacking 2{4 , and it is not known why switching has only been observed in the ferrimagnets GdFeCo 1 and TbCo 5 . Here we study the phenomenon in GdFeCo using atomistic spin dynamics, supported by analytical calculations based on the linear spin wave theory. We reveal that TIMS results from the strong excitation of two magnon bound states, a hybridisation of ferro- and antiferro-magnetic dynamical modes, relating to speci c material dependent conditions. We give detailed quanti cation of the phenomenon, and thus our study opens pathways for search and design of new classes of materials exhibiting TIMS.

The manipulation of magnetism by using ultrafast external stimuli ( &lt; 100 ps) 6 , such as shaped magnetic eld pulses 7 , acousto-magneto-plasmonics 8 and femtosecond laser pulses 9,10 , is fundamental to future digital data storage technologies 11 . The most promising is the discovery of sub-picosecond magnetisation reversal by TIMS, occurring after the application of a femtosecond laser pulse alone in antiferromagnetically coupled systems 12 . It opens new avenues for technological developments including proposals for ultrafast, all-optically switched magnetic recording media which will allow a considerable simpli cation in the design of write transducers and achieve signi cant energy savings 13,14 . However, despite extensive experimental 5,14{19 and theoretical research 2{4,20 aimed at revealing the microscopic mechanisms to allow the control of TIMS and the identi cation of new candidate materials, a satisfactory understanding still does not exist. Shedding new light on the issue is the main subject of this report.

## RESULTS

To understand the microscopic magnetisation dynamics which lead to TIMS in GdFeCo alloys we  rst use large-scale atomistic spin dynamics to study time evolution of the spatial Fourier transform of the spin-spin correlation function (the intermediate structure factor - ISF) (see Supplementary Section S2) after the application of a femtosecond laser pulse to observe the distribution of magnons in the Brillouin zone. Figure 1a corresponds to a low laser  uence situation where TIMS is not observed. The ISF shows that the absorbed laser energy ( k B T ( t )) is uniformly distributed within the low wave-vector k modes after the initial heating, leading to a decrease in the magnetisation of both sublattices (upper panel Fig. 1a). After the pulse, the non-equilibrium magnon distribution moves back towards its equilibrium resulting in the gradual recovery in the magnetisation of the sublattices. For a larger laser  uence (Fig. 1b) the initial heating leads to a more pronounced reduction in magnetisation and excitation of a broader k -range. While cooling, instead of a relaxation of magnons, one observes an almost instantaneous excitation of magnons within a well de ned range in k -space. This behaviour is a consequence of magnon-mediated angular momentum transfer between ferromagnetic (FM) and antiferromagnetic (AF) modes through well-de ned channels. This initially leads to the so-called transient ferromagnetic-like state 1 which precedes TIMS.

To identify the nature of magnons de ning the angular momentum channels, we calculate the dynamic structure factor (DSF), S ( k ; ! ), to obtain the magnon spectrum (experimentally obtainable via Brillouin experiments). To interpret the ISF in relation to the equilibrium spectrum, one can assume the laser excitation is so fast that only the magnonic population is altered, rather than the spectrum itself. To give a clear contrast of the relative contribution to the spin  uctuations of each magnon branch in the spectrum we perform the normalisation jS ( k ; ! ) j 2 = max( jS ( k ; ! ) j 2 ) 2 .

The spectrum in ferrimagnetic GdFeCo alloys, (Fig. 2a), contains two kinds of magnons: 1) FM magnons whose low-energy reads ! ( k ) k 2 (see Fig. 2b) and 2) the AF magnons ( ! k ) which relate mainly to FeCo-Gd spin- uctuations 22,23 . The magnon spectrum evolves in a characteristic manner with increasing Gd concentration as shown schematically in  gures. 2c-e. At low density, where the Gd can be considered an impurity in the FeCo lattice, the spectrum is dominated mainly by the FeCo spin- uctuations (Fig. 2c), while at high densities of Gd the AF mode dominates (Fig. 2e). In the intermediate density range (Fig. 2d) both FM

and AF magnons coexist and, as we will show, it is this region which is central to the origin of TIMS. In this work we use the virtual crystal approximation (VCA) to make the disordered lattice tractable within linear spin wave theory (LSWT) and calculate the energy and the contribution of the FM and AF magnons to the spin uctuations of each sublattice (Fig. 2f).

At low Gd concentration, where TIMS is not observed in our simulations or in experiments 18 , the distinction between FM and AF magnons is well manifested (Fig 3a). FM magnons are dominant across the Brillouin zone, and it is only at the edge of the Brillouin zone where the few localised FeCo-Gd interactions play a role. This indicates the suppression of AF excitations on longer length scales (small k ) within the lattice and thus the interaction-induced AF correlation length is range-limited. Therefore, in the low-energy regime GdFeCo essentially behaves as a ferromagnet slightly perturbed by Gd impurities. Spin  uctuations are mixed only at very short interaction length scales (large k values) which are very high in energy, so the laser heating excites only FM modes leading to a reduction in magnetisation (Fig. 3d).

As the Gd concentration increases, so does the FeCo-Gd AF exchange interaction correlation length(Fig. 2d). Consequently in the FeCo lattice the relative FM magnon contribution to spin  uctuations loses amplitude at large length scales in favour of the AF modes (Fig. 3b), gradually diminishing the ferromagnetic character of such spin  uctuations to a FM-AF magnon mixing, the two magnon bound state. For 20-30% Gd, there is a strong interplay between the two bands and a region develops close to the centre of the Brillouin zone where the relative amplitude of both magnon branches is similar, leading to localised oscillations in the magnetisation vector that can be excited by the laser energy as shown in  gure 3e. This is a key factor to allow angular momentum transfer between the modes which scales with the intersecting area of the two modes power spectrum (see PSD cross section below Fig. 3b). This area is maximised when gap between the bands, f is minimised. For TIMS to occur the  ow of angular momentum from FM to AF modes must be enhanced which is satis ed by increasing laser  uence because the number of magnons transferring angular momentum is increased.

For even larger Gd content ( &gt; 35%) FeCo-Gd interactions play the dominant role in the lattice (Fig. 2e). The system takes on the character of an antiferromagnet with little contribution from the FM band (Fig. 3c). The large frequency gap f means that there is negligible interaction between two magnon modes, reducing angular momentum transfer, so applying laser energy causes the system to demagnetise via one magnon excitations as in  gure 3d.

The minimum laser energy required to initiate switching is essential in the interpretation of experiments 17,24 . Laser induced magnetisation switching was  rst observed to depend on the chirality of the laser pulse 25 but was later shown using linear light 1 . The threshold energy is helicity dependent because of magnetic circular dichroism 17 . We propose the following criterion for TIMS. First, the frequency gap f ( k ) between both magnon branches should be minimised, to maximise the angular momentum transfer through nonlinear interactions (Fig. 3b). Second, the laser energy must be su cient to strongly excite the k -region corresponding to the two magnon bound states. To de ne this region we use percolation theory to quantify the statistical properties of clusters of Gd on the lattice (Fig. 2a) and  nd the typical correlation length of clusters (see Methods section). The signi cance is that directly relates to the length scale of the AF FeCo-Gd interactions. We plot 1 = as dashed white lines in Fig. 1 where it matches the excited region during switching and as black arrows in the top panels in Fig 3a-c where it matches the extent of the two magnon state in the DSF, shown in red above each panel. From our analytic framework incorporating the LSWT with the VCA and using calculated via percolation theory, we can calculate f (1 = ), the frequency di erence of the low energy two magnon states, for a range of equilibrium temperatures, T = 0 300 K and Gd concentrations, % = 10 40 (Fig. 4a). To test our premiss that the threshold laser energy to induce TIMS scales with f (1 = ) we perform many computational simulations as in Fig. 1 to  nd the parameter regions where TIMS occurs. Fig. 4b) shows the switching regions for di erent laser  uences (as labelled). The criterion f (1 = ) is smallest around Gd concentrations of 25%, but does not exactly follow the magnetisation compensation point, M comp , where the magnetisation of each sublattice is equal. This deviation directly relates to the Gd clustering which limits the range of the two magnon states. In larger samples the FeCo clustering around Gd rich regions can produce the inverse e ect, namely, showing a transfer of angular momentum to FeCo clusters with the consequence of Gd region reversing  rst 19 .

## DISCUSSION

Our study has identi ed the nature of TIMS as the magnon-mediated angular momentum transfer between ferromagnetic subsystems with antiferromagnetic coupling between them. Our quantitative analysis opens the door for design of magnetic heterostructures for more energy-e cient all-optical storage devices 25 , and an enhancement of the information processing rates into the elusive THz regime 26 . The angular momentum transfer channels identi ed in this work as being essential for the occurrence of TIMS, can be directly accessed by THz radiation 27,28 . Operation in the THz range leads to a range of bene ts as it allows substantially reducing the heat generation that leads to material fatigue and device performance degradation. Additionally, due to the problem with sourcing the rare-earth materials, the large-scale technological impact relies on the discoveries of new cost-friendly TIMS-exhibiting materials. The relatively small parameter space necessary for existence of TIMS in natural materials such as the GdFeCo alloys can be broadened via engineering of heterostructures, for instance, superlattices made of ferromagnetic layers with strong AF coupling, and by improving the inter-lattice magnon-exchange e ciency.

## METHODS

## Lattice Impurity Model

We model the GdFeCo on a simple cubic lattice with Gd moments placed on sites with a uniform random probability. Other sites are considered as an e ective FeCo combined moment. The simulations are performed with a Heisenberg like Hamiltonian

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The laser heating is modelled using a two-temperature model representing the coupled phonon and electron heat baths. The spin degrees of freedom are coupled to the electronic temperature. Calculation of the dynamic structure factor was by means of a three dimensional spacial discrete Fourier transform (with periodic boundaries) and temporal discrete Fourier transform where a Hamming window is applied. We use a simple cubic lattice of size 128 128 128 and integrate the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert Langevin equation for over 800ps of simulated time, giving a frequency resolution of 2.5GHz. The resulting power spectra are then convoluted along constant k -vector with a Gaussian kernel of width 0 : 95THz and normalised so the largest peak is unity (an example is given in Supplementary Fig. 1).

## Linear Spin Wave Theory

We  rst use the virtual crystal approximation to make the disordered lattice Hamiltonian in Eq. (1) translationally symmetric with respect to spin variables. The spin dynamics is described by the linear Landau-Lifshitz equation of motion, d s i = d t = [ s i H e ;i ], where H e ;i = @ H =@ s i . The resulting equations are then transformed in terms of spin raising and lowering operators s i ; FeCo = s x i ; FeCo s y i ; FeCo and s i ; Gd = s x i ; Gd s y i ; Gd which describes the spin  uctuations around equilibrium. The resulting system of two coupled equations is then Fourier transform to describe the spin  uctuations in the reciprocal space and diagonalised by Bogoliubov-like transformation s k ; FeCo = u + k k + u k y k . s k ; Gd = u k y k + u + k k , where k and k are the eigenstates (magnons) of the system with frequency ! ( k ) and ! ( k ) respectively. More detail is given Supplementary Section S4.

## Percolation Theory

Percolation theory provides a general mathematical toolbox for quantifying statistical properties of connected geometrical regions of size s which will here refer to s adjacent Gd atom sites. After identifying such Gd clusters within the lattice using the e cient Hoshen-Kopelman algorithm 3 , discounting small clusters ( s &lt; 4) and percolating clusters spanning the computational cell, we calculate the radius of gyration R st of each cluster remaining within the distribution and obtain the correlation length as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  nite size e ects are included via the  nite size scaling formula for the correlation length

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p c is the percolation threshold for bulk lattice and is correlation length universal critical exponents. The values p c = 0 : 3116004 and = 0 : 875 for site percolation on a simple cubic lattice and the non-universal constant A = 0 : 776187 obtained by  tting Eq. 3 to the cluster data evaluated by statistical counts through the lattice. Thus Eq. 3 allows relating the Gd concentration to the associated typical geometrical size of Gd clusters, and correlates well with the predictions of the LSWT discussed in the text.

## REFERENCES

- 1 Ostler, T. A. et al. Ultrafast heating as a su cient stimulus for magnetization reversal in a ferrimagnet. Nat. Commun. 3 , 666{6 (2012).
- 2 Mentink, J. et al. Ultrafast Spin Dynamics in Multisublattice Magnets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 , 057202 (2012).
- 3 Atxitia, U. et al. Ultrafast dynamical path for the switching of a ferrimagnet after femtosecond heating. arXiv (2012). 1207.4092v1.
- 4 Schellekens, A. J. &amp; Koopmans, B. Microscopic model for ultrafast magnetization dynamics of multisublattice magnets. Phys. Rev. B (2013).
- 5 Alebrand, S. et al. Light-induced magnetization reversal of high-anisotropy TbCo alloy  lms. Appl. Phys. Lett. 101 , 162408 (2012).
- 6 St ohr, J. &amp; Siegmann, H. C. Magnetism From Fundamentals to Nanoscale Dynamics (Springer, 2006), 1 edn.
- 7 Tudosa, I. et al. The ultimate speed of magnetic switching in granular recording media. Nature 428 , 831{833 (2004).
- 8 Temnov, V. V. Ultrafast acousto-magneto-plasmonics. Nature Photon. (2012).
- 9 Bigot, J.-Y., Vomir, M. &amp; Beaurepaire, E. Coherent ultrafast magnetism induced by femtosecond laser pulses. Nature Physics 5 , 515{520 (2009).
- 10 Kirilyuk, A., Kimel, A. V. &amp; Rasing, T. Ultrafast optical manipulation of magnetic order. Reviews of Modern Physics 82 , 2731 (2010).
- 11 Weller, D. &amp; Moser, A. Thermal e ect limits in ultrahigh-density magnetic recording. IEEE Trans. Magn. 35 , 4423{4439 (1999).
- 12 Stanciu, C. D. et al. Subpicosecond magnetization reversal across ferrimagnetic compensation points. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99 , 217204 (2007).
- 13 Challener, W. A. et al. Heat-assisted magnetic recording by a near- eld transducer with e cient optical energy transfer. Nature Photon. 3 , 220{224 (2009).
- 14 Savoini, M. et al. Highly e cient all-optical switching of magnetization in GdFeCo microstructures by interferenceenhanced absorption of light. Phys. Rev. B 86 , 140404 (2012).
- 15 de Jong, J. et al. Coherent Control of the Route of an Ultrafast Magnetic Phase Transition via Low-Amplitude Spin Precession. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012).
- 16 Alebrand, S. et al. All-optical magnetization switching using phase shaped ultrashort laser pulses. Phys. Status Solidi A 209 , 2589{2595 (2012).
- 17 Khorsand, A. et al. Role of Magnetic Circular Dichroism in All-Optical Magnetic Recording. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012).
- 18 Khorsand, A. R. et al. Element-Speci c Probing of Ultrafast Spin Dynamics in Multisublattice Magnets with Visible Light. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 , 107205 (2013).
- 19 Graves, C. E. et al. Nanoscale spin reversal by nonlocal angular momentum transfer following ultrafast laser excitation in ferrimagnetic GdFeCo. Nature Materials 12 , 293{298 (2013).
- 20 Schlickeiser, F. et al. Temperature dependence of the frequencies and e ective damping parameters of ferrimagnetic resonance. Phys. Rev. B 86 , 214416 (2012).
- 21 Bergman, A. et al. Magnon softening in a ferromagnetic monolayer: a  rst-principles spin dynamics study. Phys. Rev. B 81 , 144416 (2010).
- 22 Haug, A. Magnetic Properties of Solids. In Theoretical Solid State Physics , 282{350 (Pergamon Press, 1972).
- 23 Mekonnen, A. et al. Femtosecond Laser Excitation of Spin Resonances in Amorphous Ferrimagnetic Gd 1 x Co x Alloys. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107 , 117202 (2011).
- 24
- Vahaplar, K. et al. Ultrafast Path for Optical Magnetization Reversal via a Strongly Nonequilibrium State. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 , 117201 (2009).
- 25 Stanciu, C. D. et al. All-Optical Magnetic Recording with Circularly Polarized Light. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99 , 1{4 (2007).
- 26 Kimel, A. V., Kirilyuk, A. &amp; Rasing, T. Femtosecond opto-magnetism: ultrafast laser manipulation of magnetic materials. Laser &amp; Photon. Rev. 1 , 275{287 (2007).
- 27 Kampfrath, T. et al. Coherent terahertz control of antiferromagnetic spin waves. Nature Photon. 5 , 31{34 (2010).

28 Wienholdt, S., Hinzke, D. &amp; Nowak, U. THz Switching of Antiferromagnets and Ferrimagnets. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 , 247207 (2012).

29 Hoshen, J., Berry, M. &amp; Minser, K. Percolation and cluster structure parameters: The enhanced Hoshen-Kopelman algorithm. Phys. Rev. E 56 , 1455{1460 (1997).

the moments of which are de ned as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a and b are Cartesian components. The equation of motion is integrated with the Heun scheme using a time step of dt =0.1 fs to ensure numerical stability. The material parameters we use in the model are given in table I.

TABLE I: Atomistic material parameters for GdFeCo in the LLG equation.

| FeCo-FeCo Exchange Energy  J  i j  6.920 J  10  21  FeCo-Gd Exchange Energy  J  i j  -2.410 J  10  21  Gd-Gd Exchange Energy  J  i j  2.778 J  10  21  FeCo Anisotropy Energy  d  z  8.072 J  10  24  FeCo Moment  s  1.92  B  FeCo Damping  0.02  FeCo Gyromagnetic Ratio  1.00  e  Gd Anisotropy Energy  d  z  8.072 J  10  24  Gd Moment  s  7.63  B  Gd Damping  0.02  Gd Gyromagnetic Ratio  1.00  e   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

The amorphous nature of GdFeCo is modelled by using a simple cubic lattice model but with random placements of Gd moments within the lattice to the desired concentration. Using a very large lattice (128 128 128) allows use to  nely control the concentration and also gives a good ensemble of clusters.

The thermal e ect of the laser is included by use of the two temperature model 1 where the spin system is coupled to the electron temperature.

## SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION

## S1 - Atomistic Spin Model

The atomistic modelling used to obtain the dynamic structure follows standard techniques in this area. We include a description of the model here for completeness. We use the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where i is the gyromagnetic ratio, i is the Gilbert damping, i is the magnetic moment and H i is the e ective eld on a spin S i . We can include temperature by writing the LLG as a Langevin equation, where the e ective eld contains a stochastic process i

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## S2 - Structure Factors

The intermediate structure factor (ISF) is calculated from

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where N is the number of spins and the spin-spin correlation function, C ( r r 0 ; t ) = S + ( r ; t ) S ( r 0 ; t ).

The dynamic structure factor (DSF) is calculated from

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where N is the number of spins, C ( r r 0 ; t ) is the spin-spin correlation function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

S + , S are the spin raising and lowing operators and h      i denotes a thermodynamic average. Numerically the time integral is performed as a discrete Fourier transform in a Hamming window.

To reduce noise and readability of the structure factors, we apply some data processing. We follow the same techniques used by Bergman et al. 2 . Essentially along each constant k -vector, the data is  rst smoothed with a Gaussian convolution of width 0.95 THz and then normalised so that the maximum value is unity. This means that the mode amplitudes can be compared only on constant k -vectors but not between k -vectors. This is however, the more useful comparison, especially when looking at the intermediate structure factors. Without normalisation, the large change in temperature across the ISF would make the di erence in contrast between low and high temperature too large to reasonably display. Further more we do no wish to compare the absolute value of the amplitude at di erent times, but rather see which modes are more populated at each given instance in time. An example of the Gaussian convolution is given in  gure 5 showing that the data is smoothed but the features remain intact.

## S3 - Cluster Counting and Percolation Theory

To identify clusters of Gd sites in the lattice we use the Hoshen-Kopelman method 3 . This is an e cient algorithm for identifying unique clusters on a lattice. We de ne a unique cluster as any set of Gd sites which are linked together by a immediate adjacent site (i.e. nearest neighbour exchange coupled). To calculate the typical correlation length, we  rst remove the tails of the distribution 4 , that is any cluster of size s &lt; 4 and the percolating cluster. In practice we discount the single largest cluster to avoid having to calculate if a cluster is percolating. For the calculation of the correlation length, we use the formula 4

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where s is the cluster size, R is the radius of gyration of a cluster and n s is the number of clusters of size s . Universal critical exponents are strictly speaking de ned only in the thermodynamic limit. Their determination from  nite size lattice simulations requires performing the  nite size scaling analysis 4 . However, considering very large lattices in our simulations reduces  nite size e ects and allows direct determination of critical exponents by  tting to the lattices we generate using the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p c is the site percolation threshold which is 0 : 3116004 for a simple cubic lattice 5 and the critical exponent is 0 : 875 (ref. 6) and A is the only  tted parameter. The resulting  t is shown in  gure 6 along with data extracted directly from the DSF as the maximum length scale of the two-spin region. These show a good agreement as discussed in the article.

## S4 - Ferrimagnet Linear Spin Wave Theory

To calculate the LSWT for arbitrary Gd compositions we use the spin analogy of the virtual crystal approximation to transform the disordered lattice Hamiltonian H describing the system, to a translationally symmetric Hamiltonian H VCA with respect to spin variables S i . This involves weighting the material parameters by the relative composition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where subscripts 1 and 2 denote two di erent species, x is the concentration of species 2, z is the coordination of the lattice. The spin dynamics is described by the Landau-Lifshitz equation of motion, d S i = d t = [ S i H e ;i ], where H e ;i = @ H VCA =@ S i . The LL equation is then transformed in terms of spin raising and lowering operators S i ; FeCo = S x i ; FeCo S y i ; FeCo which describes the spin  uctuations around equilibrium, in this case the z axis. The resulting system of two coupled equations is then Fourier transform to describe the spin  uctuations in the reciprocal space

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We include the temperature in a mean  eld approximation by the self consistent calculation of the values of h s 1 i and h s 2 i 7 . Matrix equation (12) is diagonalised using the Bogoliubov-like transformation s k ; FeCo = u + k k + u k y k . s k ; Gd = u k y k + u + k k , where k and k are the eigenstates (magnons) of the system with frequency

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the coe cients of the transformation u k and v k read

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

1 Chen, J. K., Tzou, D. Y. &amp; Beraun, J. E. A semiclassical two-temperature model for ultrafast laser heating . International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 49 , 307{316 (2006).

2 Bergman, A. et al. Magnon softening in a ferromagnetic monolayer: a  rst-principles spin dynamics study. Phys. Rev. B 81 , 144416 (2010).

3 Hoshen, J., Berry, M. &amp; Minser, K. Percolation and cluster structure parameters: The enhanced Hoshen-Kopelman algorithm. Phys. Rev. E 56 , 1455{1460 (1997).

4 Stau er, D. &amp; Aharoni, A. Introduction to Percolation Theory (Taylor &amp; Francis, London, 1994), 2 edn.

5 Grassberger, P. Numerical studies of critical percolation in three dimensions. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 25 , 5867 (1992).

6 Lorenz, C. &amp; Zi , R. Precise determination of the bond percolation thresholds and  nite-size scaling corrections for the sc, fcc, and bcc lattices. Phys. Rev. E 57 , 230{236 (1998).

7 Ostler, T. et al. Crystallographically amorphous ferrimagnetic alloys: Comparing a localized atomistic spin model with experiments. Phys. Rev. B 84 , 024407 (2011).

## ADDITIONAL INFORMATION

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the EU Seventh Framework Programme under grant agreement No. 281043, FEMTOSPIN. and the Spanish project from Ministry of Science and Innovation under the grant FIS2010-20979C02-02. U.A. is funded by Basque Country Government under "Programa Posdoctoral de perfeccionamiento de doctores del DEUI del Gobierno Vasco". O.H. gratefully acknowledges support from a Marie Curie Intra European Fellowship within the 7th European Community Framework Programme under Grant Agreement No. PIEF-GA-2010- 273014 (MENCOFINAS).

## Author Contributions

J.B. and T.O. performed atomistic spin dynamics simulations; J.B., U.A. and O.F. performed the LSWT calculations and interpretation and J.B., O.H. and R.C. carried out the HK cluster analysis and percolation theory. J.B. and U.A. wrote the core of the manuscript, all authors contributed to parts of it.

## Competing Financial Interests

The authors declare no competing  nancial interests.

## FIGURE LEGENDS

4

4

<!-- image -->

Time [ps]

FIG. 1: Intermediate structure factors with laser excitation. Application of a laser pulse to the Gd 25 (FeCo) 75 amorphous lattice model. The blue and red lines are the M z of the FeCo and Gd, normalised to the total magnetisation of each sublattice respectively. The yellow curve shows the thermal energy applied to the system. In the low panels the colour intensity represents the amplitude of magnons at the given k -vector in comparison to other vectors at the same instance in time. (a) The laser heating causes a reduction in magnetisation of the two sublattices but the distribution of power in the magnons does not change signi cantly from the equilibrium distribution. (b) A higher laser  uence causes switching. During the reversal period, magnons on a speci c length scale are excited corresponding to the angular momentum transfer channel between AF and FM modes. After reversal the ISF returns to the equilibrium distribution.

Mz

S

q

One Spin Wave Mode

FeCo

q

Gd

q

Mz

S

Gd

Mz

S

Two Spin Wave Mode FeCo

ω

50 fs

ω

50 fs

k

k

k

ω

<!-- image -->

 

FIG. 2: E ective magnons in amorphous GdFeCo. (a) The lattice is made up of FeCo (blue) and Gd (red) spins. The random distribution of Gd within the lattice forms clusters of connected Gd regions. These have a typical length scale for a given Gd concentration. (b-e) Relevant magnons on di erent wave-vectors k , depend on the Gd content. (b) For a pure FM only FM magnons exist on all wave-vectors k . (c) At low Gd concentrations FeCo spin  uctuations are dominated by low k FM magnons, whereas the few Gd spins uctuate due to the short range AF coupling to the FeCo lattice represented by the dominance of AF magnons at large k . (d) At intermediate Gd concentrations ( 20-30 %) due to the increase of Gd spins in the system, the AF correlation length characterised by the wave-vector k AF decreases allowing the existence of AF-FM two magnon bound state spin  uctuations. (e) AF magnons dominate across all length scales. (f) Using linear spin wave theory and the virtual crystal approximation we can represent the system in terms of and e ective magnons which hybridizes the elementary FM and AF modes (see Supplementary Section S4 for details).

ω

ω

FIG. 3: Magnon band structures and explanation of one and two magnon states. (a-c) In each DSF the colour indicates the relative amplitude of magnons modes (the power specturm density). The analytic dispersion from the LSWT is overlaid on each DSF in dashed-white, showing a good agreement with our calculated band structure. The box above each panel gives the amplitude of the two magnon state in red. This is maximised when both bands have the same amplitude and is zero where only one band contains any amplitude. The mean Gd cluster correlation length as calculated from percolation theory is denoted by the black arrows. Below each DSF is a cross section of the power spectrum density (PSD) at the low k vector j k j = 0 : 125. (a) Low Gd concentration has distinct FM and AF magnons.The AF band is restricted to the edge of the Brillouin zone (colloring scheme) as there are relatively few, localised FeCo-Gd interactions. The system behaves as a FM due to the dominance of this band. (b) For Gd 20-30%. there is region near the centre of the Brillouin zone with the two magnon state and a small frequency gap ( f ) between the two bands. The shaded region in the PSD is where non-linear interactions allow the e cient transfer of angular momentum between sublattices. Strong excitation of these magnons causes TIMS. (c) High Gd concentration reduces the two magnon state and the large frequency gap stops the  ow of angular momentum between the FM and AF modes. (d) Excitation of one magnon modes causes a reduction in the magnetisation. (e) Two magnon modes cause localised oscillations in the magnetisation. Strong excitation of these states causes a transfer of angular momentum between FM and AF modes leading to the transient ferromagnetic state and switching.

<!-- image -->

FIG. 4: TIMS reversal windows. (a) The band frequency di erence f at the cluster correlation length , calculated from LSWT with VCA and percolation theory. The spacial localisation of the Gd clusters means the minimum does not lie on M comp . Smaller f means that the two magnon modes can more e ciently transfer angular momentum and magnetisation between sublattices when su ciently excited. (b) TIMS switching windows found from atomistic spin dynamics for di erent laser  uences. Each enclosed area is the parameter set where switching occurs for the labelled laser  uence. The switching windows closely match the energy contours from diagram (a) (shown in grey).

<!-- image -->

FIG. 5: The power spectral density along one k -vector is  ltered using Gaussian convolution with a width of = 0 : 95 THz.

<!-- image -->

FIG. 6: The red points correspond to data taken from cluster analysis using the Hoshen-Kopelman method on the lattice. The blue points are the maximum extent of the two spin wave mode as measured from the Langevin-Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert dynamic structure factors (see Figure 2 in the main article). The lines correspond to the  t of Eq. (11) where only A is a free parameter. For the cluster analysis A = 0 : 776187 0 : 01142, analysis from the DSF gives A = 0 : 869468 0 : 04154.

<!-- image -->