## Stock Market Trend Analysis Using Hidden Markov Models

## Kavitha G

School of Applied Sciences, Hindustan University, Chennai, India. E-mail: kavithateam@gmail.com

*Udhayakumar A

School of Computing Sciences, Hindustan University, Chennai, India E-mail: aukumar71@gmail.com

Abstract -Price  movements  of  stock  market  are  not totally random. In fact, what drives the financial market and what pattern financial time series follows have long been the interest that attracts economists, mathematicians and  most  recently  computer  scientists  [17].  This  paper gives  an  idea  about  the  trend  analysis  of  stock  market behaviour  using  Hidden  Markov  Model  (HMM).  The trend  once  followed  over  a  particular  period  will  sure repeat in future. The one day difference in close value of stocks for a certain period is found and its corresponding steady state probability distribution values are determined. The pattern of the stock market behaviour is then  decided  based  on  these  probability  values  for  a particular time. The goal is to figure out the hidden state sequence given the observation sequence so that the trend can be analyzed using the steady state probability distribution( π ) values. Six optimal hidden state sequences  are  generated  and  compared.  The  one  day difference in close value when considered is found to give the best optimum state sequence.

Keywords -Hidden Markov Model; Stock market trend; Transition Probability Matrix; Emission Probability Matrix; Steady State Probability distribution

## I. INTRODUCTION

'A  growing  economy  consists  of  prices  falling,  not rising', says Kel Kelly[9] . Stock prices change every day as  a  result  of  market  forces.  There  is  a  change  in  share price  because  of  supply  and  demand.  According  to  the supply  and  demand,  the  stock  price  either  moves  up  or undergoes a fall. Stock markets normally reflect the business cycle of the economy: when the economy grows, the stock market typically reflects this economic growth in an upward trend in prices. In contrast, when the economy slows,  stock  prices  tend  to  be  more  mixed.  Markets  may take time to form bottoms or make tops, sometimes of two years  or  more.  This  makes  it  difficult  to  determine  when the  market  hits  a  top  or  a  bottom[3].  The  Stock  Market patterns  are  non-linear  in  nature,  hence  it  is  difficult  to forecast future trends of the market behaviour.

## Nagarajan D

Department of Information Technology, Math Section, Salalah College of Technology,

Salalah, Sultanate of Oman

E-mail: drnagarajan75@gmail.com

In  this  paper,  a  method  has  been  developed  to forecast the  future  trends  of  the  stock  market.  The  Latent or  hidden  states,  which  determine  the  behaviour  of  the stock  value,  are  usually  invisible  to  the  investor.  These hidden  states  are  derived  from  the  emitted  symbols.  The emission  probability  depends  on  the  current  state  of  the HMM. Probability and Hidden Markov Model give a way of  dealing  with  uncertainty.  Many  intelligent  tasks  are sequence  finding  tasks, with a limited availability of information. This naturally involves hidden states or strategies for dealing with uncertainty.

## II. LITERATURE SURVEY

In  Recent  years,  a  variety  of  forecasting  methods have been proposed and implemented for the stock market analysis. A brief study on the literature survey is presented. Markov Process is a stochastic process where the probability  at  one  time  is  only  conditioned  on  a  finite history,  being  in  a  certain  state  at  a  certain  time.  Markov chain is 'Given the present, the future is independent of the past'.  HMM is a form of probabilistic finite  state  system where  the  actual  states  are  not  directly  observable.  They can only be estimated using observable symbols associated with the hidden states. At each time point, the HMM emits a  symbol  and  changes  a  state  with  certain  probability. HMM analyze and predict  time  series  or  time  depending phenomena.  There  is  not  a  one  to  one  correspondence between  the  states  and  the  observation  symbols.  Many states are mapped to one symbol and vice-versa.

Hidden  Markov  Model  was  first  invented  in  speech recognition [12,13], but is widely applied to forecast stock market  data.    Other  statistical  tools  are  also  available  to make  forecasts  on  past  time  series  data.  Box-Jenkins[2] used  Time  series  analysis  for  forecasting  and  control. White[5,18,19]  used  Neural  Networks  for  stock  market forecasting  of  IBM  daily  stock  returns.  Following  this, various studies reported on the effectiveness of alternative learning  algorithms  and  prediction  methods  using  ANN . To  forecast the daily close  and morning  open  price, Henry [6] used ARIMA model. But all these conventional methods  had  problems  when  non  linearity  exists  in  time series.  Chiang  et  al.[4]    have  used  ANN  to  forecast  the end-of-year  net  asset  value  of  mutual  funds.  Kim  and Han [10] found that the complex dimensionality and buried noise  of  the  stock  market  data  makes  it  difficult  to  reestimate the ANN parameters. Romahi and Shen [14] also found  that  ANN  occasionally  suffers  from  over  fitting problem.  They  developed  an  evolving  rule  based  expert system  and  obtained  a  method  which  is  used  to  forecast financial market behaviour. There were also hybridization models  effectively  used  to  forecast  financial  behaviour. The  drawback  was  requirement  of  expert  knowledge.  To overcome  all  these  problems  Hassan  and  Nath  [15]  used HMM  for  a better optimization. Hassan et al. [16] proposed a fusion model of HMM, ANN and GA for stock Market  forecasting.  In  continuation  of  this,  Hassan  [7] combined  HMM  and  fuzzy  logic  rules  to  improve  the prediction accuracy on non-stationary stock data sets. Jyoti Badge[8]  used  technical  indicators  as  an  input  variable instead  of  stock  prices  for  analysis.  Aditya  Gupta  and Bhuwan  Dhingra[1]  considered    the  fractional  change  in Stock value and the intra-day high and low  values of the stock to train the continuous HMM . In the earlier studies, much  research  work  had  been  carried  out  using  various techniques and  algorithms for training the model  for forecasting  or  predicting  the  next  day  close  value  of  the stock  market,  for  which  randomly  generated  Transition Probability  Matrix  (TPM),  Emission  Probability  Matrix (EPM) and prior probability matrix have been considered.

In this paper, the trend analysis of the stock market is  found  using  Hidden  Markov  Model  by  considering  the one  day  difference  in  close  value  for  a  particular  period. For a given observation sequence, the hidden sequence of states and their corresponding probability values are found. The probability values of π gives the trend percentage of the  stock  prices.  Decision  makers  make  decisions  in  case of uncertainty. The proposed approach gives a platform for decision  makers  to  make  decisions  on  the  basis  of  the percentage of probability  values obtained from the steady state probability distribution.

## III. RESEARCH SET UP

## A. Basics of HMM

HMM is a stochastic model where the system is assumed to  be  a  Markov  Process  with  hidden  states.  HMM  gives better  accuracy  than  other  models.  Using  the  given  input values, the parameters of the HMM ( λ )  denoted by A, B and π are found out.

Hidden Sequence

Observation Sequence

Fig 1. Trellis  Diagram

<!-- image -->

HMM consists of

A set of hidden or latent states (S)

A set of possible output symbols (O)

A state transition probability matrix (A)

- head2right probability of making transition from one state to each of the other states

Observation emission probability matrix (B)

- head2right probability of emitting/observing a symbol  at a particular state

Prior probability matrix ( π )

- head2right probability of starting at a particular state

An HMM is defined as λ =(S, O, A, B, π ) where

S={s1,s2,…,sN} is a set of N possible states

O={o1,o2,…,oM}  is  a  set  of  M  possible  observation symbols

A  is an NxN  state  Transition Probability  Matrix (TPM)

B  is  an  NxM  observation  or  Emission  Probability Matrix (EPM)

π is an N dimensional initial state probability distribution vector

and A, B and π should satisfy the following conditions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

N;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  main  problems  of  HMM  are:  Evaluation,  Decoding, and Learning.

## Evaluation problem

Given  the  HMM } , , { π λ A B = and  the  observation sequence O = o 1 o 2 ... o M , the probability that model λ has generated sequence O is calculated.

Often  this  problem  is  solved  by  the  Forward  Backward Algorithm (Rabiner, 1989) (Rabiner, 1993).

Decoding problem

Given  the  HMM } , , { π λ A B = and  the  observation sequence O = o 1 o 2 ... oM, calculate the most likely sequence of hidden states that produced this observation sequence O .

Usually  this  problem  is  handled  by  Viterbi  Algorithm (Rabiner,1989) (Rabiner,1993).

## Learning problem

Given some training observation sequences O = o 1 o 2 ... oM and  general  structure  of  HMM  (numbers  of  hidden  and visible states), determine HMM parameters } , , { π λ A B = that best fit training data.

The  most  common  solution  for  this  problem  is  BaumWelch  algorithm  (Rabiner,1989)  (Rabiner,1993)  which  is considered as the traditional method for training HMM.

In  this  paper,  IBM  daily  close  value  data  for  a  month period is considered.

Two observing symbols    ' I '    and    ' D ' have been used:

'I indicates  Increasing' , ' D indicates Decreasing '.

If Today's close value - Yesterday's close value &gt; 0, then observing symbol is I

If Today's close value - Yesterday's close value &lt; 0 then observing symbol is D

There are six hidden states assumed and are denoted by the symbol

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

S1   indicates   'very low';

S2   indicates   'low';

S3   indicates   'moderate low'

S4   indicates   'moderate high';

S5   indicates   'high';

S6   indicates   'very high'.

The States are not directly observable. The situations of the stock  market  are  considered  hidden.  Given  a  sequence  of observation  we  can  find  the  hidden  state  sequence  that produced those observations.

## B.  Database

The complete set of data for the proposed study has been taken  from yahoofinance.com. The  Table  1  given  below shows the daily close value of the stock market:

Table I.  Daily close value for finding differences in one  day,  two  days,  three  days,  four  days, five days, six days close value

| 1  77.91  2  77.39  -0.52  D  3  76.5  -0.89  D  -1.41  D  4  75.86  -0.64  D  -1.53  D  -2.05  D  5  77.45  1.59  I  0.95  I  0.06  I  -0.46  D  6  79.33  1.88  I  3.47  I  2.83  I  1.94  I  1.42  I  7  79.51  0.18  I  2.06  I  3.65  I  3.01  I  2.12  I  1.6  I  8  79.15  -0.36  D  -0.18  D  1.7  I  3.29  I  2.65  I  1.76  I  9  79.95  0.8  I  0.44  I  0.62  I  2.5  I  4.09  I  3.45  I  10  78.56  -1.39  D  -0.59  D  -0.95  D  -0.77  D  1.11  I  2.7  I  11  79.07  0.51  I  -0.88  D  -0.08  D  -0.44  D  -0.26  D  1.62  I  12  77.4  -1.67  D  -1.16  D  -2.55  D  -1.75  D  -2.11  D  -1.93  D  13  77.28  -0.12  D  -1.79  D  -1.28  D  -2.67  D  -1.87  D  -2.23  D  14  77.95  0.67  I  0.55  I  -1.12  D  -0.61  D  -2  D  -1.2  D  15  77.33  -0.62  D  0.05  I  -0.07  D  -1.74  D  -1.23  D  -2.62  D  16  76.7  -0.63  D  -1.25  D  -0.58  D  -0.7  D  -2.37  D  -1.86  D  17  77.73  1.03  I  0.4  I  -0.22  D  0.45  I  0.33  I  -1.34  D  18  77.07  -0.66  D  0.37  I  -0.26  D  -0.88  D  -0.21  D  -0.33  D  19  77.9  0.83  I  0.17  I  1.2  I  0.57  I  -0.05  D  0.62  I  20  75.7  -2.2  D  -1.37  D  -2.03  D  -1  D  -1.63  D  -2.25  D  O.S  D.in.3  days  CV  O.S  D.in4  days  CV  O.S  D.in. 5  days  CV  O.S  D.in. 6  days  CV  O.S  S.NO  C.V  D.in. 1  day CV  O.S  D.in. 2  days  CV   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

C.V - Close value        ;   O.S - Observing symbol

D.in.1 day CV   - difference in 1 day close value;

D.in.2 days CV - difference in 2 days close value;

D.in.3 days CV - difference in 3 days close value;

D.in.4 days CV - difference in 4 days close value;

D.in.5 days CV - difference in 5 days close value;

D.in.6 days CV - difference in 6 days  close value

## IV. CALCULATION

The  various  probability  values  of  TPM,  EPM  and π for difference in one day, two days, three days, four days, five days,  six  days  close  value  close  value  are  calculated  as given below.

## A.    Probability values of TPM, EPM and π for difference in one day close value:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig 2. TPM

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig 3. EPM

Steady state probability distribution

Table II.    Transition table with probability values for difference in one day close value

| TRANSITION  OF STATES  WITH  OBSERVING  SYMBOLS  S1  S2  S3  S4  S5  S6  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  S1  0  0  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  S2  0  0  0  0  0  0.5  0.5  0  0  0  0  0  S3  0  0  0  0.1429  0  0.1429  0  0  0.5714  0  0.1429  0  S4  0  0.5  0  0  0  0.5  0  0  0  0  0  0  S5  0  0.25  0  0.25  0  0.5  0  0  0  0  0  0  S6  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

- B.   Probability values of TPM, EPM and π for difference in two days close value:

| $$S1       S2        S3      S4    S5  S6                     0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.5 0.17 0.33 0 0 0 0.33 0.33 0.33 0 0 0.2 0.4 0 0.4 6 5 4 3 2 1 S S S S S S$$   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig 5. EPM

Steady state probability distribution

<!-- image -->

Table   III.  Transition  table  with  probability  values for difference in two days close values

| TRANSITION  OF STATES  WITH  OBSERVING  SYMBOLS  S1  S2  S3  S4  S5  S6  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  S1  0  0.4  0  0  0.4  0  0.2  0  0  0  0  0  S2  0  0.33  0  0.33  0.33  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  S3  0  0.33  0  0.167  0.5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  S4  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0  S5  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  S6  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0  0   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

- C.      Probability  values  of  TPM,  EPM  and π for difference in three days close value:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig 7. EPM

Steady state probability distribution

Table  1V.   Transition table with probability values for difference in three days close values

| TRANSITION  OF STATES  WITH  OBSERVING  SYMBOLS  S1  S2  S3  S4  S5  S6  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  S1  0  0  0  0.5  0.5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  S2  0  0  0  0.25  0  0.75  0  0  0  0  0  0  S3  0  0.2  0  0.2  0  0.2  0.2  0  0  0  0.2  0  S4  0  0.5  0  0.5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  S5  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  S6  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0.5  0  0.5  0   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

- D.    Probability  values  of  TPM,  EPM  and π for difference in  four days close value:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig  9. EPM

Steady state probability distribution

Table  V.    Transition table with probability values for difference in four days close values

| TRANSITION  OF STATES  WITH  OBSERVING  SYMBOLS  S1  S2  S3  S4  S5  S6  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  S1  0  0.33  0  0.33  0  0.33  0  0  0  0  0  0  S2  0  0  0  0  0  0.33  0.67  0  0  0  0  0  S3  0  0.67  0  0  0  0  0  0  0.33  0  0  0  S4  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  S5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0  S6  0  0  0  0.33  0  0  0  0  0  0  0.67  0   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

- E.      Probability  values  of  TPM,  EPM  and π for difference in five days close value:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Fig  10. TPM

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Fig  11. EPM

Steady state probability distribution

Table  VI.    Transition table with probability values for difference in five days close values

| TRANSITION  OF STATES  WITH  OBSERVING  SYMBOLS  S1  S2  S3  S4  S5  S6  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  S1  0.5  0  0  0.25  0.25  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  S2  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  S3  0  0.33  0  0  0  0.67  0  0  0  0  0  0  S4  0  0  0  0.5  0  0  0  0  0.5  0  0  0  S5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0.5  0  0.5  0  S6  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

- F.      Probability  values  of  TPM,  EPM  and π for difference in six days close value:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig  12.

TPM

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig  13. EPM

Steady state probability distribution The MATLAB  function 'Hmmgenerate' is used to generate  a  random  sequence  of  emission  symbols  and states.  The  length  of  both  sequence  and  states  to  be generated is denoted by L.

Table VII. Transition table with probability values for difference in six days close values

| TRANSITION  OF STATES  WITH  OBSERVING  SYMBOLS  S1  S2  S3  S4  S5  S6  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  I  D  S1  0  0.5  0  0.5  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  S2  0  0.5  0  0  0  0.5  0  0  0  0  0  0  S3  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  S4  0  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  S5  0  0.33  0  0  0  0  0  0  0.33  0  0.33  0  S6  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0.5  0  0.5  0   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

The HMM matlab toolbox  syntax is :

[Sequence, States] = Hmmgenerate ( L , TPM, EPM) , see [11]

For instance,

If  the Input is given as,

TPM = [0 0 1 0 0 0; 0 0 0.5 0.5 0 0; 0 0.143 0.143 0 0.571 0.143; 0.5 0 0.5 0 0 0; 0.25 0.25 0.5 0 0 0; 0 0 0 0.5 0 0.5];

EPM = [0 1;0.5 0.5; 0.71 0.29;0 1;0 1;1 0];

[sequence,states] = hmmgenerate(7, TPM, EPM)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the Output of few randomly generated sequences and states is given below:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  ' ε '    denotes the start symbol  .

The fitness function used for finding the fitness value of sequence of states is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## V.   DISCUSSION

Using  the  Iterative  procedure,  for  each  TPM  and  EPM framed  we  get  an  optimum  sequence  of  states  generated. The length of the sequence generated is taken as L=7, for instance.

The optimum sequence of states obtained from the one day difference TPM and EPM is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly ,we get 5 more such optimum sequences of states for  2  day  difference  ,  3  day  difference,  4  day  difference, 5 day difference, 6 day difference  TPM  and  EPM respectively as follows:

| $$2. ε barb2right I barb2right D barb2right D barb2right I barb2right D barb2right D S1                  S3                    S1                     S1                         S3                        S1                    S1 3. ε barb2right D barb2right D barb2right I barb2right D barb2right I barb2right I S1                      S2                       S3                      S4                  S1                     S3                 S4 4. ε barb2right D barb2right I barb2right D barb2right I barb2right D barb2right D S1                      S2                     S4                     S2                     S4                        S2                   S3 5. ε barb2right D barb2right D barb2right I barb2right I barb2right D barb2right D S1                      S2                    S1                     S1                    S1                         S2                    S1 6. ε barb2right D barb2right D barb2right I barb2right D barb2right D barb2right D S1                      S2                     S3                   S4                         S1                          S2              S3$$   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Using the fitness function we compute the fitness value for each of the optimum sequence of states obtained .

| S.No.  Comparison of 6 optimum  sequence of states  Calculated  value  Fitness   =  ∑  )  ,  (  1  j  i  compare  1.  (1,2) + (1,3) + (1,4) + (1,5) + (1,6)  1  1  2.  (2,1) + (2,3) + (2,4) + (2,5) + (2,6)  1.29  0.76  3.  (3,1) + (3,2) + (3,4) + (3,5) + (3,6)  1.86  0.54  4.  (4,1) + (4,2) + (4,3) + (4,5) + (4,6)  1.43  0.70  5.  (5,1) + (5,2) + (5,3) + (5,4) + (5,6)  2.14  0.47  6.  (6,1) + (6,2) + (6,3) + (6,4) + (6,5)  2.14  0.47   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## VI.  CONCLUSION

In  this  paper,  results  are  presented  using  Hidden  Markov Model to find the trend of the stock market behavior. The highest is the fitness value, the better is the performance of the particular sequence. One day difference in close value when  considered  is found to give  the  best  optimum sequence.  It  is  observed  that  at  any  point  of  time  over years,  if  the  stock  market  behaviour  pattern  is  the  same then  we  can  observe  the  same  steady  state  probability values  as  obtained  in  one  day  difference  of  close  value, which  clearly  determines  the  behavioural  pattern  of  the stock market.

## VII.  REFERENCES

- [1] Aditya  Gupta  and  Bhuwan  Dhingra,  Non-Student members,  IEEE,  'Stock  Market  Prediction  Using Hidden Markov Models,' 2012.
- [2] G. E. P. Box and G. M. Jenkins, Time series analysis: forecasting and control. San Fransisco, CA: HoldenDay, 1976.
- [3] Dr. Bryan Taylor, The Global Financial Data Guide to Bull and Bear Markets, President, Global Financial Data, Inc.
- [4]  W.C.  Chiang,  T.  L.  Urban  and  G.  W.  Baldridge,'A neural  network  approach  to  mutual  fund  net  asset value  forecasting,'  Omega  International  Journal  of Management Science.,Vol. 24 (2), pp. 205-215,1996.
- [5]  Halbert  White,  'Economic  prediction  using  neural networks: the case of IBM  daily stock returns,' Department  of  Economics,  University  of  California, San Diego.
- [6]  Henry M. K. Mok, 'Causality of interest rate, exchange  rate  and  stock  prices  at  stock  market  open

and  close  in  Hong  Kong,'  Asia  Pacific  Journal  of Management,Vol. 10 (2), pp. 123-143,1993.

- [7]  Hassan  Rafiul,  Nath  Baikunth  and  Michael  Kirley, 'HMM based Fuzzy Model for Time Series Prediction,'  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Fuzzy Systems., pp.  2120-2126,2006.
- [8]  Jyoti  Badge,  'Forecasting of  Indian  Stock Market by Effective  Macro-  Economic  Factors  and  Stochastic Model,' Journal of Statistical and Econometric Methods,  Vol. 1 (2),pp.    39-51,ISSN:  2241-0384 (print), 2241-0376 (online) Sciencepress Ltd, 2012.
- [9]  Kel  Kelly,  A  growing  economy  consists  of  prices falling, not rising, How the Stock Market and Economy Really Work , 2010.
- [10]  K.J. Kim and I. Han, 'Genetic algorithms approach to feature  discretization  in  artificial  neural  networks  for the  prediction  of  stock  price  index,  Expert  Systems with Applications,' Vol.19,pp. 125-132,2000.
- [11] K.  Murphy,  HMM  Toolbox  for  MATLAB,  Internet: http://www.cs.ubc.ca/~murphyk/Software/HMM/hmm .html, Oct. 29, 2011.
- [12] L.  Rabiner  and  B.  Juang,  'Fundamentals  of  Speech Recognition,' Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,NJ, 1993.
- [13] L.R  Rabiner,  'A  tutorial  on  HMM  and  Selected Applications in Speech Recognition,' In:[WL], proceedings of the IEEE,Vol. 77 (2), pp. 267296,1993.
- [14] Y. Romahi and Q. Shen, 'Dynamic financial forecasting with automatically induced fuzzy associations,'  In  Proceedings  of  the  9th  international conference on fuzzy systems., pp. 493-498,2000.
- [15] Md. Rafiul Hassan and Baikunth Nath, 'Stock Market forecasting  using  Hidden  Markov  Model:  A  New Approach,'  Proceeding  of  the  2005  5 th international conference on intelligent Systems Design and Application 0-7695-2286-06/05, IEEE, 2005.
- [16]  Md.  Rafiul  Hassan,  Baikunth  Nath  and  Michael Kirley, ' A fusion model of HMM, ANN and GA for stock market forecasting,' Expert systems with Applications.,  pp. 171-180,2007.
- [17]  A.  S.  Weigend  A.  D.  Back,  'What  Drives  Stock Returns?-An  Independent  Component  Analysis,'  In Proceedings of the IEEE/IAFE/INFORMS 1998 Conference on Computational Intelligence for Financial  Engineering,  IEEE,  New  York.,  pp.  141156,1998.
- [18]  H.White, 'Economic prediction using neural networks:  the  case  of  IBM  daily  stock  returns,'  In Proceedings  of  the  second  IEEE  annual  conference on neural networks., II, pp. 451-458,1988.
- [19]  H.White,  Learning  in  artificial  neural  networks:  a statistical perspective, Neural Computation., Vol. 1 , pp. 425-464,1989.