## Hidden Markov Model for Inferring Learner Task Using Mouse Movement

Elbahi Anis #1 ,Mohamed Ali Mahjoub *2 ,Mohamed Nazih Omri #3

# Research Unit MARS, Department of computer sciences

Faculty of sciences of Monastir, Monastir, Tunisia.

1 Elbahi.anis@gmail.com

3 MohamedNazih.Omri@fsm.rnu.tn

* Research Unit SAGE,

National Engineering School of Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia.

2 Medali.mahjoub@ipeim.rnu.tn

Abstract - One of the issues of e-learning web based application is  to  understand  how  the  learner  interacts  with  an  e-learning application  to  perform  a  given  task.  This  study  proposes  a methodology  to  analyze  learner  mouse  movement  in  order  to infer the task performed. To do this, a Hidden Markov Model is used  for  modeling  the  interaction  of  the  learner  with  an  elearning application. The obtained results show the ability of our model to analyze the  interaction  in  order  to  recognize  the  task performed by the learner.

Keywords -E-Learning web base application, Interaction analysis,  Hidden  Markov  Models,  Mouse  movements,  Task inference.

## I. INTRODUCTION

In the e-learning process, it is very important to know how the  learner  interacts  with  the  interface.  Indeed,  analysis  and recognition  of  the  learner  task  may  be  too  useful  to  provide feedback for the learning process in order to guide the learner.

The analysis of user behavior and activity recognition in a web  user  interaction  process  is  one  of  the  most  popular subjects of the human computer interaction HCI and usability evaluation of web based applications.

Various  studies  have  been  achieved  in  this  context  to analyze the navigational behavior of the user in order to infer the activity provided using techniques such as eye tracking [13],  psychological  and  physiological  tracking  [4]  and  mouse cursor  tracking  [5-8].  Many  earlier  works  shows  that  it  is obvious  that  Mouse  trajectories  can  be  processed,  averaged, visualized, and explored for analyzing users' behaviors.

Generally,  in  e-learning  the  trajectory  of  the  mouse  is considered as a powerful tool to provide indicators of the way in  which  a  learner  interacts  with  an  e-learning  interface.  In fact, mouse movements are guided by the goal of the task and reflect the cognitive processes of the user as shown in Fig. 1.

Have clues of cognitive processes of the learner using the trajectory of the mouse, can infer its goal, then know his needs and provide assistance for him in a feedback process.

In  [9]  'an  inverse  Yarbus  process'  whereby  the  authors infer  the  visual  task  by  observing  the  measurements  of  a viewer's eye movements while executing the visual task.

Fig. 1 Mouse trajectories for two different tasks

<!-- image -->

The use of eye tracking as a tool to infer the user task may not  be  an  affordable  alternative  in  various  cases  because  the data provided by the eye tracking are expensive and may be biased, indeed subjects must be present in a specific location to wear or not tracking device and they are aware of the test situation  hence  the  conditions  of  the  experiment  of  gaze tracking  may  affect  the  found  results  much  more  than  usual experience handling the mouse device.

Chen  et  al.  [10]  found  that  over  75%  of  cases,  a  mouse saccade moves to significant region of the screen and, in these cases,  it  is  quite  likely  that  the  eye  gaze  is  very  near  to  the cursor.

In the present article, we propose to use the Markov theory to modelling the learner interaction using the cursor trajectory. The main goal is to infer the learner task in order to improve the e-learning process in a web based application.

## II. RELATED RESEARCH

The  learner  is  the  'center  of  gravity'  of  the  e-learning process. In addition, adaptive and intelligent web-based educational systems attempt to be more adaptive by using the student  profile  associated  with  the  goals,  preferences  and knowledge of the each individual student [15].  Various ways such as log files were used to better understand the progress of students and to guide them in the e-learning process [19,20], to provide good support for web users and to better understand the  learner  behavior.  In  the  same  way,  the  analysis  of  the trajectory of the mouse has been widely used to infer learner's strategy.  Ohmori  et  al  [14]  analyzed  the  mouse  movements during the reading task to make a classification of learners in three  patterns.  In  [17]  an  application  was  suggested  to  track mouse movements of learners during their learning process in order to enable teachers to better understand the behavior of its students and in [18] the movements of the cursor were used to  infer  user  interest  over  spatial  information  has  shown  to him.  Various  tools  have  been  developed  for  the  capture  and analysis of the trajectory of the mouse like OGAMA 1 [13].

Freeman  and  Ambady  [16]  present  'MouseTracker'  tool that  evaluate  real-time  processing in  psychological  tasks. Therefore the trajectory of the mouse has been widely used to guide  and  improve  the  process  of  learning  since  it  reflects  a part of the cognitive process of learner.

This  type  of  interaction  can  potentially  be  used  for  the recognition of the task performed during the e-learning activity.  Hence, this  paper presents an HMM  which is based on the path of the mouse to recognize the task performed by a learner in order to enhance the e-learning process.

## III. HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS (HMM) :

## A. Presentation:

Although HMM have been introduced since the late 60s by Baum  and  al,  they  are  still  overused  in  various  fields  for modelling  stochastic  sequences  [12,9]  as  the  analysis  and speech recognition, handwriting recognition, image recognition, DNA sequence analysis , activity recognition, ...

In  the  present  article,  we  do  not  try  to  detail  the  HMMs. However, for An excellent tutorial covering the basic HMM technologies the reader is recommended to see the documents of  R.  Rabiner  [11,12].  In  what  follows  we  use  the  same notation used by R. Rabiner.

## B. Formal definition:

Briefly, a HMM is a statistical mathematical model used to describe a doubly stochastic process, which can be presented by the following figure:

<!-- image -->

Formally, a HMM noticed by λ = (A, B, Π) is defined by:

-  S = {S1, S2, ..., S N}: set S of N hidden states with S 0 is a start state. (At time t the model state is q t ).
-  O = {O1, O2, ... OM} : the alphabet of M symbols.
-  A={aij} / aij =  p(q t =Sj  | q t-1 =Si), 1≤i,j≤N, ∑ : the matrix of transition probability between the N states.
-  B={bj(k)} / bj(k) = p(Ok =Ot | qt=Sj), 1≤j≤N , 1≤k≤M, ∑ :  the  matrix  of  symbol  transmission probability by N states.
-  ∏ = {∏i} /  ∏i  =  p(q1=Si),  1≤i≤N  , ∑ :  the Initial probability distribution vector.

The system starts with an initial transition from state S 0 to all  other  states  S i of  the  model  with  an  initial  transition probability Πi ; 0 ≤ Π i ≤1.

The system can pass from any state Si to an other state Sj with a transition probability a ij ; 0 ≤ a ij ≤ 1.

From each state Sj the system generates a symbol Ok with an emission probability bj (k) ; 0≤ b j (k) ≤ 1.

## C. Markov property:

A  stochastic process has the Markov  property  if the prediction  of  the  next  state  depends  only  on  the  relevant information contained in the present state of the process, ie:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Problems and their solutions for HMM's :

Like shown in TABLE I, Rabiner and Juang in [11] explain the three key problems of interest that must be solved for the model to be useful in real world application, given a model λ = (A, B, Π) and observation sequence O={O1,O2, …,OT}.

TABLE I PROBLEMS / SOLUTIONS FOR HMM'S

| Description of  the problem  Solution  algorithm  Prob1  How we compute P(O&#124; λ).  Forward-backward  Prob2  How  we  choose  a  state  sequence  S={S1,S2,  …,  ST}  witch  is  optimal  in some meaningful sense.  Viterbi  Prob3  How  we  adjust  the  model  parameters to maximize P(O&#124; λ)  Baum-Welch   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## E. HMM for task learner modelling.

A task is the outcome of the interaction of the learner with the interface areas to achieve a fixed goal.

Since  the  handling  of  the  interface  areas  is  related  to  the aim of the task, the parts of the interface are not manipulated in the same manner for different tasks as shown in Fig. 1. Also, task can be illustrated as a set of states among them the system makes  a  transition  at  each  time t with  a  certain  probability. The  transition  to  a  state  randomly  generates  an  observable symbol which is the zone crosses by cursor. So, the task can be defined as a doubly stochastic process, the first stochastic level is the transition from one state to another randomly, and the  second  stochastic  level  is  the  random  generation  of  a symbol which is the area of interest manipulated by the user cursor. Then a task user can be modelled using a HMM. In the next section we describe the proposed model.

An  e-learning  activity  can  be  defined  as  a  set  of  task  to perform.  The  identification  of  the  task  performed  by  the learner can significantly improve the e-learning process.

TASK={TSK1, TSK2, … ,TSKN},  a set of task that can be performed by a user and each task is a set of actions.

To  perform  a  task,  the  user  can  focus  (fixes  with  mouse cursor)  areas  in  the  interface  more  than  others;  in  fact  the probability of using areas is strongly related to the task.

Let  AOIs  =  {Z 1 ,Z2,…,  ZM}  the  set  of  M  areas  of  interest that  can  be  manipulated or focused by the  mouse during  the task.  Identifying  AOIs  can  be  done  by  an  expert  who  fixed parts  of  the  interface  that  are  needed  to  perform  all  tasks required by the user. Each AOI is used to perform an action of the task.

Fig 3: AOIs for the phet 2 'Equation Grapher' simulator.

<!-- image -->

A task is represented in our model by the trajectory of the mouse when a subject crosses a set of AOIs for a T period to achieve  a  goal.  Hence,  a  task  can  be  defined  as  follows: TSK = {Zi(t)}   1 ≤ i ≤ M ;  1≤t≤T.

After recording the data of experience, a step of vectorization  will  take  place.  The  purpose  of  this  step  is  to identify all areas that have been crossed during the task using the following algorithm.

## Vectorization algorithm :

Begin vectorization

Initializations

O={} ;

Details of each area AOIs;

- T  Total duration of the task performed;
- ds  Time between recordings of tow cursor coordinates;

## Treatment :

for t:=1 to T (with ds step) do

if (cursor coordinates of a mouse trajectory is in Z i ) then

O [t]  Zi

endif

end for

Output:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

End vectorization The vectorization step result is O={O1,O2, …, Ot, …,OT} ; Ot= Zi(t) , 1 ≤ i ≤ M , 1≤t≤T.

2 Phet available on http://phet.colorado.edu/sims/equation-grapher/equation-grapher\_fr.html

In  order  to  infer  the  task  achieved  by  the  learner,  we propose  to  use  for  each  task,  an  HMM  and  we  proceed  as follows:

- 1 - Each task TSKk must be modeled by a specific HMM λ k = ( Π , A, B) ; 1 ≤ k ≤ N
- 2 - The parameters for each HMM λk must be estimated, so we must train it by a set of  observation sequences regarding the task TSKk.
- 3 - For a task TSK caracterized by the sequence O = {O1, O2, ..., Ot, ..., OT} and for each HMM λ k ,  we must calculate the probability P TSK = P (O | λ k ) ; 1 ≤ k ≤ N.
- 4 - To infer the task we choose the task whose probability value founded by the model is maximum, ie:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following illustration shows the task inference process which  is  based  on  the  calculation  of  maximum  probability value generated by each HMM for the task performed.

Fig 4. Task inference model using mouse movement data.

<!-- image -->

## V. EXPERIMENTS

In this section we will describe our proposed method.

On the  Phet  simulator,  we  fixed  the  details  of  interesting areas (AOIs) that can be manipulated by the learner using the mouse,  as  shown  in  Fig.  3.  Then  AOIs  ={A,B,C,D,E,F,R} with R is the position of the mouse outside the areas A, B, C, D, E and F.  For simplicity, we asked the students to achieve only one of the two tasks bellow.

TSK1 = graphical representation of a curve (REP).

TSK2  =  graphic  verification  of  the  intersection  of  two curves (INT).

For  modelling  each  task,  we  propose  an  initial  model λ =(Π, A, B) Which parameters are:

## VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For adjusting the parameters of each HMM, we prepared a training dataset  for  each  hmm. Using the OGAMA tool [13] and the 'equation grapher' simulation, we asked 10 participants  to  perform  graphical  equation  representations  of their  choice.  Similarly,  we  asked  10  others  participants  to perform a task of checking the intersection of two curves of their  choice.  Using  Baum-Welch  algorithm  the,  parameters obtained are:

λ1=(∏1,A1,B1)  learned  with  the  Learning  Base  (LB1) concerning the first task.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

B1=

( )

λ2=(∏2,A2,B2)  learned  with  the  Learning  Base  (LB2) concerning the second task.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

B2=

( )

Once  the  parameters  of  each  HMM  were  estimated,  10 experiments were performed in which participants were asked to perform a task of their choice (REP / INT) and for each task an observation sequence O = {O1, O2, ..., OT} was generated using the vectorization algorithm cited above.

To  infer  the  task  performed,  each  obtained  observation sequence  is  estimated  using  both  HMM.  The  maximum likelihood value generated using Forward-backward algorithm will be considered as an indicator of the task performed by the participant. The results of the model are shown in next section.

TABLE II EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

Using OGAMA [13], we record the path of the mouse and the  heat  map.  The  heat  map  can  tell  us  about  the  most  used and  the  most  ignored  areas  in  the  interface,  and  the  mouse path  presents  the  order  by  which  the  learner  interacts  with interface  simulator  for  each  task  performed  as  shown  in  the Fig. 4.

Fig 4. Two heat maps (with mouse paths) for two different tasks performed by the same learner using Phet simulator.

<!-- image -->

The  examination  of  each  heat  map  shows  that  -without being  aware-,  the  learner  draws  a  mouse  path,  fixes  areas more than others and spends a lot more time on elements more than  others.  Despite  the  significance  and  quality  of  data provided by the heat map and the mouse path, it is difficult to automatically infer the type of task performed.

For  the  10  experiments  performed,  the  table  II  shows  for each task, its duration, nature, percentage of mouse fixations on  each  area  of  interest,  the  logarithm  of  the  likelihood probability generated by each HMM and decision taken by the model.

Remember that the HMM1 is part of the model trained to recognize  TSK1  (REP)  while  HMM2  is  part  of  the  model trained to recognize TSK2 (INT).

For experiments T1, T2, T3, T5 and T9 in which participants  made  a  simple  graphical  representation  of  the curve, the HMM1 generated higher values of probability then those generated by the HMM2 .

While  for  experiments  T4,  T6,  T7,  T8  and  T10  where participants checked the curves intersection, probability values generated by the HMM2  are  higher than those generated by the HMM1.

| Task  ID  Task  time  Task  type  Fixation % on each AOI  HMM1(R)  HMM2(I)  DECISION  R  E  P  I  N  T  A  B  C  D  E  F  R  T1  2800  +  0,57  0,39  0,50  2,11  45,32  14,82  36,29  -6908.1  -3110.8  INT  T2  3000  +  0,00  8,00  0,70  1,70  70,60  5,43  13,57  -7601.6  -1977.4  INT  T3  3000  +  0,00  0,33  0,17  0,00  88,77  1,67  9,07  -8203.4  -1195.5  INT  T4  1650  +  36,42  43,70  3,52  7,58  0,00  0,06  8,73  -1884.5  -2443.5  REP  T5  3700  +  12,89  28,49  3,22  7,54  30,16  6,24  11,46  -6733.4  -4366.9  INT  T6  2400  +  15,67  51,13  7,42  7,88  3,25  5,54  9,13  -3379.6  -3591.7  REP  T7  2540  +  26,14  36,18  6,34  8,23  3,15  4,92  15,04  -3579.6  -3943.3  REP  T8  2860  +  27,27  34,20  4,79  15,63  4,72  3,25  10,14  -3618.4  -4483.3  REP  T9  2050  +  16,10  17,80  3,41  5,37  47,46  0,00  9,85  -4115.1  -1957.5  INT  T10  2920  +  44,73  34,04  0,24  9,69  0,00  3,56  7,74  -3223.8  -4374.6  REP   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

So the  model developed could infer the type of each task correctly.  The  following  graph  shows  the  capacity  of  each HMM of the model to recognize each task.

Fig 5. Task inference value for each HMM of the model

<!-- image -->

For experiments T1,T2,T3 and T9 there is a strong difference between the two HMMs  whereas the other experiments the difference between the two HMMs is low.

Consider  for  example  the  experience  T6  where  the  value generated  by  HMM1is  -3379.6  and  by  HMM2  is  -3591.7. Although the model could infer the task correctly, the difference between values founded by the two HMMs is very low  (182,1),  whereas  for  the  experience  T3  the  difference between values founded by the two HMMs is higher (7007,9)

This  can  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  learner  performing the task T6 focuses on the areas A (15,67%) and B (51,13%) which  are  recognized  by  the  first  HMM1  as  very  important areas for the realization of task  REP  (according  to  the emission  matrix  estimated  for  HMM1)  but  he  manipulates other areas in relation to the task INT (C=7,42% ; D=7,88% ;E= 3,25% ;F=5,54%) , so the difference between tow HMMs is not very important.

Whereas in the case of task T3, the learner fixes more the area  E  (88,77%)  which  is  considered  very  important  for  the realization of the task INT (according to the emission matrix estimated  for  HMM2)  but  he  is  not  frequently  uses  areas  in relation to the task REP (A=0% ;B=0,33% ;C= 0,17% ;D=0%; F=1,67%),  so  the  difference  between  two  HMMs  is  very important. The results of all the experiments can be explained in the same way.

From  the  other  side,  the  inference  value  can  give  an indication on how learners interact with the e-learning application. In fact, for a learner doing a task, if the difference between  two  HMMs  is  important  we  conclude  that  the  user targets  well  the  areas  needed  to  the  achievement  of  the required task and therefore he has a good level of manipulation of the application.

But  if  learner  performs  the  same  task  and  the  values returned by the two HMMs are too close we concluded that he has  a  low  level  of  manipulation  of  the  application  than  the first learner, so this learner presents problems of handling the application.

Another  result  that  can  be  concluded  from  this  work, according  to  the  following  graph  which  presents  the  rate  of use of each area for the realization of all tasks .

Fig 6. Mouse fixations rate in each AOI for each task.

<!-- image -->

The  figure  shows  that  the  realization  of  the  task  INT attracts many the mouse cursor of the user on the area E and for  the  task  REP,  mouse  cursor  will  be  attracted  to  areas  A and  B.  This  results,  brings  us  to  conclude  that  the  mouse movements  are  guided  by  the  objective  of  the  task  to  welldefined  areas  of  the  interface.  This  finding,  is  in  accordance with to the work of Yarbus [19] who found that the gaze path of  a  subject  is  dependent  of    his  task  and  with  the  work  of Chen et al  that show that the gaze path is strongly correlated with the mouse path[10].

## VII. CONCLUSIONS

In  this  paper  we  propose  a  model  for  learner  interaction with an e-learning web based application.

The  proposed  model  has  good  ability  to  infer  the  task performed  by  the  learner  based  on  mouse  path  and  using  a Hidden Markov Model for each task. The inference technique is based on the greater likelihood probability value generated by the HMMs of the model.

The model can give indications  about  the  learner  level  of interaction with the application to help the teacher to know the problems faced by learners.

Despite  their  power  and  their  wide  use  in  various  fields, HMMs have some problems like a choice of initial parameters of the model that may influence the effectiveness of the model, and also the training set which must be large and containing sequence  learning  well  chosen.  The  enhancement  of  these elements can significantly improve the proposed model.

## REFERENCES

- [1] A.  Bulling,  J.A.  Ward,  H.  Gellersen,  and  G.  Tröster,  "Eye  movement analysis  for  activity  recognition  using  electrooculography",  IEEE Transactions  on  Pattern  Analysis  and  Machine  Intelligence  archive, vol. 33, Issue 4, pp. 741-753, April 2011.
- [2] A. Bulling, J.A. Ward, H. Gellersen, and G. Tröster, "Robust Recognition of Reading Activity in Transit Using Wearable Electrooculography," Proc. Sixth Int'l Conf. Pervasive Computing, pp. 19-37, 2008.
- [3] J.  H.  Goldberg,  M.  J.  Stimson,  M.    Lewenstein,  N.  Scot,  and  A.  M. Wichansky, "Eye tracking in web search tasks: Design implications",Proc.02 of the Eye Tracking Research and Applications Symposium, pp. 51-58, 2002.
- [4] A. Dufresne, F. Courtemanche, S. Prom Tep, S. Senecal,"Physiological  measures,  eye  tracking  and  task  analysis  to track user reactions in user generated content", Proc. 7th

Internationcal Conference on Methods and Techniques in Behavioral Research, p. 218, August 2010.

- [5] Q. Guo, E. Agichtein, "Exploring mouse movements for inferring query intent".  Proc. 31st international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval, pp. 707-708, July 2008.
- [6] J. Huang, R. W. White, and S. Dumais,"No clicks, No problem: Using Cursor Movements to Understand and Improve Search" Proc. SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp.1225-1234, 2011.
- [7] J. Huang, R. W. White, G. Buscher, and K. Wang, "Improving searcher models using mouse cursor activity", Proc. the 35th international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval, pp 195-204, 2012.
- [8] S.  Cetintas,  L.  Si,Y.  P.  Xin,C.  Hord,  and  D.  Zhang,"Learning  to Identify  Students'Off-task  Behavior  in  Intelligent  Tutoring  Systems", Proc.  the  14th  International  Conference  on  Artificial  Intelligence  in Education, pp. 701-703, 2009.
- [9] A.  H.  Abolhassani  and  J.  J.  Clark,"Visual  Task  Inference  Using Hidden Markov Models", Proc. IJCAI'11 Proceedings of the TwentySecond international joint conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2, pp. 1678-1683, 2011.
- [10] M.C. Chen, J.R. Anderson, and M.H. Sohn, "What can a mouse cursor tell us more?: correlation of eye/mouse movements on web browsing", CHI '01 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 281-282, 2001.
- [11] L.  R.  Rabiner  and  B.  H.  Juang,   "An  introduction  to  hidden  Markov models",  IEEE ASSP Mag.,  vol. 3,  pp.4 -16, 1986.
- [12] L.  R.  Rabiner,   "A  tutorial  on  hidden  Markov  models  and  selected applications  in  speech  recognition",   Proc.  IEEE,   vol.  77,   pp.  257  286, 1989.
- [13] A. Voßkühler, V. Nordmeier, L. Kuchinke and A.M. Jacobs, "OGAMA(Open  Gaze  and  Mouse  Analyzer):  Open  source  software designed  to  analyze  eye  and  mouse  movements  in  slideshow  study designs", Behavior Research Methods, pp. 1150-1162, 2008.
- [14] Y. Ohmori, D. Iibuchi,I. Horie, and K. Itoh, 'Understanding learning effect  using  MBC',Analysis  of  mouse  behaviour.  Conference  on  IT Education, pp. 51-54, 2006.
- [15] P.  Brusilovsky,  and  C.  Peylo,  'Adaptive  and  intelligent  Web-based educational systems,' Int. J. Artificial Intelligence in Education, vol.13, no.2-4, pp.159-172, 2003.
- [16] J. B. Freeman, and N.  Ambady, 'MouseTracker: Software for studying real-time mental processing using a computer mouse-tracking method'. Behavior Research Methods, 42 (1), pp. 226-241, 2010.
- [17] M. Zushi, Y. Miyazaki, and K. Norizuki,' Web  application for recording learners' mouse trajectories and retrieving their study logs for data analysis'.  Knowledge Management  &amp;  E-Learning: An International Journal, 4(1), pp 37-50, 2012. E.  Mac  Aoidh,  and  M.  Bertolotto,  'Analysing  Mouse  Movements  to Infer Spatial Interests', Proc. GISRUK, pp. 307-311, April 2007.
- [18] G.D. Chen, C.C. Liu, K.L. Ou, and M.S. Lin, 'Web learning portfolios: A tool for supporting performance awareness,' Innovations in Education and Training International, vol.38, no.1, pp.19-30, 2000.
- [19] A L. Yarbus, 'Eye Movements and Vision'. New York: Plenum Press; 1967.