## Approximation of Invariant Measures for Regime-Switching Diffusions

Jianhai Bao, ∗

Jinghai Shao †

October 4, 2018

## Abstract

In this paper, we are concerned with long-time behavior of Euler-Maruyama schemes associated with a range of regime-switching diffusion processes. The key contributions of this paper lie in that existence and uniqueness of numerical invariant measures are addressed (i) for regime-switching diffusion processes with finite state spaces by the Perron-Frobenius theorem if the 'averaging condition' holds, and, for the case of reversible Markov chain, via the principal eigenvalue approach provided that the principal eigenvalue is positive; (ii) for regime-switching diffusion processes with countable state spaces by means of a finite partition method and an M-Matrix theory. We also reveal that numerical invariant measures converge in the Wasserstein metric to the underlying ones. Several examples are constructed to demonstrate our theory.

AMS subject Classification:

60H10; 60H35

Keywords: Regime-switching diffusion; Invariant measure; Euler-Maruyama scheme; Perron-Fronenius theorem; Principal eigenvalue; M-matrix

## 1 Introduction

For a regime-switching diffusion process (RSDP), we mean a diffusion process in a random environment characterized by a Markov chain. The state vector of an RSDP is a pair ( X t , Λ t ). Here { X t } t ≥ 0 satisfies a stochastic differential equation (SDE)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and { Λ t } t ≥ 0 denotes a continuous-time Markov chain with the state space S := { 1 , 2 · · · , N } , 1 ≤ N ≤ ∞ , and the transition rules specified by

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∗ Department of Mathematics, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410083, China, jianhaibao13@gmail.com

† School of Mathematical Science, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, China, shaojh@bnu.edu.cn

‡ Department of Mathematics, Swansea University, Singleton Park, SA2 8PP, UK, C.Yuan@swansea.ac.uk

Chenggui Yuan ‡

Various quantities of (1.1) will be given in the next section. RSDPs have considerable applications in e.g. control problems, storage modeling, neutral activity, biology and mathematical finance (see e.g. monographs [15, 31]). Pinsky and Scheutzow [19] showed that the overall system ( X x t , Λ i t ) need not to be positive recurrence (resp. transience) even when each subsystem is positive recurrence (resp. transience), and Mao and Yuan revealed in [15, Example 5.45, p.223] that ( X x t , Λ i t ) is stable although some of the subsystems are not. So, in some cases, the dynamical behavior of RSDPs may be markedly different from diffusion processes without regime switchings. So far, the works on RSDPs have included ergodicity [3, 9, 22, 21, 26], stability [15, 21, 27, 31], recurrence and transience [18, 19, 20, 31], invariant densities [1, 2], hypoellipticity [1, 4], and so forth.

Since solving RSDPs is still a challenging task, numerical schemes and/or approximation techniques have become one of the viable alternatives, where [15, 31] are concerned with finite-time (strong or weak) convergence while [10, 15] are devoted to long-time behavior of numerical schemes. For more details on numerical analysis of diffusion processes without regime switching, please refer to the monograph [12]. Also, approximations of invariant measures for stochastic dynamical systems have attracted much attention, see e.g. Mattingly et al. [16] via a Poisson equation, Talay [24] through the Kolmogorov equation, and Br´ ehier [5] by means of the Malliavin calculus. For the counterpart associated with Euler-Maruyama (EM) algorithms with constant/decreasing stepsize of RSDPs, we refer to Mao et al. [14] and Yuan and Mao [29] adopting the M-matrix theory, and Yin and Zhu [31] utilizing the weak convergence method, where RSDPs therein enjoy finite state spaces. Moreover, sufficient conditions imposed in [14, 29, 31] to guarantee existence of numerical invariant measures are irrelevant to stationary distributions of the continuous-time Markov chains that can accommodate a set of possible regimes.

Motivated by [14, 29, 31], in this paper we are also interested in numerical approximation of invariant measure for RSDP (1.1) and (1.2). In particular, we are concerned with the following questions:

- (i) Under what conditions, will the discrete-time semigroup generated by EM scheme admit a unique invariant measure?
- (ii) Will the numerical invariant measure, if it exists, converge in some metric to the underlying one?

In this paper, we shall answer the questions above one-by-one in several cases.

Throughout the paper, we stipulate N &lt; ∞ in Section 2-4, and N = ∞ in Section 5. The content of this paper is arranged as follows. In Section 2, by the Perron-Fronenius theorem, we discuss existence and uniqueness of invariant measure for semigroup generated by ( X x t , Λ i t ) if (1.1) is attractive 'in average' (see (2.6)). In what follows, we call (2.6) an 'averaging condition'. As Example 2.3 below shows, our established theory, Theorem 2.2, covers more interesting models in contrast to existing results (see e.g. [28, Theorem 5.1]). By following the idea of argument for Theorem 2.2, Section 3 focus on existence and uniqueness of numerical invariant measure for RSDP (1.1) and (1.2) with additive noise and multiplicative noise respectively. In addition, we also reveal that numerical invariant converges in the Wasserstein distance to the underlying one. For more details, please refer to Theorem 3.2. We point out that the Markov chain considered in Section 3 need not to be reversible. However, for the reversible case, by the principal eigenvalue approach (see e.g. Chen [7]), existence and uniqueness of numerical invariant measure can also be addressed if the principal eigenvalue is positive. This is elaborated in Section 4. Note that the Markov chain in Section 3 and 4 admits a finite state space. We proceed to the countable case in Section 5. For such case, a finite partition method due to Shao [22] and an M-matrix theory (see e.g. [15, Theorem 2.10, p.68]) are adopted to study existence of numerical invariant measure. More precisely, by a finite partition method, EM scheme with a countable state space is transformed into a new EM with a finite state space. Thus, the discrete-time semigroup generated by the EM scheme with a countable state space possesses an invariant measure provided that the one generated by the new EM with a finite state space does. Moreover, several examples (see Examples 2.3, 3.4, 4.2 and Remark 3.1) are constructed to demonstrate our theory established.

Throughout the paper, c &gt; 0 is a generic constant which is independent of the time parameters and the stepsize, and may change from occurrence to occurrence.

## 2 Invariant Measure

To begin with, we introduce some notation. Let (Ω , F , P ) be a probability space with a filtration { F t } t ≥ 0 satisfying the usual conditions (i.e. F 0 contains all P -null sets and F t = F t + := ⋂ s&gt;t F s ). Let { Λ t } t ≥ 0 be a continuous-time Markov chain with the state space S := { 1 , 2 · · · , N } , N &lt; ∞ , and { W t } t ≥ 0 an m -dimensional Brownian motion, independent of { Λ t } t ≥ 0 , defined on the probability space above. We assume that the Q -matrix Q := ( q ij ) N × N is irreducible and conservative. So the Markov chain { Λ t } t ≥ 0 has a unique stationary distribution µ := ( µ 1 , · · · , µ N ) which can be determined by solving linear equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

subject to µ 1 + · · · + µ N = 1 and µ i &gt; 0 , i ∈ S . Here 0 is a zero vector. Let P ( R n × S ) stand for the family of all probability measures on R n × S . For ξ = ( ξ 1 , · · · , ξ n ) ∗ ∈ R n , ξ ≫ 0 means each component ξ i &gt; 0, i = 1 , · · · , n, in which A ∗ denotes the transpose of a vector or matrix A. For a, b ∈ R , a ∧ b := min { a, b } . For each R &gt; 0, B R (0) := { x ∈ R n : | x | ≤ R } , the ball of radius R centered at 0. Let ‖ A ‖ be the Hilbert-Schmidt norm of the matrix A. diag( a 1 , · · · , a N ) denotes the diagonal matrix whose diagonal entries starting in the upper left corner are a 1 , · · · , a N .

We assume that, in (1.1), b : R n × S ↦→ R n and σ : R n × S ↦→ R n ⊗ R m satisfy the local Lipschitz condition, i.e., for each i ∈ S and R &gt; 0, there exists an L R &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Additionally, we assume that

( H ) For each i ∈ S and x, y ∈ R n , there exist c 0 &gt; 0 and β i ∈ R such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.1 . In ( H ), it is worth to pointing out that, for each i ∈ S , β i need not to be negative. On the other hand, without loss of generality, we assume that, for each i ∈ S , (2.2) and (2.3) hold respectively with the same β i ∈ R to avoid complex computation.

Under (2.1) and ( H ), (1.1) and (1.2) admit a unique non-explosive solution ( X t , Λ t ), see e.g. [15, Theorem 3.17, p.93]. Throughout the paper, we write ( X x,i t , Λ i t ) in lieu of ( X t , Λ t ) to highlight the initial data ( x, i ). Define a metric d ( · , · ) on R n × S as below

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where d 0 ( i, j ) = 0 for i = j , otherwise d 0 ( i, j ) = 1. Then ( R n × S , d ( · , · ) , B ( R n × S )) is a complete separable metric space. For two given probability measures µ and ν on R n × S , define

where C ( µ, ν ) denotes the set of all couplings of µ and ν. Let P t ( x, i ; d y ×{ j } ) be the transition probability measure of the pair ( X x,i t , Λ i t ), which is a time homogeneous Markov process (see e.g. [15, Theorem 3.28, p.105-106]). Recall that π ∈ P ( R n × S ) is called an invariant measure of ( X x,i t , Λ i t ) if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds for any Borel set Γ ∈ B ( R n ) and i ∈ S . For any p &gt; 0, let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Q is the Q -matrix of { Λ t } t ≥ 0 , and spec( Q p ) denotes the spectrum of Q p .

The lemma below plays a crucial role for existence of an invariant measure of ( X x,i t , Λ i t ).

Lemma 2.1. ([3, Proposition 4.2]) Let N &lt; ∞ and assume that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

Then, one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(ii) η p &gt; 0 for p &lt; k , where k ∈ (0 , min i ∈ S ,β i &gt; 0 {-2 q ii /β i } ) with max i ∈ S β i &gt; 0 .

Remark 2.2 . The RSDP (1.1) and (1.2) is said to be attractive 'in average' if (2.6) holds (see e.g. Bardet et al. [3]).

Our first main result in this paper is stated as below.

Theorem 2.2. Let N &lt; ∞ and assume that (2.1), ( H ) and (2.6) hold. Then ( X x,i t , Λ i t ) admits a unique invariant measure π ∈ P ( R n × S ).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let Q p,t := e tQ p , where Q p is defined in (2.5). Then the spectral radius Ria( Q p,t ) of Q p,t equals to e -η p . Since all coefficients of Q p,t are positive, the Perron-Frobenius theorem (see e.g. [8, p.6]) yields that -η p is a simple eigenvalue of Q p . Note that the eigenvalue of Q p,t corresponding to e -η p is also an eigenvalue of Q p corresponding to -η p . The PerronFrobenius theorem (see e.g. [8, p.6]) ensures that, for Q p , there exists an eigenvector ξ ( p ) = ( ξ ( p ) 1 , · · · , ξ ( p ) N ) ≫ 0 corresponding to -η p . Now, by Lemma 2.1 above, there exists some p 0 &gt; 0 such that η p &gt; 0 for any 0 &lt; p &lt; p 0 . Hereinafter, fix a p with 0 &lt; p &lt; 1 ∧ p 0 and the corresponding eigenvector ξ ( p ) ≫ 0 . Then we obtain that

By the Itˆ o formula and p ∈ (0 , 1 ∧ p 0 ), we obtain from ( H ) and (2.7) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observe that ( X x,i t , Λ i t ) is Feller continuous (see e.g. [31, Theorem 2.18, p.48]) and B R (0) is a compact subset of R n . For arbitrary t &gt; 0, define a probability measure

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, for any ε &gt; 0, by (2.8) and Chebyshev's inequality, there exists R &gt; 0 sufficiently large such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence { µ t } t ≥ 0 is tight and there exists an invariant measure of ( X x,i t , Λ i t ) (see e.g. [6, Theorem 4.14, p.128]).

Next, we show uniqueness of invariant measure. Again, by the Itˆ o formula, it follows from (2.7) and ( H ) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which gives

Set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since S is a finite set, and Q is irreducible, there exists θ &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observe that (2.8) holds with different η p and ξ ( p ) for any 0 &lt; p &lt; 1 ∧ p 0 . For 0 &lt; p &lt; 1 ∧ p 0 above, choose q &gt; 1 such that 0 &lt; pq &lt; 1 ∧ p 0 . By H¨ older's inequality, we derive from (2.8)-(2.10) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ρ := ( q -1) θ 2 q ∧ η p 2 . Note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Assume that π, ν ∈ P ( R n × S ) are invariant measures of ( X x,i t , Λ i t ). By the KantorovichRubinstein duality formula (see e.g. [25, Theorem 5.10]), it follows from (2.11) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

Hence, uniqueness of invariant measure follows.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Next, we provide an example to demonstrate that our theory is more general than that of the existing literature.

Example 2.3. Let { Λ t } t ≥ 0 be a right-continuous Markov chain taking values in S := { 0 , 1 } with the generator

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with some γ &gt; 0 . Consider a scalar Ornstein-Uhlenback (O-U) process with regime switching

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α · , σ · : S ↦→ R such that α 0 = 1, and α 1 = -1 / 2.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By an M-Matrix approach, ( X x,i t , Λ i t ), determined by (2.13) and (2.14), has a unique invariant measure for γ ∈ (0 , 1) (see e.g. [28, Example 5.1]). It is easy to see that the stationary distribution of { Λ t } t ≥ 0 is

For the O-U process (2.14), β 0 = 2, β 1 = -1 in ( H ) and (2.6) holds with γ ∈ (0 , 2). So, by Theorem 2.2, ( X x,i t , Λ i t ), determined by (2.13) and (2.14), admits a unique invariant measure π ∈ P ( R × S ) for γ ∈ (0 , 2). This means that our result cannot be covered by the existing results.

Remark 2.3 . In (1.1), let b, σ : R × S ↦→ R , with b (0 , i ) = σ (0 , i ) ≡ 0 for i ∈ S , satisfy the global Lipschitz condition, and { W t } t ≥ 0 be a scalar Brownian motion. For each i ∈ S , assume that there exists β i ∈ R such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

By [13, Lemma 3.2, p.120], for X x,i 0 = x = 0, P ( X x,i t = 0 on t ≥ 0) = 1 , i.e., almost all the sample path of any solution starting from a non-zero state will never reach the origin. In the sequel, without loss of generality, we assume X x,i 0 = x &gt; 0. Following the first part of argument for Theorem 2.2, and applying Itˆ o's formula to E (( X x,i t ) p ξ ( p ) Λ i t ), we can deduce that ( X x,i t , Λ i t ) admits an invariant measure π ∈ P ( R × S ) whenever ∑ N i =1 µ i β i &lt; 0. Next, for any x &gt; y , by the comparison theorem (see e.g. [11, Theorem 1.1, p.352]), we have X x,i t &gt; X y,i t a.s. Then, by imitating the second part of argument for Theorem 2.2 and utilizing Itˆ o's formula to E (( X x,i t -X y,i t ) p ξ ( p ) Λ i t ) , uniqueness of invariant measure for ( X x,i t , Λ i t ) follows provided that ∑ N i =1 µ i β i &lt; 0. Therefore, for a scalar RSDP, existence and uniqueness of invariant measure can be determined only by the drift coefficient in some cases.

## 3 Numerical Invariant Measure

In the last section, under the 'averaging condition' (2.6), we discuss existence and uniqueness of invariant measure for the semigroup generated by the pair ( X x,i t , Λ i t ), determined by (1.1) and (1.2). In this section, assuming N &lt; ∞ we turn to study existence and uniqueness of invariant measure for the semigroup generated by the EM scheme constructed as below. For a given stepsize δ ∈ (0 , 1), we define the discrete-time EM scheme associated with (1.1) as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where △ W k := W ( k +1) δ -W kδ stands for the Brownian motion increment. For convenience, we also need the following continuous-time EM scheme

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where, for a ≥ 0 , ⌊ a ⌋ denotes the integer part of a. Note that Y x,i kδ = Y x,i kδ , k ≥ 0 . That is, the discrete-time EM scheme (3.1) coincides with the continuous-time EM scheme (3.2) at the gridpoints whenever they enjoy the same starting points. Hence, for some quantitative analysis, it is sufficient to focus on { Y x,i t } t ≥ 0 instead of { Y x,i kδ } k ≥ 0 .

Let P δ kδ ( x, i ; d y ×{ j } ) be the transition probability kernel of ( Y x,i kδ , Λ i kδ ), which is a time homogeneous Markov chain (see e.g. [15, Theorem 6.14, p.250]). If π δ ∈ P ( R n × S ) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then we call π δ ∈ P ( R n × S ) an invariant measure of ( Y x,i kδ , Λ i kδ ). Moreover, the invariant measure π δ ∈ P ( R n × S ) is also said to be a numerical invariant measure of ( X x,i t , Λ i t ).

In this section, we further assume that b : R n × S ↦→ R n and σ : R n × S ↦→ R n ⊗ R m are globally Lipschitzian, i.e., for each i ∈ S and x, y ∈ R n , there exists an L &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This implies the linear growth condition:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where L 0 := max i ∈ S {| b (0 , i ) | + ‖ σ (0 , i ) ‖} .

In the sequel, we shall investigate existence and uniqueness of invariant measure for ( Y x,i kδ , Λ i kδ ), determined by (3.1) and (1.2) with additive noise and multiplicative noise case respectively.

## 3.1 Additive Noise Case

We here consider (1.1) with additive noise in the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where σ : S ↦→ R n ⊗ R m , and the other quantities are defined exactly as in (1.1) and (1.2). Moreover, the EM scheme Y x,i kδ associated with (3.5) is constructed as in (3.1) with σ ( · , · ) ≡ σ ( · ). In what follows, ξ ( p ) ≫ 0 is the eigenvector Q p , defined in (2.5), with the corresponding eigenvalue -η p &lt; 0 for 0 &lt; p &lt; 1 ∧ p 0 , i.e., (2.7) holds. Let

Set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our main result in this subsection is as follows.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 3.1. Let N &lt; ∞ , and assume further that ( H ), (2.6), and (3.3) hold. Then, for

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

( Y x,i kδ , Λ i kδ ) admits a unique invariant measure π δ ∈ P ( R n × S ) .

Proof. We divide the whole proof into two parts.

( i ) Existence of an Invariant Measure. For each integer q ≥ 1, define the measure

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To show existence of an invariant measure, it suffices to show that, for any ( x, i ) ∈ R n × S ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Indeed, if so, the Chebyshev inequality yields that the measure sequence { µ q ( · ) } q ≥ 1 is tight. Then, one can extract a subsequence which converges weakly to an invariant measure (see e.g. Meyn and Tweedie [17]).

In what follows, we prove that (3.9) holds. Let W t,δ := | W t -W ⌊ t/δ ⌋ δ | 2 . By (3.4) and (3.8), one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and By applying Itˆ o's formula, for any ρ &gt; 0 and p ∈ (0 , 1 ∧ p 0 ), it follows from (2.2) and (2.7) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the fundamental inequality: a ν b 1 -ν ≤ νa +(1 -ν ) b with a, b &gt; 0 and ν ∈ (0 , 1) , (3.4), (3.10) and (3.11) yield that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any t ≤ δ , due to q ii &lt; 0 one has

This further gives that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

where we have used that { W t } t ≥ 0 is independent of { Λ t } t ≥ 0 . Furthermore, in light of (3.10), (3.11) and (3.13), it follows that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α &gt; 0 is defined in (3.7). Taking ρ = η p -αδ p/ 2 &gt; 0 due to (3.8) leads to (3.9). ( ii )Uniqueness of Invariant Measure. By checking the second part of argument for Theorem 3.3, we need only to show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For δ ∈ (0 , 1) such that (3.8) holds, note that

and

For arbitrary ε &gt; 0, ρ &gt; 0, and p ∈ (0 , 1 ∧ p 0 ), by the Itˆ o formula and ( H ), it follows from (2.7) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observe from (3.3), (3.16) and (3.17) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As (3.14) was done, by virtue of (3.3), (3.16), and (3.17), we deduce that

As a consequence, we arrive at

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α &gt; 0 is defined as in (3.7). Then (3.15) follows by choosing ρ = η p -αδ p/ 2 &gt; 0 own to (3.8) and taking ε ↓ 0.

Remark 3.1 . Let us reexamine the Example 2.3. Note that ( H ), (2.6), and (3.3) hold with β 1 = 1, β 2 = -1 2 , γ ∈ (0 , 2), and L = 1 respectively. So, ( Y x,i kδ , Λ i kδ ), associated with (2.14) and (2.13), admits a unique invariant measure π δ ∈ P ( R × S ) whenever the stepsize δ &lt; (1 / 16) ∧ ( η p /α ) 2 /p for α = p { 29 + 4 (2+ p ) / 2 (4 p/ 2 +4 ξ 0 ξ 0 ) } .

̂ The following theorem reveals that numerical invariant measure π δ converges in the Wasserstein distance to the underlying one.

Theorem 3.2. Under the assumptions of Theorem 3.1, there exists c &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p 0 &gt; 0 is introduced in the argument of Theorem 3.3.

Proof. For any p &lt; 1 ∧ p 0 , note that

and

Then, by a close inspection of arguments for Theorem 2.2 and 3.3, for δ ∈ (0 , 1)such that (3.8), there exist k &gt; 0 sufficiently large and c 1 &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, for fixed k &gt; 0 above, it follows from [30, Theorem 3.1] that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some c 2 &gt; 0 . Then the desired assertion follows from the triangle inequality.

## 3.2 Multiplicative Noise Case

In the previous subsection, we discuss existence and uniqueness of numerical invariant measures for the RSDP (1.1) and (1.2) with additive noise. While, in this subsection, we turn to study the case of multiplicative noise. We further assume that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under this condition, by Lemma 2.1 (ii) we can take p = 2 in (2.5). Set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Q is the Q -matrix of { Λ t } t ≥ 0 , and spec( Q 2 ) denotes the spectrum of Q 2 . Following an argument of (2.7), we can deduce from (2.6) and (3.18) that there exists an eigenvector ξ (2) ≫ 0 of Q 2 with eigenvalue -η 2 &lt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Set

where q 0 , β 0 &gt; 0 are defined as in (3.6).

Our main result in this subsection is presented as follows.

Theorem 3.3. H

Let N &lt; ∞ , and assume further that ( ), (2.6), (3.3), and (3.18) hold. For

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where β &gt; 0 is given in (3.20), ( Y x,i kδ , Λ i kδ ) admits a unique measure π δ ∈ P ( R n × S ) .

Proof. The ideas of argument for Theorem 3.3 is analogous to that of Theorem 3.1. However, we herein give an outline of the argument to point out some corresponding differences.

( i ) Existence of an Invariant Measure. To end this, it is sufficient to show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (3.2) and (3.4), one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This further leads to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, due to (3.21),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Itˆ o's formula, for any ρ &gt; 0, it follows from (2.2) and (3.19) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (3.4) and (3.23), we derive that

Next, by (3.13) with p = 2 and (3.23), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, we arrive at

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking ρ = η 2 -α δ &gt; 0 thanks to (3.21) yields the desired assertion (3.22). ( ii ) Uniqueness of Invariant Measure. We need only to show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For δ ∈ (0 , 1) such that (3.21), we deduce from (3.2) and (3.3) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

√

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any ρ &gt; 0, by Itˆ o's formula and (2.3), it follows from (3.19) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice from (3.3), (3.27) and (3.28) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in which β &gt; 0 is defined in (3.20). Consequently, we have

E (e ρt | Y x,i t -Y y,i t | 2 ξ (2) Λ i t ) ≤ | x -y | 2 ξ (2) i -( η 2 -ρ -β √ δ ) ∫ t 0 e ρs E ( | Y x,i s -Y y,i s | 2 ξ (2) Λ i s )d s, Choosing ρ = ( η 2 -β √ δ ) &gt; 0 due to (3.21) leads to (3.26).

Now we construct an example to show an application of Theorem 3.3.

Example 3.4. Let { Λ t } t ≥ 0 be a right-continuous Markov chain taking values in S := { 1 , 2 , 3 } with the generator

for some ν ≥ 0 . Consider a scalar linear SDE with regime switching

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α · , σ · : S ↦→ R such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observe that (3.3) holds with L = 4, and ( H ) holds for β 1 = 10 9 , β 2 = 0, and β 3 = -5. Since the Markov chain possesses the stationary distribution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the solution of the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with X (1) 0 = 0 will explode to ∞ with probability one. However it is easy to see that (2.6) and (3.18) are satisfied respectively for any ν ≥ 0. Then, ( Y x,i kδ , Λ i kδ ) has a unique invariant measure for sufficiently small δ ∈ (0 , 1) .

̸

We can also obtain the following convergence rate of numerical invariant measure.

Theorem 3.5. Under the assumptions of Theorem 3.3, for δ ∈ (0 , 1) such that (3.21), there exists c &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We omit the proof of Theorem 3.5 since it is similar to that of Theorem 3.2.

## 4 Numerical Invariant Measure: Reversible Case

In the last section, we investigate existence and uniqueness of numerical invariant measures for RSDPs with additive noises and multiplicative noises respectively, where the Markov chain { Λ t } t ≥ 0 need not to be reversible, i.e., π i q ij = π j q ji , i, j ∈ S , for some probability measure π := ( π 1 , · · · , π N ). While, throughout this section, we shall always assume that the Markov chain { Λ t } t ≥ 0 , with the state space S := { 1 , · · · , N } , N &lt; ∞ , is reversible with the probability measure π above. For such case, under a new condition we study existence and uniqueness of numerical invariant measure for multiplicative noise case.

To begin with, we need to introduce some notation. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then ( L 2 ( π ) , 〈· , ·〉 0 , ‖·‖ 0 ) is a Hilbert space with the inner product 〈 f, g 〉 0 := ∑ N i =1 π i f i g i , f, g ∈ L 2 ( π ). Define the bilinear form ( D ( f ) , D ( D )) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where β i ∈ R , i ∈ S , is given in ( H ), and the domain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The principal eigenvalue λ 0 of D ( f ) is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For more details on the first eigenvalue, refer to [7, Chapter 3]. Due to the fact that the state space of { Λ t } t ≥ 0 is finite, there exists ξ = ( ξ 1 , · · · , ξ N ) ∈ D ( D ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For ξ ∈ D ( D ) such that (4.1) holds, set

Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where q 0 , β 0 are given in (3.6), and L &gt; 0 defined in (3.3).

The main result in this section is the following.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 4.1. Let N &lt; ∞ , (3.3) and ( H ) hold, and assume further λ 0 &gt; 0. Then, ( Y x,i kδ , Λ i kδ ) admits a unique invariant measure π δ ∈ P ( R n × S ) for any

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Recalling (4.1) and checking the argument of [21, Theorem 3.2], one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The remainder of the proof is similar to that of Theorem 3.3, here we omit it.

Next, an example is constructed to demonstrate Theorem 4.1.

Example 4.2. Let { Λ t } t ≥ 0 be a right-continuous Markov chain taking values in S := { 0 , 1 , 2 } with the generator

for some a, b &gt; 0. Consider a scalar SDE with regime switching

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α · , σ · : S ↦→ R such that

We further assume that

Note that (3.3) holds with L = max i ∈ S {| α i | + | σ i |} and ( H ) holds with

Set

By the notion of Ω, for ξ i = i +1, i = 0 , 1 , 2 , we deduce that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 4.1 . The principal-eigenvalue approach has been applied successfully to investigate ergodic property, stability and recurrence for regime-switching diffusion processes. For more details, please refer to Shao [22] and Shao-Xi [23]. As we discuss previously, for the reversible case, such trick can also be utilized to discuss existence and uniqueness of numerical invariant measure for RSDPs with multiplicative noises.

Taking

thanks to (4.4), one finds that

Then λ 0 &gt; 0 due to [21, Theorem 4.4]. As a result, ( Y x,i kδ , Λ i kδ ) has a unique invariant measure π δ ∈ P ( R n × S ) whenever the stepsize is sufficiently small.

̸

Remark 4.2 . Theorem 4.1 can also be extended into the case of RSDPs with countable state spaces (i.e. N = ∞ ) provided that λ 0 is attainable, i.e., there exists f ∈ L 2 ( π ) , f = 0, such that D ( f ) = λ 0 ‖ f ‖ 2 0 . For more details, please refer to [21, Theorem 3.2].

## 5 Numerical Invariant Measure: Countable State Space

The approach based on the Perron-Frobenius theorem (see Theorem 3.1 and 3.3) is not suitable to the case that S is a countable state space, i.e., N = ∞ , while the approach based on the principal eigenvalue (see Theorem 4.1) can be applied to this case under some additional conditions as being pointed out in Remark 4.2. Now in this section, we shall introduce another method to deal with the case N = ∞ , based on a finite partition approach and an M -matrix theory.

Definition 5.1. (see e.g. [15, Definition 2.9, p.67]) A square matrix A = ( a ij ) n × n is called a nonsingular M -matrix if A can be expressed in the form A = sI -B with B ≫ 0 and s &gt; Ria( B ), where I is the n × n identity matrix and Ria( B ) the spectral radius of B.

We further suppose that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where β i ∈ R is given in ( H ). Let us insert m points in the interval ( -∞ , K ] as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, the interval ( -∞ , K ] is divided into m +1 sub-intervals ( k i -1 , k i ] indexed by i . Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Without loss of generality, we can and do assume that each F i is not empty. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a finite partition of S . For i, j = 1 , · · · , m +1, set

̸

So Q F := ( q F ij ) is the Q -matrix for some Markov chain with the state space S 0 := { 1 , · · · , m + 1 } . For i = 1 , · · · , m +1, let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 5.1. Let N = ∞ , (3.3), ( H ) and (5.1) hold. Assume further that { Λ t } t ≥ 0 is exponential ergodic and that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a nonsingular M -matrix. Then ( Y x,i kδ , Λ i kδ ) admits a unique measure π δ ∈ P ( R n × S ) whenever the stepsize δ ∈ (0 , 1) is sufficiently small.

Proof. Some ideas of the argument go back to [22, Theorem 4.1]. Moreover, we only sketch the argument of Theorem 5.1 since it is analogous to that of Theorem 3.3.

Since -( Q F + diag( β F 1 , · · · , β F m +1 )) H m +1 is a nonsingular M -matrix, by [15, Theorem 2.10, p.68] there exists a vector η F := ( η F 1 , · · · , η F m +1 ) ∗ ≫ 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Set ξ F := H m +1 η F . By the structure of H m +1 , it is trivial to see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This, together with η F ≫ 0 , yields that ξ F ≫ 0 and ξ F i +1 &lt; ξ F i , i = 1 , · · · , m + 1. Next, we extend the vector ξ F to be a vector on S by setting ξ r := ξ F i for r ∈ F i . Moreover, let φ : S ↦→{ 1 , · · · , m +1 } be a map defined by φ ( j ) := i for j ∈ F i . Then, by the definition of β F i , one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any r ∈ S , there exists F i such that r ∈ F i . Recalling the definition of q F ij and utilizing ξ F i +1 &lt; ξ F i , i = 1 , · · · , m +1, we derive from (5.3) that, for r ∈ F i ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any ρ &gt; 0, observe from (5.2)-(5.4) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where λ 0 := min i ∈ S 0 λ F i &gt; 0 due to (5.2), ξ 0 := max i ∈ S 0 ξ F i , and Λ i is defined as in (3.25). Then, following the argument of Theorem 3.3, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, ergodicity of { Λ t } t ≥ 0 yields existence of numerical invariant measure whenever the stepsize δ &gt; 0 is sufficiently small. The proof of the uniqueness is similar to that of Theorem 5.1, since Markov chain { Λ t } t ≥ 0 is exponential ergodic, (2.10) holds.

Remark 5.1 . ( Y x,i kδ , Λ i kδ ) associated with [22, Example 4.1] admits a numerical invariant measure whenever the stepsize δ &gt; 0 is sufficiently small.

## References

- [1] Bakhtin, Y., Hurth, T., Invariant densities for dynamical systems with random switching, Nonlinearity , 25 (2012), 2937-2952.
- [2] Bakhtin, Y., Hurth, T., Mattingly, J. C., Regularity of invariant densities for 1D-systems with random switching, arXiv:1406.5425.
- [3] Bardet, J. B., Gu´ erin, H., Malrieu, F., Long time behavior of diffusion with Markov switching, iALEA Lat. Am. J. Probab. Math. Stat., 7 (2010), 151-170.
- [4] Benaim, M., Le Borgne, S., Malrieu, F., Zitt, P.-A., Qualitative properties of certain piecewise deterministic Markov processes, arXiv:1204.4143v4.
- [5] Br´ ehier, C.-E., Approximation of the invariant measure with a Euler scheme for stochastic PDEs driven by space-time white noise, Potential Anal. , 40 (2014), 1-40.
- [6] Chen, M.-F., From Markov Chains to Non-equillibrium Particle Systems , World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., Singapore, 2004.
- [7] Chen, M.-F., Eigenvalues, inequalities, and Ergodicity Theory , Springer, London, 2005.
- [8] Chen, M.-F., Mao, Y.-H., An Introduction of Stochastic Processes , Higher Education Press, 2007.

- [9] Cloez, B., Hairer, M, Exponential ergodicity for Markov processes with random switching, arXiv: 1303.6999, 2013.
- [10] Higham, Desmond J., Mao, X., Yuan, C., Preserving exponential mean-square stability in the simulation of hybrid stochastic differential equations, Numer. Math. , 108 (2007), 295-325.
- [11] Ikeda, N., Watanable, S., Stochastic Differential Equations and Diffusion Processes , NorthHolland, New York, 1989.
- [12] Kloeden, P. E., Platen, E., Numerical Solution of Stochastic Differential Equations , SpringerVerlag, New York, 1992.
- [13] Mao, X., Stochastic Differential Equations and Applications , Horwood Publishing, 2 nd Edition, 2008.
- [14] Mao, X., Yuan, C., Yin, G., Numerical method for stationary distribution of stochastic differential equations with Markovian switching, J. Comput. Appl. Math. , 174 (2005), 1-27.
- [15] Mao, X., Yuan, C., Stochastic Differential Equations with Markovian Switching , Imperial College Press, 2006.
- [16] Mattingly, J. C., Stuart, A. M., Tretyakov, M. V., Convergence of numerical time-averaging and stationary measures via Poisson equations, SIAM J. Numer. Anal. , 48 (2010), 552-577.
- [17] Meyn, S., Tweedie, R. L., Stochastic Stability of Markov Chains , Springer, New York, 1992.
- [18] Pinsky, M., Pinsky, R., Transience recurrence and central limit theorem behavior for diffusions in random temporal enrivoments, Ann. Probab. , 21 (1993), 433-452.
- [19] Pinsky, M., Scheutzow, M., Some remarks and examples concerning the transience and recurrence of random diffusions, Ann. Inst. Henri. Poincar´ e , 28 (1992), 519-536.
- [20] Shao, J., Criteria for transience and recurrence of regime-switching diffusions processes, arXiv:1403.3135.
- [21] Shao, J., Xi, F., Strong ergodicity of the regime-switching diffusion processes, Stoch. Proc. Appl. , 123 (2013), 3903-3918.
- [22] Shao, J., Ergodicity of regime-switching diffusions in Wasserstein distances, arXiv:1403.0291v1.
- [23] Shao, J., Xi, F., Stability and recurrence of regime-switching diffusion processes, Preprint.
- [24] Talay, D., Second order discretization schemes of stochastic differential systems for the computation of the invariant law, Stochastics Stochastics Rep. , 29 (1990), 13-36.
- [25] Villani, C., Optimal transport, old and new, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2009.
- [26] Xi, F., Feller property and exponential ergodicity of diffusion processes with state-dependent switching, Sci. China Ser. A-Math. , 51 (2008), 329-342.
- [27] Xi, F., Yin, G., Stability of Regime-Switching Jump Diffusions, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 48 (2010), 525-4549.
- [28] Yuan, C., Mao, X., Asymptotic stability in distribution of stochastic differential equations with Markovian switching, Stoch. Proc. Appl. , 103 (2003), 277-291.
- [29] Yuan, C., Mao, X., Stationary distributions of Euler-Maruyama-type stochastic difference equations with Markovian switching and their convergence, J. Difference Equ. Appl. , 11 (2005), 29-48.
- [30] Yuan, C., Mao, X., Convergence of the Euler-Maruyama method for stochastic differential equations with Markovian switching, Math. Comput. Simul. , 64 (2004), 223-235.
- [31] Yin, G., Zhu, C., Hybrid Switching Diffusions: Properties and Applications , Springer, 2010.