## Dirichlet Process Hidden Markov Multiple Change-point Model

Stanley I. M. Ko ∗ , Terence T. L. Chong † , and Pulak Ghosh ‡

Abstract. This paper proposes a new Bayesian multiple change-point model which is based on the hidden Markov approach. The Dirichlet process hidden Markov model does not require the specification of the number of change-points a priori . Hence our model is robust to model specification in contrast to the fully parametric Bayesian model. We propose a general Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm which only needs to sample the states around change-points. Simulations for a normal mean-shift model with known and unknown variance demonstrate advantages of our approach. Two applications, namely the coal-mining disaster data and the real United States Gross Domestic Product growth, are provided. We detect a single change-point for both the disaster data and US GDP growth. All the change-point locations and posterior inferences of the two applications are in line with existing methods.

Keywords: Change-point, Dirichlet process, Hidden Markov model, Markov chain Monte Carlo, Nonparametric Bayesian.

## 1 Introduction

The earliest Bayesian change-point model is explored by Chernoff and Zacks (1964), who assume a constant probability of change at each point in time. Smith (1975) investigates the single change-point model under different assumptions of model parameters. Carlin et al. (1992) assume that the structural parameters are independent of the change-points and introduce the Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling method to derive the posterior distributions. Stephens (1994) further applies the Markov chain Monte Carlo method to the case of multiple changes. Chib (1998) allows the change-point probability to depend on the regime between two adjacent change-points. Koop and Potter (2007) propose the Poisson hierarchical prior for durations in the change-point model that allows the number of change-points to be unknown. More recent works on the Bayesian changepoint model include Wang and Zivot (2000), Giordani and Kohn (2008), Pesaran et al. (2006), Maheu and Gordon (2008) and Geweke and Yu (2011).

In this paper we follow the modeling strategy of Chib (1998) which is one of the most popular Bayesian change-point models. He introduces a discrete random variable indicating the regime from which a particular observation is drawn. Specifically, let

∗ Department of Finance and Business Economics, University of Macau, Macau, StanleyKo@umac.mo

† Department of Economics and Institute of Global Economics and Finance, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, and Department of International Economics and Trade, Nanjing University, China, chong2064@cuhk.edu.hk

‡ Department of Quantitative Methods &amp; Information Systems, Indian Institute of Management at Bangalore, India, pulak.ghosh@iimb.ernet.in

Y n = ( y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y n ) ′ be the observed time series, such that the density of y t conditioned on Y t -1 = ( y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y t -1 ) ′ depends on the parameter θ whose value changes at an unknown time period 1 &lt; τ 1 &lt; · · · &lt; τ k &lt; n and remains constant within each regime, that is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 where θ i ∈ R l is an l dimension vector, i = 1 , 2 , . . . , k + 1. Note that we consider in this paper the change-point problem when the data are assumed to be generated by a parametric model where the unknown parameter θ i changes with respect to different regimes. Let s t be the discrete indicator variable such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where s t takes values in { 1 , 2 , . . . , k, k + 1 } . The indicator variable s t is modeled as a discrete time, discrete-state Markov process with the constrained transition probability matrix

where p ij = pr( s t = j | s t -1 = i ) is the probability of moving to regime j at time t given that the regime at time t -1 is i . With this parameterization, the i th change-point occurs at τ i if s τ i = i and s τ i +1 = i +1.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As pointed out in Chib (1998), the above is a hidden Markov model where the transition matrix of the hidden state s t is restricted as in (3). Hence, Chib's multiple change-point model inherits the limitation of the hidden Markov model in that the number of states has to be specified in advance. In light of this, Chib (1998) suggests to select from alternative models (e.g. one change-point vs. multiple change-points) according to the Bayes factors. In this paper, we introduce the Dirichlet process hidden Markov model (DPHMM) with left-to-right transition dynamic, without imposing restrictions on the number of hidden states. The use of the DPHMM has the following appealing features:

1. We do not have to specify the number of states a priori . The information provided by the observations determines the states endogenously. Hence, our method can be regarded as semiparametric.
2. Our modeling approach facilitates the sampling of states since we only need to sample the states around change-points.

We note that Kozumi and Hasegawa (2000) propose a method similar to ours in that they utilize a Dirichlet process prior for θ , but in a mixture model.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief introduction of the Dirichlet process. Section 3 incorporates the Dirichlet process into the changepoint model. The general Markov chain Monte Carlo sampler is discussed in Section 4. AMonte Carlo study of the normal mean-shift model is conducted in Section 5. Section 6 discusses learning of DPHMM parameters. Section 7 provides applications of our model and Section 8 concludes the paper.

## 2 The Dirichlet Process

Our new method employs the Dirichlet process technique which is widely used in nonparametric Bayesian models. The Dirichlet process prior is first proposed by Ferguson (1973). He derives the Dirichlet process prior as the prior on the unknown probability measure space with respect to some measurable space (Ω , F ). Hence the Dirichlet process is a distribution over probability measures. Blackwell and MacQueen (1973) show that the Dirichlet process can be represented by the Polya urn model. Sethuraman (1994) develops the constructive sticking-breaking definition.

In the present study, we assume a Dirichlet process prior to each row of the transition matrix. The Dirichlet process is best defined here as the infinite limit of finite mixture models (Neal (1992), Neal (2000) and Beal et al. (2002)). To illustrate the idea, let us first consider the case with a finite number of states. With the left-to-right restriction to the transition dynamic, a particular state s t -1 = i will either stay at the current state i or transit to a state j &gt; i . A left-to-right Markov chain with k states will typically have the following upper triangular transition matrix

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the summation of each row equals 1. Note that the left-to-right Markov chain here is different from Chib's restricted band transition matrix (3). Here, the number of states k is not necessarily the number of regimes as is the case in Chib's model.

Let p i = (0 , . . . , p ii , p i ( i +1) , . . . , p ik ) be the transition probabilities of the i th row of the transition matrix (4). Suppose we draw m samples { c 1 , . . . , c m } of s t +1 given s t = i with probability profile p i . The joint distribution of the sample is thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where m j denotes the number of samples that take state j , j = i, . . . , k . We assume a symmetric Dirichlet prior π ( p i | β ) for p i with positive concentration parameter β :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With the Dirichlet prior, we can analytically integrate out p i such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The conditional probability of a sample c d ∈ { c 1 , . . . , c m } given all other samples is thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where c -d denotes the sample set with c d deleted, and m -d,j is the number of samples in c -d that take state j .

Taking the limit of equation (8) as k tends to infinity, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the probability that c d takes an existing state, say j , is proportional to m -d,j , which implies that c d is more likely to choose an already popular state. In addition, the probability that a new state (i.e. k +1) takes place is proportional to β . Hence, there are potentially many states available, with infinite dimension transition matrix

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The actual state space can be regarded as consisting of an infinite number of states, only a finite number of which are actually associated with the data. Therefore, the number of states is endogenously determined.

## 3 The Dirichlet Process Hidden Markov Multiple Change-point Model and the State Evolution

Let us now turn to the proposed multiple change-point model and discuss a particular state evolution. Suppose we have already generated the hidden states up to s t = i . We impose the Dirichlet process as described in Section 2 to s t +1 . In the change-point model, the transitions that have existed so far from state i are only self transitions. With the left-to-right restriction, we will neither see a backward transition, i.e., transition from state i to some previous states, nor a forward transition, i.e., transition to some future states. The counts of the existing transitions from state i will be used as the counts defined in equation (9). Hence, we will have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where n ii = ∑ t -1 t ′ =1 δ ( s t ′ , i ) δ ( s t ′ +1 , i ) denotes the counts of transitions that have occurred so far from state i to itself. 1 Note that in equation (11), s t +1 depends only on the state that s t takes according to the Markovian property. All other previous states merely provide the transition counts.

We introduce a self-transition prior mass α for each state. The idea here is that if s t transits to a new state, say s t +1 = i + 1, then without previous transition records, the next state s t +2 conditioned on s t +1 = i +1 will further take another new state with probability 1. Hence, with α , the trivial case is avoided and we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, the whole Markov chain is characterized by two parameters, α and β , instead of a transition probability matrix. We can see that α controls the prior tendency to linger in a state, and β controls the tendency to explore new states. Figure 1 illustrates three left-to-right Markov chains of length n = 150 with different α and β . Figure 1a depicts the chain that explores many new states with very short linger time. Figure 1b shows the chain with long linger time and less states. Figure 1c lies in between.

Equation (12) coincides with Chib (1998)'s model when the probability p ii is integrated out. Specifically, in Chib (1998),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p ii ∼ Beta( a, b ) and f ( p ii ) is the corresponding density. However, our model stems from a different perspective. The derivations in the previous section and equation (12) follow the nonparametric Bayesian literature (Neal (2000)) and the infinite HMM of Beal et al. (2002). Indeed, it is known that when the Dirichlet process is truncated at a finite number of states, the process reduces to the generalized Dirichlet distribution (GDD), see Connor and Mosimann (1969) and Wong (1998). For the same reason we have (12) coincides with (13). We would like to point out that our modeling strategy facilitates the Gibbs sampler of s t which is different from Chib (1998). We will elaborate further on the Gibbs sampler in the next section. Also, learning of α and β will be discussed in Section 6.

1 The Kronecker-delta function δ ( a, b ) = 1 if and only if a = b and 0 otherwise.

Figure 1: Left-to-right Markov chain with different α and β .

<!-- image -->

## 4 Markov Chain Monte Carlo Algorithm

## 4.1 General

Suppose we have observations Y n = ( y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y n ) ′ . Given the state S n = ( s 1 , . . . , s n ) ′ we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where θ s t ∈ R l , Y t -1 = ( y 1 , . . . , y t -1 ) ′ . Let θ = ( θ 1 , . . . , θ k ) ′ and γ denotes a hyperparameter. Recall that we impose the DPHMM to the states and a hierarchical model to the parameter, we are thus interested in sampling from the posterior p ( θ, S n , γ | Y n ) given the priors p ( θ | γ ), p ( γ ) and p ( S n ). The general Gibbs sampler procedure is to sample the following in turn:

Step 1. S n | θ, γ, Y n ,

Step 2. θ | γ, S n , Y n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We will discuss the three steps below.

## 4.2 Simulation of Sn

The state prior p ( S n ) can be easily derived from (12). Moreover, the full conditional is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Simulation of S n from the full conditional (15) is done by the Gibbs sampler. Specifically, we draw s t in turn for t = 1 , 2 , . . . , n from

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S t -1 = ( s 1 , . . . , s t -1 ) ′ and S t +1 = ( s t +1 , . . . , s n ) ′ . The most recent updated values of the conditioning variables are used in each iteration. Note that we write p ( s t | s t -1 , S t -2 ) and p ( s t +1 | s t , S t +2 ) to emphasize the Markov dynamic; the other conditioning states merely provide the counts.

With the left-to-right characteristic of the chain, we do not have to sample all s t from t = 1 to T . Instead, we only need to sample the state in which a change-point takes place. To see this, let us consider a concrete example. Suppose from the last sampler, we have

| s  1  s  2  s  3  s  4  s  5  s  6  s  7  s  8  s  9  s  10  s  11  · · ·  1  1  1  2  2  3  3  3  4  5  5  · · ·   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

̸

With left-to-right transition restriction, s t requires a sampling from (16) if and only if s t -1 and s t +1 differ. For other cases, s t is unchanged with probability one. Suppose we are at t = 2. Since s 1 and s 3 are both equal to 1, s 2 is forced to take 1. In the above chain, the first state that needs to sample from (16) is s 3 , which will either take the values 1 or 2 ( s 2 or s 4 ). If s 3 takes 2 in the sampling (i.e., joining the following regime), then the next state to sample would be s 5 ; otherwise (i.e., joining the preceding regime), the next state to sample is s 4 because s 5 -s 3 = 0 for s 3 = 1. Now suppose we are at t = 9. We will draw a new s 9 and s 9 will either join the regime of s 8 or the regime of s 10 . This will look strange because a gap exists in the chain. However, our concern here is the consecutive grouping or clustering in the series. We can alternatively think that the state represented by s 9 is simply pruned away in the current sweep. Note the numbers assigned to the s t 's are nothing but indicators of regimes. 2 Therefore, we will relabel the s t 's after each sweep.

In general, suppose s t -1 = i and s t +1 = i +1. s t takes either i or i +1. Table 1 shows the corresponding probability values specified in (16). To see this, if s t takes i , then the transition from s t -1 to s t is a self-transition and that from s t to s t +1 is an innovation. The corresponding probability values are in the first row of Table 1. The reasoning for s t = i +1 is similar. Note the changes of counts in different situations.

Table 1: Sampling probabilities of s t . n ii = ∑ t -2 t ′ =1 δ ( s t ′ , i ) δ ( s t ′ +1 , i ) and n i +1 ,i +1 = ∑ n -1 t ′ = t +1 δ ( s t ′ , i +1) δ ( s t ′ +1 , i +1).

| p  (  s  t  &#124;  s  t  -  1  =  i, S  t  -  2  )  p  (  s  t  +1  =  i  +1  &#124;  s  t  , S  t  +2  )  p  (  y  t  &#124;  s  t  , Y  t  -  1  , θ  )  s  t  =  i  n  ii  +  α  n  ii  +  β  +  α  β  n  ii  +1+  β  +  α  p  (  y  t  &#124;  Y  t  -  1  , θ  i  )  s  t  =  i  +1  β  n  ii  +  β  +  α  n  i  +1  ,i  +1  +  α  n  i  +1  ,i  +1  +  β  +  α  p  (  y  t  &#124;  Y  t  -  1  , θ  i  +1  )   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

̸

For the initial point s 1 , if currently s 2 -s 1 = 0, then we can sample s 1 from

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

2 This will exclude the case of the regime with only one data point. We do not consider this situation here.

̸

where n s 2 s 2 = ∑ n -1 t ′ =2 δ ( s t ′ , s 2 ) δ ( s t ′ +1 , s 2 ) and c is the normalizing constant. For the end point s n , if s n -s n -1 = 1, we sample s n from

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As mentioned in Section 3, the DPHMM facilitates the Gibbs sampler of states. In sampling s t from (16), we simultaneously use up all information of the transitions prior to t (i.e. s 1 , . . . , s t -1 ) and after t (i.e. s t +1 , . . . , s T ) which are captured in p ( s t | s t -1 , S t -2 ) and p ( s t +1 | s t , S t +2 ). Thus far, our algorithm only requires a record of transitions and draws at the point where the structural change takes place, whereas we have to sample all s t in Chib (1998).

where n s n -1 s n -1 = ∑ n -2 t ′ =1 δ ( s t ′ , s n -1 ) δ ( s t ′ +1 , s n -1 ) and c is the normalizing constant.

## 4.3 Updating θ and γ

Given S n and Y n , the full conditionals of θ and γ are simply

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which are model specific. In the following sections, we will study a simulated normal mean-shift model, a discrete type Poisson model, and an ar (2) model.

## 4.4 Initialization of States

In Section 4.2, we have discussed the simulation of the states S n . The number of changepoints is inherently estimated through the sampling of states in equation (16). Within the burn-in period, the state number will be changing around after each MCMC pass. After the burn-in period, the Markov chain converges and hence the number of states becomes stable. Theoretically, it is legitimate to set any number of change-points in the beginning and let the algorithm find out the convergent number of states. In practice, we find it is more efficient to initialize with a large number of states and let the algorithm prune away redundant states, rather than allow for the change-point number to grow from a small number. Specifically, suppose a reasonably large state number k is proposed. We initialize equidistant states, that is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where i = 1 , . . . , k . Then the algorithm described above will work out the change-point locations and the number of states after convergence of the Markov chain.

## 5 A Monte Carlo Study: the Normal Mean-Shift Model

## 5.1 The Model

In this section, we first study the normal mean-shift model with known variance σ 2 . Suppose the normal data Y n = ( y 1 , . . . , y n ) ′ is subject to unknown k changes in mean. We use the following hierarchical model

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where σ 2 is known and τ i ( i = 1 , . . . , k ) is the change-point. We set τ 0 = 0 and τ k +1 = n . Next, we apply our algorithm to the case of unknown variance. In addition to (21), we assume the Inverse-Gamma prior for σ 2

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

All derivations of the full conditionals and the Gibbs samplers are given in the Appendix.

We simulate two normal sequences with the parameters specified in Table 2. Specifically, Model 1 is subject to one change-point occurring at t = 50. Model 2 is a two change-points model with breaks at t = 50 and t = 100. Both models assume variance σ 2 = 3. Two realizations with respect to Model 1 and Model 2 are shown in Figure 2. We can see the overlapping of the data ranges of different regimes and it is hard to visually identify the change-points.

Figure 2: Random realizations of Model 1 and Model 2.

<!-- image -->

Table 2: Normal Mean-Shift Models 1 and 2.

| θ  1  θ  2  θ  3  σ  2  τ  1  τ  2  k  n  Model 1  1  3  -  3  50  -  1  150  (One change-point)  Model 2  1  3  5  3  50  100  2  150  (Two change-points)   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 5.2 Simulation Results

To implement our algorithm, we set the inverse-Gamma hyperparameters a = b = c = d = 1, and the DPHMM parameters α = 3 and β = 2. The two Gibbs samplers for the cases of known and unknown variance are conducted for 5000 sweeps with 5000 burn-in samples, respectively. The 5000 sweeps after the burn-in period are thinned with 50 draws to reduce dependence of iterations. The first column of Figure 3 shows the probabilities of regime indicator s t = i of the two models. Intersections of the lines s t = i clearly demonstrate the break locations.

To compare our proposed DPHMM to Chib's method, we also report the posterior inference of Chib's model under the true change-point number and the same model specification as in (A-3) and (A-4). 3 The posterior means and standard deviations of parameters are summarized in Table 3. First, our method performs well in all cases where the posterior distributions concentrate on the true values. The sample first-order serial correlations demonstrate good mixing of the samplers. Second, our results are comparable to those estimated from Chib's model. The Bayes factors show that in most of the cases the models with the true number of change-points are preferred to others. For example, in Model 2 where two change-points exist, the Bayes factors comparing models with k = 1 versus k = 2 are close to zero favoring the two change-point model. Likewise, the Bayes factors comparing k = 2 versus k = 3 favor the two change-point model. Hence we conclude that the model with two change-points is correctly specified with high probability. However, the Bayes factor fails to detect the correct number of changes in Model 1 with unknown variance. The values suggest a model with two change points. The posterior probabilities of states estimated by Chib's model are shown in the second column of Figure 3. In summary, the simulation results demonstrate that our algorithm works well in the normal mean-shift models and is robust to the change-point number compared to Chib's model.

## 5.3 Robustness Check of Change-Point Number

In this section, we study the robustness of our algorithm in detecting the true number of change-points. Although our method does not require prespecification of the changepoint number, it is still possible that our algorithm fails to estimate the correct number of change-points. Thus, we replicate the entire estimation process as in the previous section for 1000 times and record the estimated change-point number in each replication. Specifically, in each of the 1000 replications, we iterate the Gibbs sampler for 5000 times and the change-point number of the last sample is recorded. Therefore, we obtain 1000 collections of change-point numbers. Table 4 reports the frequencies of the detected change-point numbers. We see that with high frequency (over 99%) our method detects one change-point ( k = 1) in Model 1 in both cases of known and unknown variance. In Model 2, our results show that over 90% of the 1000 replications detect two changepoints ( k = 2), and over 99% detect at least one change-point. The figures demonstrate that our algorithm correctly detects the change-point number with high probability in different cases.

3 The prior of the transition probabilities in Chib (1998)'s model is assumed to be Beta( a, b ). The parameters a and b are chosen to reflect equidistant duration of each state. For example, in the case of one change-point with n = 150 sample size, we take b = 0 . 1 and a = n/ 2 × b = 7 . 5, i.e. Beta(7 . 5 , 0 . 1).

Figure 3: Posterior probability of s t = i : DPHMM vs. Chib's model.

<!-- image -->

Table 3: Posterior estimates of Normal Mean-Shift Models 1 and 2. Mean and SD denote, respectively, posterior mean and posterior standard deviation.

| Model 1  Known variance  Unknown variance  Mean  SD  True value  Mean  SD  True value  DPHMM  θ  1  0.9123  0.2519  1.0000  0.9154  0.2432  1.0000  θ  2  2.9375  0.1812  3.0000  2.9354  0.1723  3.0000  σ  2  2.8244  0.3343  3.0000  Chib's Model with  k  = 1  θ  1  0.8980  0.1889  1.0000  0.9521  0.2441  1.0000  θ  2  2.9520  0.1324  3.0000  2.9331  0.1619  3.0000  σ  2  2.7933  0.4121  3.0000  Bayes Factor Analysis  k  = 1 vs.  k  = 2  1.730  0.548  k  = 1 vs.  k  = 3  1.374  1.010  k  = 2 vs.  k  = 3  0.794  1.850  Model 2  Known variance  Unknown variance  Mean  SD  True value  Mean  SD  True value  DPHMM  θ  1  1.1746  0.2777  1.0000  1.2770  0.2584  1.0000  θ  2  2.9758  0.2874  3.0000  3.2176  0.2672  3.0000  θ  3  5.3344  0.2459  5.0000  5.1108  0.2682  5.0000  σ  2  3.1102  0.3726  3.0000  Chib's Model with  k  = 2  θ  1  1.1770  0.2052  1.0000  1.3680  0.2643  1.0000  θ  2  2.9480  0.1916  3.0000  3.1920  0.2730  3.0000  θ  3  5.3320  0.1823  5.0000  5.0310  0.2461  5.0000  σ  2  3.0780  0.6794  3.0000  Bayes Factor Analysis  k  = 1 vs.  k  = 2  0.000  0.0193  k  = 1 vs.  k  = 3  0.000  0.0583  k  = 2 vs.  k  = 3  3.090  3.0332   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 4: Frequencies of estimated change-point numbers.

| Known variance  Unknown variance  k  = 0  k  = 1  k  = 2  k  = 0  k  = 1  k  = 2  Model 1  0.3%  99.7%  0.0%  0.5%  99.5%  0.0%  (One change-point)  Model 2  0.0%  6.5%  93.5%  0.2%  8.7%  91.1%  (Two change-points)   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 6 Learning α and β

In the previous section, we set the DPHMM parameters α = 3 and β = 2 in estimating the simulated models. In order to learn about α and β , we propose to use vague Gamma priors, see Beal et al. (2002). Note that with the number of states specified in each MCMC sweep, the DPHMM reduces to the generalized Dirichlet distribution (GDD), see Connor and Mosimann (1969) and Wong (1998). Hence the posterior is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where n ii = ∑ T -1 t =1 δ ( s t , i ) δ ( s t +1 , i ) denotes the counts of self transitions. We set a α = b α = a β = b β = 1 here and in the subsequent sections. Below we consider two alternative approaches for sampling: the first based on maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) estimation and a second approach using a random walk sampler.

## 6.1 The Maximum-a-Posteriori

We first solve for the maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) estimates for α and β which are obtained as the solutions to the following gradients using the Newton-Raphson method,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ψ ( · ) is the digamma function defined as ψ ( x ) = d ln Γ( x ) /dx .

We implement our algorithm in the previous section together with the MAP update of α and β in each sweep. The DPHMM with MAP update correctly detects the true number of change-points in all cases. Table 5 shows the MAP solutions for α and β , and the posterior estimates of all parameters in each model. We can see that the average MAP values of α and β are 0 . 6353 and 0 . 1937 respectively in Model 1 with known and unknown variance. The results are slightly different in Model 2 such that average MAP values are 0 . 9451 and 0 . 2360 respectively. We also report the sample standard errors which show evidence of stability of the MAP values after the burn-in period. In all cases, α is greater than β indicating that the algorithm tends to linger in existing states rather than exploring a new one. Besides, all parameter estimates are in line with the results in the previous section when α and β are prespecified.

Table 5: MAP of α and β in Normal Mean-Shift Models 1 and 2. Average MAP values of α and β are reported with standard deviations within parentheses. For other parameters, the values are posterior means and posterior standard deviations.

| Model 1  Model 2  known variance  unknown variance  known variance  unknown variance  α  0.6353 (0.0007)  0.6353 (0.0007)  0.9453 (0.0008)  0.9451 (0.0005)  β  0.1937 (0.0005)  0.1937 (0.0005)  0.2364 (0.0001)  0.2361 (0.0005)  θ  1  0.9145 (0.2560)  0.9049 (0.2430)  1.1843 (0.2847)  1.2675 (0.2585)  θ  2  2.9326 (0.1745)  2.9385 (0.1731)  2.9859 (0.2892)  3.2222 (0.2716)  θ  3  5.3349 (0.2468)  5.1026 (0.2661)  σ  2  2.8207 (0.3340)  3.0908 (0.3752)   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 6.2 The Metropolis-Hastings Sampler

We also consider a Metropolis-Hastings (M-H) sampler for the posterior (23). The candidate-generating density is assumed to be the random walk process with positive support

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α is the value of the previous draw, φ ( · ) is the standard normal density function. The acceptance ratio given β is thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Φ( · ) is the standard normal distribution function. The same M-H sampler is also applied to β given the updated α . We incorporate the M-H sampler of α and β in the Gibbs sampler in Section 5. The posterior estimators are shown in Table 6. The posterior means and standard deviations of parameter θ i and σ 2 are similar to those obtained in the previous analyses. The posterior mean of α is greater than the posterior mean of β in all models. This affirms the conclusion in the MAP results that the algorithm tends to linger in existing states rather than exploring a new one. Both the MAP and M-H methods correctly estimate the number of change-points in each simulation.

Table 6: M-H sampler of α and β in Normal Mean-Shift Models 1 and 2. Posterior means and posterior standard deviations within parentheses.

| Model 1  Model 2  known variance  unknown variance  known variance  unknown variance  α  1.8073 (1.3345)  1.8145 (1.3646)  2.2007 (1.5179)  2.1482 (1.4731)  β  0.3446 (0.2168)  0.3455 (0.2176)  0.3667 (0.2087)  0.3622 (0.2086)  θ  1  1.1182 (0.2521)  1.0839 (0.2399)  1.1256 (0.2558)  1.0892 (0.2457)  θ  2  2.9447 (0.1724)  3.0939 (0.1701)  2.8277 (0.2644)  3.0341 (0.2449)  θ  3  5.0138 (0.2461)  5.1172 (0.2454)  σ  2  2.8190 (0.3298)  2.8793 (0.3455)   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 6.3 Comparison between MAP and M-H

We can see that the estimates of α and β from the two approaches are quite different as shown in Tables 5 and 6. The MAP as a point estimator may not reflect the variations of α and β , whereas the M-H is a typical Bayesian method which can be incorporated into the MCMC sampler of other parameters in question. Moreover, the MAP approach may be limited when the posterior happens to be multi-modal. Therefore, the M-H method is preferred in practice and the following empirical studies are conducted with the M-H sampler.

## 7 Empirical Applications

## 7.1 Poisson Data with Change-Point

We first apply our Dirichlet process multiple change-point model to the much analyzed data set on the number of coal-mining disasters by year in Britain over the period 1951-1962 (Jarrett (1979), Carlin et al. (1992) and Chib (1998)).

Let the disaster count y be modeled by a Poisson distribution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The observation sequence Y n = ( y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y 112 ) ′ is subject to some unknown changepoints. We plot the data y t in Figure 4. Chib (1998) estimates the models with one change-point ( k = 1) and with two change-points ( k = 2), respectively. He assumes the parameter λ following the prior Gamma(2 , 1) in the one-change-point case and the prior Gamma(3 , 1) in the other. Hence, given the regime indicators S n , the corresponding parameter λ i in regime i has the following posteriors with respect to the two priors:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 4: Data on coal mining disaster count y t .

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: Posterior probability of s t = i .

<!-- image -->

where U i = ∑ 112 t =1 δ ( s t , i ) y t and N i = ∑ 112 t =1 δ ( s t , i ). We perform our algorithm with the following Gibbs steps:

Step 1. Sample S n | λ, Y n as in (16) and obtain k ,

Step 2. Sample λ i | S n , Y n as in (28) or (29),

Step 3. Update α and β with the Metropolis-Hastings Sampler as in Section 6.2.

The above Gibbs sampler is conducted for 5000 sweeps with 1000 burn-in samples. To reduce the sampler dependency, the 5000 sweeps are thinned by 50 draws. The sampler estimates one change-point in the data. Figure 5 shows the posterior probabilities of the regime indicator s t = i at each time point t . The intersections of the two lines s t = 1 and s t = 2 show that the break location exits at around t = 40. Figure 6 provides the distribution of the transition points τ i . Interestingly, our model produces exactly the same figure as the one in Chib (1998). The change-point is identified as occurring at around t = 41.

Figure 6: Posterior probability mass function of change-point location τ i .

<!-- image -->

The corresponding posterior means of the parameters λ 1 and λ 2 are 3 . 1006 and 0 . 9387 with posterior standard deviations, 0 . 2833 and 0 . 1168, respectively, under the prior Gamma(2 , 1). The posterior means of α and β are 1 . 8101 and 0 . 3697 with standard deviations 1 . 3577 and 0 . 2464. When using the prior Gamma(3 , 1), we have the posterior means of λ 1 and λ 2 equal to3 . 1308 and 0 . 9567 with posterior standard deviations 0 . 2877 and 0 . 1218, respectively. The posterior means of α and β are 1 . 8375 and 0 . 3715 with standard deviations 1 . 3456 and 0 . 2360, respectively under prior 2. All our results closely match those of the literature and we show a certain robustness of our model under different prior assumptions.

In order to check the robustness of the estimation of the number of change-points, k , we conduct 1000 replications of the above estimation process and collect 1000 changepoint numbers. When the first prior is assumed, 77 . 23% of the 1000 replications detect one change-point. We find a similar result for prior 2. Hence, we conclude that without assuming the number of change-points a priori , our algorithm detects the same changepoint number as in the model developed by Chib (1998) with high probability.

## 7.2 Real Output

We also apply our algorithm to estimate structural changes in real Gross Domestic Product growth. The data and model are drawn from Maheu and Gordon (2008) (see also Geweke and Yu (2011)). Let y t = 100[log( q t /q t -1 ) -log( p t /p t -1 )], where q t is quarterly US GDP seasonally adjusted and p t is the GDP price index. The data range from the second quarter of 1947 to the third quarter of 2003, for a total of 226 observations (see Figure 7). We model the data with a Bayesian ar (2) model with structural change.

Figure 7: US real GDP growth from the second quarter of 1947 to the third quarter of 2003.

<!-- image -->

The frequentist autoregressive structural change-model can be found in Chong (2001). Suppose the data are subject to k change-points and follow

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume the following hierarchical priors to β 0 ,i , β 1 ,i and β 2 ,i :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ = ( µ 0 , µ 1 , µ 2 ) ′ and V = Diag( v 2 0 , v 2 1 , v 2 2 ), such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume the noninformative prior for σ 2 i such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Conditional on σ 2 i , the sampling of β i , µ and V is similar to Section 5. For σ 2 i , we can draw from the following full conditional:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ω 2 i = ∑ τ i -1 &lt;t ≤ τ i ( y t -β 0 ,s t -β 1 ,s t y t -1 -β 2 ,s t y t -2 ) 2 .

As in the previous applications, we set the inverse-Gamma hyperparameters a = b = 1. The M-H update of α and β follows the discussion in Section 6.2. The Gibbs sampler is conducted for 5000 sweeps with 1000 burn-in samples. The 5000 sweeps are thinned by 50 draws. The posterior probabilities of the regime indicator s t in Figure 8a suggest that the structural break exists between the years 1980 and 1990. Figure 8b further shows the change-point at the second quarter of 1983, which is close to the results in Maheu and Gordon (2008). 4 The posterior estimates are summarized in Table 7. Finally, the posterior means of α and β are 1 . 7749 and 0 . 3045 with standard deviations 1 . 3422 and 0 . 1939 respectively. All of our results are consistent with Chib's estimates.

Figure 8: US real GDP growth structural change model.

<!-- image -->

Table 7: US real GDP growth structural change model with one change-point. Posterior means and posterior standard deviations within parentheses. The results applying Chib's model are drawn from Maheu and Gordon (2008).

| Chib's Model  DPHMM  s  t  = 1  s  t  = 2  s  t  = 1  s  t  = 2  β  0  ,s  t  0.5642 (0.1228)  0.4434 (0.1162)  0.5499 (0.1303)  0.3894 (0.1169)  β  1  ,s  t  0.2716 (0.0734)  0.2792 (0.1052)  0.2812 (0.0837)  0.2796 (0.1173)  β  2  ,s  t  0.0800 (0.0739)  0.1588 (0.1010)  0.0913 (0.0855)  0.2253 (0.1124)  σ  2  s  t  1.3331 (0.1542)  0.3362 (0.0516)  1.4089 (0.1722)  0.2672 (0.0460)   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Finally, we replicate 1000 times the whole estimation process and check the robustness of the detected change-point number. The result suggests that nearly 100% of the replications detect one break point.

## 8 Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we have proposed a new Bayesian multiple change-point model, that is the Dirichlet process hidden Markov model. Our model is semiparametric in the sense that the number of states is not built-in to the model but endogenously determined. As a result, our model avoids the model misspecification problem. We have proposed an MCMC sampler which only needs to sample the states around change-points. We have also proposed the MAP and M-H updates of hyperparameters in the DPHMM process. We have presented three specific models, namely, the discrete Poisson model, the continuous normal model, and the ar (2) model with structural changes. Results from the simulations and empirical applications showed that our Dirichlet process hidden Markov multiple change-point model detected the true change-point numbers and locations with high accuracy.

4 See Figure 4 in Maheu and Gordon (2008).

## Appendix

In the appendix, we give the derivations of the full conditionals and the Gibbs samplers in Section 5. For the case of known variance, we first rewrite the hierarchical model (21) as the joint distribution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p ( µ, υ 2 ) corresponds to Inv-Gamma( υ 2 | a, b ), θ = ( θ 1 , . . . , θ k +1 ) ′ and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (A-1) and (A-2), we have the following full conditionals:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Step 1. Sample S n | θ, µ, υ, Y n as in (16) and obtain k ,

where ¯ θ = ∑ k +1 i =1 θ i / ( k +1). Therefore, we can perform the following Gibbs sampler:

Step 2. Sample θ, µ, υ | S n , Y n as in (A-3).

For the case of unknown variance, the full conditional with respect to (22) is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Conditional on σ 2 , we apply the same estimation strategy discussed above. The Gibbs sampler is thus

- Step 1. Sample S n | θ, µ, υ, σ 2 , Y n as in (16) and obtain k ,
- Step 2. Sample θ, µ, υ, σ 2 | S n , Y n as in (A-3) and (A-4).

## References

- Beal, M. J., Ghahramani, Z., and Rasmussen, C. E. (2002). 'The Infinite Hidden Markov Model.' In Dietterich, T. G., Becker, S., and Ghahramani, Z. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 577-584. MIT Press. 277, 279, 287
- Blackwell, D. and MacQueen, J. B. (1973). 'Ferguson Distributions Via Polya Urn Schemes.' The Annals of Statistics , 1(2): 353-355. 277
- Carlin, P. B., Gelfand, A. E., and Smith, A. F. M. (1992). 'Hierarchical Bayesian Analysis of Changepoint Problems.' Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C (Applied Statistics) , 41(2): 389-405. 275, 289
- Chernoff, H. and Zacks, S. (1964). 'Estimating the Current Mean of a Normal Distribution which is Subjected to Changes in Time.' The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 35(3): pp. 999-1018. 275
- Chib, S. (1998). 'Estimation and comparison of multiple change-point models.' Journal of Econometrics , 86(2): 221 - 241. 275, 276, 279, 282, 284, 289, 291
- Chong, T. T.-L. (2001). 'Structural Change in AR(1) Models.' Econometric Theory , 17(1): 87-155. 292
- Connor, R. J. and Mosimann, J. E. (1969). 'Concepts of Independence for Proportions with a Generalization of the Dirichlet Distribution.' Journal of the American Statistical Association , 64(325): pp. 194-206. 279, 287
- Ferguson, T. S. (1973). 'A Bayesian analysis of some nonparametric problems.' Annals of Statistics , 1: 209-230. 277
- Geweke, J. and Yu, J. (2011). 'Inference and prediction in a multiple-structural-break model.' Journal of Econometrics , 163(2): 172-185. 275, 291
- Giordani, P. and Kohn, R. (2008). 'Efficient Bayesian Inference for Multiple ChangePoint and Mixture Innovation Models.' Journal of Business and Economic Statistics , 26(1): 66-77. 275
- Jarrett, R. G. (1979). 'A Note on the Intervals Between Coal-Mining Disasters.' Biometrika , 66(1): 191-193. 289
- Koop, G. and Potter, S. M. (2007). 'Estimation and Forecasting in Models with Multiple Breaks.' The Review of Economic Studies , 74(3): pp. 763-789. 275
- Kozumi, H. and Hasegawa, H. (2000). 'A Bayesian analysis of structural changes with an application to the displacement effect.' The Manchester School , 68(4): 476-490. 277

- Maheu, J. M. and Gordon, S. (2008). 'Learning, forecasting and structural breaks.' Journal of Applied Econometrics , 23(5): 553-583. 275, 291, 293
- Neal, R. M. (1992). 'The Infinite Hidden Markov Model.' In Smith, C. R., Erickson, G. J., and Neudorfer, P. O. (eds.), Proceedings of the Workshop on Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods of Statistical Analysis , 197-211. Kluwer Academic Publishers. 277
- -(2000). 'Markov Sampling Methods for Dirichlet Process Mixture Models.' Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 9(2): 249-265. 277, 279
- Pesaran, M. H., Pettenuzzo, D., and Timmermann, A. (2006). 'Forecasting Time Series Subject to Multiple Structural Breaks.' Review of Economic Studies , 73(4): 10571084. 275
- Sethuraman, J. (1994). 'A Constructive Definition of Dirichlet Priors.' Statistica Sinica , 4(2): 639-650. 277
- Smith, A. F. M. (1975). 'A Bayesian approach to inference about a change-point in a sequence of random variables.' Biometrika , 62: 407-416. 275
- Stephens, D. A. (1994). 'Bayesian Retrospective Multiple-Changepoint Identification.' Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C (Applied Statistics) , 43(1): 159-178. 275
- Wang, J. and Zivot, E. (2000). 'A Bayesian Time Series Model of Multiple Structural Changes in Level, Trend, and Variance.' Journal of Business &amp; Economic Statistics , 18(3): 374-386. 275
- Wong, T. (1998). 'Generalized Dirichlet distribution in Bayesian analysis.' Applied Mathematics and Computation , 97(2-3): 165-181. 279, 287

## Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank all the participants in the Econometric Society Australasian Meeting 2011, Adelaide, Australia, July 2011, for helpful comments and discussions.

The third author (P.G.) acknowledges the support of DST grant (SR/S4/MS:648/10) from the Government of India.