## Multiclass Classification of Cervical Cancer Tissues by Hidden Markov Model

Sabyasachi Mukhopadhyay*, Sanket Nandan*; Indrajit Kurmi ** *Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Kolkata **Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur.

## Abstract

In  this  paper,  we  report  a  hidden  Markov  model  based  multiclass  classification  of cervical  cancer  tissues.  This  model  has  been  validated  directly  over  time  series generated  by  the  medium  refractive  index  fluctuations  extracted  from  differential interference  contrast  images  of  healthy  and  different  stages  of  cancer  tissues.  The method shows promising results for multiclass classification with higher accuracy.

KeywordsDifferential  Interference  Contrast  (DIC)  images,  Hidden  Markov  Model,  Tissue Engineering.

## Introduction

Cancer diagnosis through optical means is a hot area of current research. There are efficient signal processing tools like wavelets, multifractal detrended fluctuation analysis (MFDFA) which have shown promising outcomes in case of disease diagnosis [2, 3, 4]. We would like to note that these linear techniques are limited for binary classifications.

The current  research works are more  focused on probabilistic classifiers  for extracting  the hidden features in biological tissues and enhancing the accuracy of classification. The probabilistic classifiers  like  support  vector  machine  (SVM),  relevance  vector  machine  (RVM),  minimum distance classifier like Mahalanobis distance were found to have a lot of applications in biomedical domain for cancer diagnosis purpose [5, 6, 8, 11]. In this paper, hidden Markov model (HMM), which  is  a  dynamic  Bayesian  model,  has  been  used  for  classifying  cervical  tissue  samples  of healthy and different stages of cancer.

## Theory

Suppose we have a non-empty finite element set of observation sequence, given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and  be the outcome (sample) space i.e. set of all possible outcomes or observations such that    , thereby 1, 2,......, t O t    .

Assume there exists some hidden state sequence,   1,...., X t t   , which follows a Markov process, associated with the observation (data) sequence such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Take   P p ij n n   to be the transition probability matrix for the underlying Markov process

with finite, discrete state space   1, 2,....., X n  ; so that   1 : | ij t t p P X j X i    

The  structure  of  the  matrix, O ,  is  given  by,     O o k j n   ,  commonly  known  as  the observation probability matrix, such that     : | j t t o k P O k X j    .

This model   , , P O    ,  where  is  the  initial  state  (probability)  distribution, is  known as hidden Markov Model.

## Experimental Method

The refractive index in space (two dimensional area of a tissue section) of the cervical tis-sue section  with  thickness  5 m  and  lateral  dimension ~ 4 6 mm mm  ,  is  the  required  stochastic (observed through measurement) variable for our study. The unstained tissue section has been concerned with the standard methods of tissue dehydration, thereafter embedding in wax, then sectioning under a rotary microtome and final dewaxing, performed on glass slides. The di erential interference contrast (DIC) microscope (Olympus IX81, USA) measures the distribution of the refractive  index  on  the  section  surface  area  of  the  tissue  section.  Separately,  a  CCD  camera (ORCA-ERG, Hamamatsu) with pixel dimension 6.45 m  and a point spread function microscope with  width ~ 0.36 m  records  the  images  of  the  stromal  regions  with  60X  magnification.  The multiclass classification has been performed over pixel-wise horizontally unfolded data. The DIC sample images are shown in fig.1. After unfolding the DIC images in a horizontal direction, it has been treated with Normal Testing method in the following ways.

1. Fluctuations= (Data-mean)/standard deviation
2. Computing the cumulative sum of fluctuations to generate the time series.

The above two steps are performed in order to process the medium refractive index fluctuations embedded in DIC images by HMM.

Figure 1: DIC images of different stages (Grade-I,II,III) of cancer and healthy (normal) tissues respectively.

<!-- image -->

## Results and Discussions

Considering a tissue with potentially four different stages, namely, Grade I, II, III and normal (healthy),  the  horizontal  surface  of  the  plot  has  been  partitioned  into  4  4  rectangles,  where prediction of each stages can lead to inaccurate detection of some other stage if there exists some non-zero percentage of detection in the off-diagonal rectangles given a particular stage to measure. The height or the perpendicular to the surface, z-axis displays the percentage of prediction of a given  stage  for  the  corresponding  class  (horizontal  rectangles).  The  graph  fig.2  shows  clear distinction among the four different stages of the tissue. Data from normal cells are accurately predicted  (with  probability  1)  as  normal  cells  all  the  time  creates  a  zero  probability  of  false prediction in the rectangles (classes) of Grade I, II and III. The graph also shows that neither Grade I, nor II, nor III class is predicted as normal stage and hence it presents an advantage of classifying Grade I, II and III together, i.e., cancerous cells and normal cells. Similarly Grade I and II stages are also predicted in the correct class with 100% accuracy. But it is evident from the graph that there is an error in the correct prediction of Grade III stage. Grade III cells are correctly predicted with 97.34% accuracy and error in prediction of Grade III stage is 2.66% that falls in the class of Grade II. This error in prediction implies wrong prediction of a Grade III cell as Grade II cell with 2.66%, but the results never predict it as a Grade I or normal cell.

For the purpose of experimentation, we first train a 17 model states in the hidden Markov model for each of the categories (stages). The training set for each category includes time series data obtained from experimentation. The model trained by the training data is defined as

Figure 2: HMM based cervical tissue classification among healthy and different stages of cancer.

<!-- image -->

  , , P O    with state space 1 2 17 { , ,.........., } S s s s  .  denotes the prior probabilities, elements of P are the transition probabilities and elements of O denote the emission prob-abilities. Prior probabilities are first selected as a random function. P and O are modelled as Gaussian densities with mean 0 and variance 1. Then the data is trained on the model iteratively to fit and modify the model using EM (Expectation maximization) algorithm. The model is optimized using Lagrange multipliers. We use forward and backward algorithm to compute a set of sufficient statistics for our EM step tractably. Once the model is sufficiently trained for a given sequence of data we

calculate the likelihood of sequence with model for each category, i.e., we calculate i X P        which

is the sum of the joint likelihoods of the sequence over all possible state sequences allowed by the model for each category.

## Conclusion

In conclusion, use of HMM has been found to be quite effective in multiclass classification purpose among the normal and different stages of cancer. Authors hope that the current study of HMM based application in DIC images of human cervical tissues will help the researchers to move this field forward.

## Acknowledgment

The  authors  thank  Dr.  Asha  Agarwal,  G.S.V.M.  Medical  College  and  Hospital,  Kanpur,  for provision of the histopathologically characterized tissue samples.

## References

- [1] Alfano,  R.R.,  Das,B.B.,  Cleary,J.,  Prudente,R.,  Celmer,E.,  "Light  sheds  light  on  cancer distinguishing malignant tumors from benign tissues and tumors", Bull. NY Acad. Med., 2nd Series, vol. 67, 1991, pp. 143-150 (1991).
- [2] Mukhopadhyay, S., Das, N., Pradhan, A., Ghosh, N., Panigrahi, P.K., Pre-cancer Detection by Wavelet Transform and Multifractality in various Grades of DIC Stromal Images, SPIE Proceeding, SPIE BIOS, USA (2014).
- [3] Mukhopadhyay, S., Das, N.K., Pradhan, A., Ghosh, N., Panigrahi, P.K., Wavelet and multifractal based analysis on DIC images in epithelium region to detect and diagnose the cancer progress among different Grades of tissues, SPIE Proceeding, SPIE Photonics Europe (2014).
- [4] Mukhopadhyay, S., Mandal, S., Das, N.K., Dey, S., Mitra, A., Ghosh, N., Panigrahi, P.K., "Diagnosing Heterogeneous Dynamics for CT Scan Images of Human Brain in Wavelet and MFDFA Domain", Proceeding of Springer, IEM OPTRONIX-2014.
- [5] Majumder, S.K., Ghosh, N., Gupta, P.K., "Support vector machine for optical diagnosis of cancer," J. Biomed. Opt. 10,024034 (2005).
- [6] Majumder, S.K., Ghosh, N., Gupta, P.K., "Relevance vector machine for optical diagnosis of cancer", Lasers Surg. Med. 36, 323 (2005).
- [7] Majumder, S.K., Kataria, S., Ghosh, N., Gupta, P.K., "Nonlinear pattern recognition for laser induced fluorescence diagnosis of cancer", Lasers Surg. Med. 33, 48 (2003).
- [8] Devi,  S.,  Panigrahi,  P.K.,  Pradhan,  A.,  "Detecting  cervical  cancer  progression  through extracted  intrinsic  fluorescence  and  principal  component  analysis",  Journal  of  biomedical optics 19 (12), 127003-127003 (2014).
- [9] Baum,  L.  E.,  Petrie,  T.,  "Statistical  Inference  for  Probabilistic  Functions  of  Finite  State Markov Chains". The Annals of Mathematical Statistics 37 (6) (1966).
- [10]  Mukhopadhyay,S.,  Ghosh,N.,  Barman,R.,  Panigrahi,P.K.,  Pratiher,S.,  Pradhan,A.,  'STRANSFORM  BASED  FLUCTUATION  ANALYSIS-  A  METHOD  FOR  PRECANCER DETECTION', IEEE Proceeding, Microcom-2016, India.
- [11]  Mukhopadhyay,S., Kurmi,I., Dey,R., Das,N.K., Pradhan,S.,Pradhan,A., Ghosh,N., Panigrahi,P.K., Mohanty,S., 'Optical diagnosis of colon and cervical cancer by support vector machine', SPIE Proceeding, SPIE Photonics Europe, Belgium, 2016, Europe.