## Existence of a calibrated regime switching local volatility model and new fake Brownian motions

∗

B. Jourdain ∗ , A. Zhou

January 23, 2017

## Abstract

By Gyongy's theorem, a local and stochastic volatility (LSV) model is calibrated to the market prices of all European call options with positive maturities and strikes if its local volatility function is equal to the ratio of the Dupire local volatility function over the root conditional mean square of the stochastic volatility factor given the spot value. This leads to a SDE nonlinear in the sense of McKean. Particle methods based on a kernel approximation of the conditional expectation, as presented in [15], provide an efficient calibration procedure even if some calibration errors may appear when the range of the stochastic volatility factor is very large. But so far, no global existence result is available for the SDE nonlinear in the sense of McKean. In the particular case where the local volatility function is equal to the inverse of the root conditional mean square of the stochastic volatility factor multiplied by the spot value given this value and the interest rate is zero, the solution to the SDE is a fake Brownian motion. When the stochastic volatility factor is a constant (over time) random variable taking finitely many values and the range of its square is not too large, we prove existence to the associated Fokker-Planck equation. Thanks to [12], we then deduce existence of a new class of fake Brownian motions. We then extend these results to the special case of the LSV model called regime switching local volatility, where the stochastic volatility factor is a jump process taking finitely many values and with jump intensities depending on the spot level. Under the same condition on the range of its square, we prove existence to the associated Fokker-Planck PDE. Finally, we deduce existence of the calibrated model by extending the results in [12].

Keywords : local and stochastic volatility models, calibration, Dupire's local volatility, Fokker-Planck systems, diffusions nonlinear in the sense of McKean.

## 1 Introduction

The notion of fake Brownian motion was introduced by Oleszkiewicz [27] to describe a martingale ( X t ) t ≥ 0 such that for any t ≥ 0 , X t ∼ N (0 , t ) , but the process ( X t ) t ≥ 0 does not have the same distribution as the Brownian motion ( W t ) t ≥ 0 . Madan and Yor [24], Hamza and Klebaner [18], and more recently Henry-Labordère, Tan and Touzi [19] provided construction of discontinuous fake Brownian motions. The question of the existence of continuous fake Brownian motion was positively answered by Albin [2], using products of Bessel processes, and Donati-Martin, Baker and Yor [4] extended that result by exhibiting a sequence of continuous martingales with Brownian marginals and scaling property. Oleszkiewicz gave a simpler example of a continuous fake Brownian motion, based on the Box Muller transform. Then, Hobson [21] proved existence of a continous fake exponential Brownian motion by mixing diffusion processes. More generally, Fan, Hamza and Klebaner [11] and Hirsch, Profeta, Roynette and Yor [20] provided construction of self-similar martingales with given marginal distributions.

One reason for raising interest in the search of processes that have marginal distributions matching given ones comes from mathematical finance, where calibration to the market prices of European call options is a major concern. According to Breeden and Litzenberger [6], the knowledge of the market prices of those options for a continuum of strikes and maturities is equivalent to the knowledge of the marginal distributions of the underlying asset under the pricing measure. Thus, to be consistent with the market prices, a calibrated model must have marginal distributions that coincide with those given by the market. More specifically, in this paper, we address the question of existence of a special class of calibrated local and stochastic volatility (LSV) models.

∗ Université Paris-Est, Cermics (ENPC), INRIA, F-77455, Marne-la-Vallée, France. E-mails : benjamin.jourdain@enpc.fr, alexandre.zhou@enpc.fr - This research benefited from the support of the 'Chaire Risques Financiers', Fondation du Risque, and the French National Research Agency under the program ANR-12-BS01-0019 (STAB).

LSV models, introduced by Lipton [23] and by Piterbarg [28], can be interpreted as an extension of Dupire's local volatility (LV) model, described in [9], to get more consistency with real markets. A typical LSV model has the dynamics

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for the stock under the risk-neutral probability measure, where ( Y t ) t ≥ 0 is a stochastic process which may be correlated with ( S t ) t ≥ 0 and r is the risk free rate. Meanwhile, according to [9], given the European call option prices C ( t, K ) for all positive maturities t and strikes K , the process ( S D t ) t ≥ 0 , which follows the dynamics

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where σ Dup ( t, K ) := √ 2 ∂ t C ( t,K )+ rK∂ K C ( t,K ) K 2 ∂ 2 KK C ( t,K ) is Dupire's local volatility function, is calibrated to the European option prices, that is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under mild assumptions, Gyongy's theorem in [16] gives that the choice σ ( t, x ) = σ Dup ( t,x ) √ E [ f 2 ( Y t ) | S t = x ] ensures that for any t ≥ 0 , S t has the same law as S D t . This leads to the following SDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is nonlinear in the sense of McKean, because the diffusion term depends on the law of ( S t , Y t ) through the conditional expectation in the denominator. Getting existence and uniqueness to this kind of SDE is still an open problem, although some local in time existence results have been found by Abergel and Tachet [1] by a perturbative approach. From a numerical point of view, particle methods based on a kernel approximation of the conditional expectation, as presented by Guyon and Henry-Labordère [15], provide an efficient calibation procedure even if some calibration errors may appear when the range of the stochastic volatility process ( f ( Y t )) t ≥ 0 is very large.

Recently, advances have been made for analogous models. Alfonsi, Labart and Lelong [3] proved existence and uniqueness of stochastic local intensity models calibrated to CDO tranche prices, where the discrete loss process makes the conditional expectation simpler to handle. Moreover, Guennoun and Henry-Labordère [14] showed that in a local volatility model enhanced with jumps, the particle method applied to a well defined nonlinear McKean SDE with a regularized volatility function gives call prices that converge to the market prices as the regularization parameter goes to 0 , for all strikes and maturities.

In this paper, we first prove existence of a simplified version of the LSV model. More precisely, we set r = 1 2 , σ Dup ≡ 1 , and consider the dynamics of the asset's log-price, where for simplicity we also neglect the drift term as its conditional expectation given the spot is equal to 0 . Moreover, let d ≥ 2 and Y be a random variable (constant in time) which takes values in Y := { 1 , ..., d } . We assume that for i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , α i := P ( Y = i ) &gt; 0 . Given a positive function f on Y and a probability measure µ on R , the SDE that we study is thus:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also suppose that X 0 , Y and ( W t ) t ≥ 0 are independent. Let us set λ i := f 2 ( i ) &gt; 0 , i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } and denote by p i ( t, x ) the conditional density of X t given { Y = i } multiplied by α i . It means that, for any measurable and nonnegative function φ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The Fokker-Planck equations derived from SDE (1) form a partial differential system (PDS) that writes for 1 ≤ i ≤ d :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the constant T &gt; 0 is the finite time horizon. We call this PDS (FBM). Let us define λ min := min 1 ≤ i ≤ d λ i and λ max := max 1 ≤ i ≤ d λ i . We notice that if λ min = λ max = λ , then each p i is a solution to the heat equation with initial condition α i µ . Results proving existence and uniqueness of solutions to variational formulations of the heat equation have already been widely developed, e.g. in [7], so we focus on the case where λ min &lt; λ max , that is when the function f is not constant on Y . We also notice that if we add the equalities (2) and (3) over the index i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , we obtain that ∑ d i =1 p i satisfies the heat equation with initial condition µ , and it is well known that ( ∑ d i =1 p i ) ( t, x ) = µ ∗ h t ( x ) , with h the heat kernel defined as h t ( x ) := 1 √ 2 πt exp ( -x 2 2 t ) for t &gt; 0 and x ∈ R . This observation can also be made formally, using Gyongy's theorem. Indeed, as we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then if Gyongy's theorem applies, X t has the same law as X 0 + W t , which has the density µ ∗ h t .

We introduce the following condition on the family ( λ i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d , under which we will obtain existence to SDE (1). We denote by ( e 1 , ..., e d ) the canonical basis of R d and for x = ( x 1 , ..., x d ) ∈ R d , we define x ⊥ = { y = ( y 1 , ..., y d ) ∈ R d , ∑ d i =1 x i y i = 0 } .

Condition (C) . There exists a symmetric positive definite d × d matrix Γ with real valued coefficients such that for 1 ≤ k ≤ d , the d × d matrix Γ ( k ) with coefficients

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is positive definite on the space e ⊥ k .

Under the Condition ( C ) , which ensures a coercivity property that enables to establish energy estimates, existence to SDE (1) can be proved in three steps:

1. For µ having a square integrable density on R , we define a variational formulation called V L 2 ( µ ) to (FBM) and we apply Galerkin's method to show that V L 2 ( µ ) has a solution.
2. For µ a probability measure on R , we define a weaker variational formulation called V ( µ ) . We take advantage of the fact that if ( p 1 , ..., p d ) is a solution to V ( µ ) then ∑ d i =1 p i is solution to the heat equation with initial condition µ . This enables to get control of the explosion rate of the L 2 norm of p i , 1 ≤ i ≤ d , as t → 0 , and we extend the results obtained in Step 1 to show existence to V ( µ ) .
3. Thanks to the results in [12], which give equivalence between the existence of a solution to a Fokker-Planck equation and the existence of a solution to the associated martingale problem with time marginals given by the solution to the Fokker-Planck equation, we show that the existence result in Step 2 implies existence of a weak solution to SDE (1). Moreover, if f is non constant on Y and if X 0 = 0 , that weak solution is a continuous fake Brownian motion.

To get a more realistic financial framework, we then adapt the previous strategy to obtain existence of a class of calibrated LSV models, where the process ( S t ) t ≥ 0 describing the underlying asset follows the dynamics

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the process ( Y t ) t ≥ 0 taking values in Y and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where the functions ( q ij ) 1 ≤ i = j ≤ d are non negative and bounded. The process ( S t , Y t ) t ≥ 0 is then a calibrated regime switching local volatility (RSLV) model.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we state the main results that give existence to SDE (1). Section 3 is dedicated to the proofs of the results in Section 2. In Section 4, we state the existence of calibrated RSLV models and we prove that result in Section 5. Beforehand, we introduce some additional notation.

## Notation

- For an interval I ⊂ R , we denote by L 2 ( I ) the space of measurable real valued functions defined on I which are square integrable for the Lebesgue measure. For k ≥ 1 , and u, v ∈ ( L 2 ( I ) ) k , we use the notation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we define L ( I ) := ( L 2 ( I ) ) d . We also define L := L ( R ) and we denote by L ′ its dual space.

- For m ≥ 1 , we denote by H m ( I ) the Sobolev space of real valued functions on I that are square integrable together with all their distribution derivatives up to the order m . We define the space H ( I ) := ( H 1 ( I ) ) d , endowed with the usual scalar product and norm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we define H := H ( R ) . We denote by H ′ its dual space, and by 〈· , ·〉 the duality product between H and H ′ .

- For 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞ , we denote by W 1 ,p ( R ) the Sobolev space of functions belonging to L p ( R ) , and that have a first order derivative in the sense of distributions that also belongs to L p ( R ) .
- For n ≥ 1 , O an open subset of R n and 0 ≤ k ≤ ∞ , we denote by C k ( O ) the set of functions O → R that are continuous and have continuous derivatives up to the order k , we denote by C k c ( O ) the set of functions in C k ( O ) that have compact support on O , and we denote by C k b ( O ) the set of functions in C k ( O ) that are uniformly bounded on O together with their p -th order derivatives, for p ≤ k .
- For n ≥ 1 , we denote by M n ( R ) the set of n × n matrices with real-valued coefficients. We denote by I n ∈ M n ( R ) the identity matrix, and by J n ∈ M n ( R ) the matrix where all the coefficients are equal to 1.
- For n ≥ 1 , we denote by S + n ( R ) (resp. S ++ n ( R ) ) the set of n × n matrices in M n ( R ) which are symmetric and positive semidefinite (resp. definite). For S ∈ S + n ( R ) (resp. S ∈ S ++ n ( R ) ) we denote by √ S the unique matrix in S + n ( R ) (resp. S ++ n ( R ) ) such that √ S √ S = S , and we denote by l min ( S ) and l max ( S ) respectively the smallest eigenvalue and the largest eigenvalue of S .
- Given n, p ≥ 1 and A a n × p matrix, we denote its transpose by A ∗ and we define || A || ∞ := max {|A ij | , 1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ j ≤ p } .
- For y ∈ R , we denote its positive part by y + = max(0 , y ) and its negative part by y -= min(0 , y ) . For k ≥ 2 and x = ( x 1 , ..., x k ) ∈ R k , we denote its positive part by x + := ( x + 1 , ..., x + k ) , and its negative part by x -:= ( x -1 , ..., x -k ) .
- We denote by P ( R ) (resp. P ( R ×Y ) ) the set of probability measures on R (resp. R ×Y ).
- We define D := ( R + ) d \ (0 , ..., 0) .
- For notational simplicity, for a function g defined on R 2 and t ∈ R , we may sometimes use the notation g ( t ) := g ( t, · ) .

## 2 A new class of fake Brownian motions

In this section, we give the main results concerning the SDE (1) . We introduce a variational formulation to give sense to the PDS (FBM). Let us assume that p := ( p 1 , ..., p d ) is a classical solution to the PDS (FBM) such that p takes values in D and for t ∈ (0 , T ] , p ( t, · ) ∈ H . For v := ( v 1 , ..., v d ) ∈ H and i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } we multiply (2) by v i and integrate over R . Through integration by parts, we obtain that for i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , the following equality holds in the classical sense and also in the sense of distributions on (0 , T ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The term ∂ x ( ∑ d l =1 p l ∑ d l =1 λ l p l λ i p i ) rewrites

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Let us introduce the function M : D → M d ( R ) where for ρ ∈ D , M ( ρ ) is the matrix with coefficients:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also define A : D → M d ( R ) , where for ρ ∈ D ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For 1 ≤ i ≤ d , we have that 1 2 ∂ x ( ∑ d l =1 p l ∑ d l =1 λ l p l λ i p i ) = ( A ( p ) ∂ x p ) i . Summing the equality (7) over the index 1 ≤ i ≤ d , the following equality holds in the sense of distributions on (0 , T ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote by p 0 the measure µ multiplied by the vector ( α 1 , ..., α d ) and introduce below a weak variational formulation for the PDS (FBM).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where the last condition means that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We call V ( µ ) the problem defined by (8)-(12). If p only satisfies (9), then the initial condition (12) does not make sense. As we will see in the proof of Theorem 2.1, if p satisfies the conditions (9)-(11), then p is a.e. equal to a function continuous from (0 , T ] into L . We will always consider its continuous representative and therefore (12) makes sense. The existence results to V ( µ ) and to the SDE (1) are stated in the following theorems.

Theorem 2.1. Under Condition ( C ) , V ( µ ) has a solution p ∈ C ((0 , T ] , L ) such that for almost every ( t, x ) in (0 , T ] × R , ∑ d i =1 p i ( t, x ) = ( µ ∗ h t )( x ) .

Theorem 2.2. Under Condition ( C ) , SDE (1) has a weak solution, which has the same marginal law as ( Z + W t ) t ≥ 0 , where Z is independent from ( W t ) t ≥ 0 and Z ∼ µ .

The proofs of Theorems 2.1 and 2.2 are postponed to the following section. To end this section, let us remark that whenever the function f is not constant on Y , the solution to the SDE (1) given by Theorem 2.2 is a continuous fake Brownian motion.

̸

̸

̸

̸

Proposition 2.3. Under Condition ( C ) , if f is not constant on Y then the solutions to SDE (1) with initial condition µ = δ 0 are continuous fake Brownian motions.

Proof. Let X be a solution to SDE (1). The term f ( Y ) √ E [ f 2 ( Y ) | X t ] is bounded, so X is a continuous martingale and by [16, Theorem 4.6], for t ∈ [0 , T ] , X t has the law N (0 , t ) . Let us remark that a solution to SDE (1) with the properties stated by Theorem 2.2 satisfies the marginal constraints without using Gyongy's theorem. We consider the quadratic variation 〈 X 〉 of X , which satisfies d 〈 X 〉 t = f 2 ( Y ) E [ f 2 ( Y ) | X t ] dt . If almost surely, ∀ t ≥ 0 , 〈 X 〉 t = t , then a.s., dt -a.e., f 2 ( Y ) E [ f 2 ( Y ) | X t ] = 1 and f 2 ( Y ) is σ ( X t ) measurable. As moreover f is positive, X t = W t , and there exists t ≥ 0 such that f 2 ( Y ) is a measurable function of W t . As Y is independent from ( W t ) t ≥ 0 , we have that f 2 ( Y ) is constant. Then by contraposition, if f is not constant on Y , we do not have that for t &gt; 0 , 〈 X 〉 t = t , so ( X t ) t ≥ 0 is a continuous fake Brownian motion.

## 3 Proofs of Section 2

Condition ( C ) , developed in Subsection 3.1, enables to establish a priori energy estimates of solutions to V ( µ ) , computed in Subsection 3.2, where we give a stronger variational formulation to the PDS (FBM) under the assumption that the initial distribution µ has a square integrable density. Under Condition ( C ) , we prove existence to that formulation. That result is extended in Subsection 3.3 to prove Theorem 2.1. In Subsection 3.4, we establish a link between V ( µ ) and the variational formulation in the sense of distributions defined in [12], and we prove Theorem 2.2, thanks to [12, Theorem 2.6].

## 3.1 Condition ( C )

Let us introduce the notion of uniform coercivity.

Definition 3.1. Given a domain D ⊂ R d , a function G : D →M d ( R ) is uniformly coercive on D with a coefficient c &gt; 0 if:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

First, let us notice that the function A is bounded.

Lemma 3.2. Any matrix B in the image A ( D ) of D by A satisfies || B || ∞ ≤ 1 2 ( 1 + λ max λ min ) .

̸

Proof. For ρ ∈ D , A ( ρ ) = 1 2 ( I d + M ( ρ )) . It is sufficient to check that || M ( ρ ) || ∞ ≤ λ max λ min . Since for 1 ≤ l ≤ d , λ l &gt; 0 , ρ l ≥ 0 and ∑ d l =1 λ l ρ l &gt; 0 , we have for 1 ≤ i = j ≤ d ,

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

The role of Condition ( C ) is to ensure the existence of a matrix Π ∈ S ++ d ( R ) such that Π A is uniformly coercive on D . By a slight abuse of notation, we will say that a matrix Γ satisfies ( C ) if Γ ∈ S ++ d ( R ) , and for 1 ≤ k ≤ d , the matrix Γ ( k ) defined by (5) is positive definite on e ⊥ k . We consider matrices with the form J d + ϵ Γ , where Γ ∈ S ++ d ( R ) and ϵ &gt; 0 , and we show that if Γ satisfies ( C ) , then for ϵ small enough, ( J d + ϵ Γ) A achieves the coercivity property. The intuition behind the choice of J d is the observation that if ( p 1 , ..., p d ) is a solution to V ( µ ) then ∑ d i =1 p i is a solution to the heat equation. This also translates into the algebraic property that J d M = 0 . We define 1 := (1 , ..., 1) ∈ R d .

Proposition 3.3. If Γ ∈ S ++ d ( R ) satisfies Condition ( C ) , then there exists z &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, for ϵ &gt; 0 small enough, the function ( J d + ϵ Γ) A is uniformly coercive on D .

Proof. For ρ ∈ D , we introduce the notation λ ( ρ ) := ∑ k λ k ρ k ∑ l ρ l and remark that λ ( D ) = [ λ min , λ max ] . The matrix A ( ρ ) rewrites as the convex combination A ( ρ ) = ∑ d k =1 w k ( ρ ) A k ( ρ ) with the weight w k ( ρ ) = λ k ρ k ∑ l λ l ρ l of the matrix A k ( ρ ) which has non zero coefficients only on the diagonal and the k -th row, and is defined by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We prove that for 1 ≤ k ≤ d , there exists z k &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we can set z = min 1 ≤ k ≤ d z k 2 λ max &gt; 0 to obtain (13). We have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where between the first and the second equality, we used the fact that ∑ d i =1 x i = 0 and then replaced x k by -∑ i = k x i . As Γ ( k ) is positive definite on e ⊥ k , there exists ˜ z k &gt; 0 such that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

By Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, x 2 k = ( ∑ i = k x i ) 2 ≤ ( d -1) ∑ i = k x 2 i , so ∑ i = k x 2 i ≥ 1 d x ∗ x and we can set z k = ˜ z k d to satisfy (14).

̸

̸

Now, we show that for ϵ &gt; 0 small enough, the function ( J d + ϵ Γ) A is uniformly coercive on D . For ρ ∈ D , as A ( ρ ) = 1 2 ( I d + M ( ρ )) and for 1 ≤ j ≤ d, as it is easy to check that ∑ d i =1 M ij ( ρ ) = 0 , we have that J d M = 0 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For x ∈ R d , we decompose x = u + v where u ∈ R 1 and v ∈ 1 ⊥ . As J d v = 0 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We will use Young's inequality:

For x ∈ 1 ⊥ , we have

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d , by Young's inequality and Lemma 3.2, (Γ A ( ρ )) ij = ∑ d k =1 Γ ik A ( ρ ) kj ≤ d 2 || Γ || ∞ ( 1 + λ max λ min ) , so for a, b ∈ R , and η &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We obtain, for ˜ x, ˜ y ∈ R d , and η &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then for η &gt; 0 ,

and moreover,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using (13) and J d u = du , we get that for η &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For 0 &lt; ϵ &lt; ( d || Γ || ∞ ( 1 + λ max λ min ) ( 1 + d 2 || Γ || ∞ ( 1+ λmax λ min ) 2 z )) -1 , we check that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and with the choice η ∈ ( η 1 , η 2 ) , we see that the function ( J d + ϵ Γ) A is uniformly coercive on D .

Corollary 3.4. Condition ( C ) is equivalent to the existence of a matrix Π ∈ S ++ d ( R ) such that the function Π A is uniformly coercive on D with a coefficient κ ∈ ( 0 , l min (Π) 2 ) .

Proof. If a matrix Γ ∈ S ++ d ( R ) satisfies ( C ) , then by Proposition 3.3, for ϵ &gt; 0 small enough, the function ( J d + ϵ Γ) A is uniformly coercive on D . Moreover, ( J d + ϵ Γ) ∈ S ++ d ( R ) as J d ∈ S + d ( R ) .

Conversely, if Π ∈ S ++ d ( R ) is such that the function Π A is uniformly coercive on D with a coefficient c &gt; 0 , with the same computation as (15)-(17), we have that for x ∈ 1 ⊥ and 1 ≤ k ≤ d ,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

so Π satisfies ( C ) . To conclude, it is obvious that if Π A is uniformly coercive, then Π A is uniformly coercive with a coefficient κ ≤ l min (Π) 2 .

Making Condition ( C ) explicit does not seem to be an easy task in general, but we give here simpler criteriae which are all proved in Appendix B, for particular situations.

- For d = 2 , Condition ( C ) is satisfied, for the choice Γ = I 2 .
- For d = 3 , we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Condition ( C ) is satisfied if and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the convention that 1 0 = + ∞ .

- For d ≥ 4 , we give in Appendix B a numerical procedure to check if there exists a diagonal matrix that satisfies Condition ( C ) .
- For d ≥ 4 , if

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

then Condition ( C ) is satisfied, for the choice Γ = I d .

## 3.2 µ has a square integrable density

We first suppose that the measure µ has a square integrable density with respect to the Lebesgue measure. In this case, we denote by p 0 , the element of L obtained by multiplication of that density by the vector ( α 1 , ..., α d ) , and we define the stronger variational formulation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We call V L 2 ( µ ) the problem defined by (18)-(22). If p only satisfies (19), then the initial condition (22) does not make sense. We will show that if p satisfies the conditions (19)-(21), then p is a.e. equal to a function continuous from [0 , T ] into L . We consider in what follows this continuous representative and therefore the initial condition (22) makes sense. We now present an existence result to V L 2 ( µ ) .

Theorem 3.5. Under Condition (C), V L 2 ( µ ) has a solution p ∈ C ([0 , T ] , L ) such that for almost every ( t, x ) in [0 , T ] × R , ∑ d i =1 p i ( t, x ) = ( µ ∗ h t )( x ) = R h t ( x -y ) µ ( y ) dy .

To prove Theorem 3.5, we apply Galerkin's procedure, as in [30, III. 1.3]. Since H is a separable Hilbert space, there exists a sequence ( w k ) k ≥ 1 = (( w k 1 , ..., w kd )) k ≥ 1 of linearly independent elements which is total in H . It is not at all obvious to preserve the condition that p takes values in D a.e. on [0 , T ] × R at the discrete level. That is why, for ϵ &gt; 0 , we introduce for ρ ∈ ( R + ) d the approximation M ϵ of M defined on ( R + ) d by

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

We introduce the approximation A ϵ of A defined on ( R + ) d by A ϵ = 1 2 ( I d + M ϵ ) , and the approximate variational formulation V ϵ ( µ ) defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the same reasons as for the variational formulation V L 2 ( µ ) , any solution of V ϵ ( µ ) has a continuous representative in C ([0 , T ] , L ) , and therefore (26) makes sense.

We first prove existence to V ϵ ( µ ) by Galerkin's procedure. Then we will check that a.e. on [0 , T ] × R , p ϵ takes values in ( R + ) d . We will then obtain existence to V L 2 ( µ ) by taking the limit ϵ → 0 . In what follows, whenever Condition ( C ) is satisfied, we denote by Π an element of S ++ d ( R ) such that Π A is uniformly coercive on D with a coefficient κ ∈ ( 0 , l min (Π) 2 ) , and both exist by Corollary 3.4. Let us remark that as the function v → Π v is a bijection from H to H and Π is symmetric, Equality (25) is equivalent to:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This formulation will help us take advantage of the coercivity property of the function Π A . For m ∈ N ∗ , we denote by p m 0 the orthogonal projection of p 0 onto the subspace of L spanned by ( w 1 , ..., w m ) . We first solve an approximate formulation named V ϵ m ( µ ) :

Find

g

m

ϵ,

1

, ..., g

m

ϵ,m

∈

C

([0

, T

]

,

R

)

,

such that the function

t

∈

[0

, T

]

→

p

ϵ m

(

t

) :=

∑

m

j

=1

g

m

ϵ,j

(

t

)

w

j

satisfies:

(28)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote by W ( m ) ∈ S ++ m ( R ) the non singular Gram matrix of the linearly independent family ( √ Π w i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ m , with coefficients W ( m ) ij = ( w i , Π w j ) d for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ m . We introduce g m ϵ, 0 := ( g m 01 , ..., g m 0 m ) ∈ R m , which is p m 0 expressed on the basis ( w 1 , ..., w m ) , and g ϵ m := ( g m ϵ, 1 , ..., g m ϵ,m ) . We define the function K ϵ m : R m → M m ( R ) such that for z ∈ R m , K ϵ m ( z ) is the matrix with coefficients

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ m and we define the function F ϵ m on R m by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Solving V ϵ m ( µ ) becomes equivalent to solving the following ODE for g ϵ m :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To show existence of a unique solution to ( V ϵ m ( µ )) , for m ≥ 1 , we check that the function F ϵ m is locally Lipschitz and that the function A ϵ is bounded. The proof of Lemma 3.6 below is postponed to Appendix A.

Lemma 3.6. For m ≥ 1 , the function z ∈ R m → F ϵ m ( z ) is locally Lipschitz.

Lemma 3.7. For ϵ &gt; 0 and B ∈ A ϵ ( ( R + ) d ) , || B || ∞ ≤ 1 2 ( 1 + λ max λ min ) .

Proof. For ϵ &gt; 0 , A ϵ (0) = 1 2 I d , so || A ϵ (0) || ∞ = 1 2 . For ρ ∈ D and ϵ &gt; 0 , it is clear that || M ϵ ( ρ ) || ∞ ≤ || M ( ρ ) || ∞ ≤ λ max λ min , where the inequality on the r.h.s comes from the proof of Lemma 3.2, so || A ϵ ( ρ ) || ∞ ≤ 1 2 ( 1 + λ max λ min ) .

Lemma 3.8. For every m ≥ 1 , there exists a unique solution to ( V ϵ m ( µ )) .

Proof. For m ≥ 1 , we use Lemma 3.6 and the Cauchy-Lipschitz theorem to get existence and uniqueness of a maximal solution g ϵ m on the interval [0 , T ∗ ) for a certain T ∗ &gt; 0 . It is sufficient to show that T ∗ &gt; T , to ensure that g ϵ m is defined on [0 , T ] . As A ϵ is uniformly bounded by 1 2 ( 1 + λ max λ min ) by Lemma 3.7, we have that all the coefficients of ( W ( m ) ) -1 K ϵ m are uniformly bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For 1 ≤ i ≤ m ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Summing over the index i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , we have for t ∈ [0 , T ∗ ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

1

and by Gronwall's lemma, for 0 ≤ t &lt; T ∗ , (∑ m i =1 | g m ϵ,i ( t ) | ) ≤ (∑ m i =1 | g m ϵ,i (0) | ) exp( mγt ) . If T ∗ &lt; ∞ , the function t → (∑ m i =1 | g m ϵ,i ( t ) | ) would explode as t → T ∗ . We conclude that T ∗ = ∞ , g ϵ m is defined on [0 , T ] and p ϵ m = ∑ m i =1 g m ϵ,i ( t ) w i is the solution to V ϵ m ( µ ) .

Before showing the existence of a converging subsequence of ( p ϵ m ) m ≥ 1 whose limit is a solution of V ϵ ( µ ) , we check that Π A ϵ is uniformly coercive on D , uniformly in ϵ &gt; 0 .

Lemma 3.9. If Π A is uniformly coercive on D with coefficient κ ∈ ( 0 , l min (Π) 2 ) , then for ϵ &gt; 0 , Π A ϵ is uniformly coercive on ( R + ) d with coefficient κ .

Proof. For ϵ &gt; 0 , A ϵ (0) = 1 2 I d so ∀ ξ ∈ R d , ξ ∗ Π A ϵ (0) ξ = 1 2 ξ ∗ Π ξ ≥ l min (Π) 2 ξ ∗ ξ ≥ κξ ∗ ξ . For ρ ∈ D , if ϵ ≤ ∑ l λ l ρ l , then A ϵ ( ρ ) = A ( ρ ) and by hypothesis ∀ ξ ∈ R d , ξ ∗ Π A ϵ ( ρ ) ξ ≥ κξ ∗ ξ . If ϵ &gt; ∑ l λ l p l , then for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d , M ϵ,ij ( ρ ) = ( 1 ϵ ∑ l λ l ρ l ) 2 M ij ( ρ ) , with ( 1 ϵ ∑ l λ l ρ l ) 2 &lt; 1 . If ξ ∗ Π M ( ρ ) ξ ≤ 0 , then ξ ∗ Π M ϵ ( ρ ) ξ ≥ ξ ∗ Π M ( ρ ) ξ and ξ ∗ Π A ϵ ( ρ ) ξ ≥ ξ ∗ Π A ( ρ ) ξ ≥ κξ ∗ ξ . If ξ ∗ Π M ( ρ ) ξ &gt; 0 , then ξ ∗ Π M ϵ ( ρ ) ξ ≥ 0 and ξ ∗ Π A ϵ ( ρ ) ξ ≥ 1 2 ξ ∗ Π ξ ≥ κξ ∗ ξ , so Π A ϵ is uniformly coercive on ( R + ) d with coefficient κ .

We now state an existence result for ( V ϵ ( µ )) .

Proposition 3.10. Under Condition ( C ) , for ϵ &gt; 0 , there exists a solution p ϵ ∈ C ([0 , T ] , L ) to ( V ϵ ( µ )) .

Proof. We compute standard energy estimates of p ϵ m for m ≥ 1 . We multiply (29) by g m ϵ,i ( t ) and add these equations for i = 1 , ..., m . This gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the uniform coercivity of the function Π A ϵ , we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, we get the following inequalities:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We see that the sequence ( p ϵ m ) m ≥ 1 remains in a bounded set of L 2 ([0 , T ]; H ) ∩ L ∞ ([0 , T ]; L ) , so there exists an element p ϵ ∈ L 2 ([0 , T ]; H ) ∩ L ∞ ([0 , T ]; L ) and a subsequence, for notational simplicity also called ( p ϵ m ) m ≥ 1 , that has the following convergence:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now show that there exists a subsequence of ( p ϵ m ) m ≥ 1 that converges a.e. on (0 , T ) × R to p ϵ . For q ∈ H , let us define the function G ϵ q ∈ H ′ , by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for v ∈ H . Then the equality (29) rewrites:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As by Lemma 3.7, the matrices in A ϵ ( ( R + ) d ) are uniformly bounded by 1 2 ( 1 + λ max λ min ) , we have for q ∈ H :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the family ( p ϵ m ) m ≥ 1 is bounded in L 2 ([0 , T ] , H ) , the family ( G ϵ p ϵ m ) m ≥ 1 is bounded in L 2 ([0 , T ] , H ′ ) and the computations in [30, (iii) p. 285] give that for any bounded open subset O ⊂ R , modulo the extraction of a subsequence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We define for n ≥ 1 , O n = ( -n, n ) , so O n ⊂ O n +1 , and ⋃ n ≥ 1 O n = R . By diagonal extraction, we get from ( p ϵ m ) m ≥ 1 a subsequence, called ( p φ ( m ) ϵ ) m ≥ 1 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We show that p ϵ is a solution to the variational formulation V ϵ ( µ ) . For 1 ≤ j ≤ m and ψ ∈ C 1 ([0 , T ] , R ) with ψ ( T ) = 0 , we have, through integration by parts, the equality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The sequence ( p φ ( m ) 0 ) m ≥ 0 converges strongly to p 0 in L so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The sequence ( p φ ( m ) ϵ ) m ≥ 0 converges weakly to p ϵ in L 2 ([0 , T ] , L ) so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the remaining term, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the term in (41), the sequence ( ∂ x p φ ( k ) ϵ ) k ≥ 0 converges weakly to ∂ x p ϵ in L 2 ([0 , T ]; L ) . In addition, by Lemma 3.7, A ϵ is bounded, so the function t → ψ ( t ) A ∗ ϵ ( p + ϵ ( t ))Π ∂ x w j belongs to L 2 ([0 , T ]; L ) and we have the convergence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we used the energy estimate (35) in the last inequality. The function A ϵ is continuous on ( R + ) d as shown in the proof of Lemma 3.6, and p φ ( m ) ϵ → p ϵ a.e. on [0 , T ] × R , so A ϵ ( ( p φ ( m ) ϵ ) + ) → A ϵ ( p + ϵ ) a.e. on [0 , T ] × R . By Lemma 3.7, A ϵ is uniformly bounded so we have through dominated convergence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus we have shown that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

When we gather the convergence results and use the fact that the sequence ( w j ) j ≥ 1 is total in H , we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which rewrites:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If moreover ψ belongs to C ∞ c ((0 , T )) , we obtain that p ϵ satisfies (25) in the distributional sense on (0 , T ) . For v ∈ H , the function t → ( v, p ϵ ( t )) d belongs to H 1 ((0 , T )) , as the functions t ∈ (0 , T ) → ( v, p ϵ ( t )) d and t ∈ (0 , T ) → ( ∂ x v, A ϵ ( p + ϵ ( t )) ∂ x p ϵ ( t )) d both belong to L 2 ((0 , T )) . Thanks to [7, Corollary 8.10], the following integration by parts formula also holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

If we choose ψ (0) = 0 , then by comparing (45) with (44), we have that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and this concludes the proof for the existence of a solution to ( V ϵ ( µ )) . We now show that p ϵ ∈ C ([0 , T ] , L ) . The function p ϵ satisfies:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the distributional sense on (0 , T ) , with

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then by [30, III. Lemma 1.2], p ϵ is a.e. equal to a function belonging to C ([0 , T ] , L ) .

Proposition 3.11. Under Condition ( C ) , for ϵ &gt; 0 , the solutions to V ϵ ( µ ) are non negative.

Proof. Let p ϵ = ( p ϵ, 1 , ..., p ϵ,d ) be a solution to the variational problem V ϵ ( µ ) . For x ∈ R , let x -= min( x, 0) . We take p -ϵ = ( p -ϵ, 1 , ..., p -ϵ,d ) as a test function in (25). Thanks to (47)-(48), we obtain by [30, Lemma 1.2 p. 261]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the sense of distributions. For f ∈ H 1 ( R ) , ∂ x f -= 1 { f&lt; 0 } ∂ x f , so we have ∀ i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , p + ϵ,i ∂ x p -ϵ,i = 0 , ∂ x p -ϵ,i ∂ x p ϵ,i = ( ∂ x p -ϵ,i ) 2 . As a consequence,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Equality (49) simplifies into

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us show that for 1 ≤ i ≤ d ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For 1 ≤ i ≤ d ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

We distinguish the cases p + ϵ,i &gt; 0 and p + ϵ,i = 0 . In the first case, ∂ x p -ϵ,i = 1 { p ϵ,i &lt; 0 } ∂ x p ϵ,i = 0 , so (50) is true. In the second case, let us define z := ( ∑ l = i λ l p + ϵ,l ) = ( ∑ d l =1 λ l p + ϵ,l ) , and notice that ( λ i ∑ l = i p + ϵ,l ) ≥ λ min λ max z . Thus we obtain:

as 0 ≤ z 2 ϵ 2 ∨ z 2 ≤ 1 , and (50) is also true.

Consequently, R ∑ d i =1 ( p -ϵ,i ) 2 ( t ) is non increasing in time. As R ∑ d i =1 ( p -ϵ,i ) 2 (0) dx = R ∑ d i =1 ( p -0 ,i ) 2 dx = 0 , we conclude that p ϵ has every component non-negative. Let us remark that to obtain the non negativity of the solutions to V ϵ ( µ ) , it is sufficient and easier to prove directly that A ϵ,ii ≥ 0 for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , but Inequality (50) will be reused for the proof of Proposition 5.7 below.

Before showing the existence of a solution to V L 2 ( R ) , we compute the energy estimates on p ϵ .

Lemma 3.12. Let ϵ &gt; 0 , and let p ϵ be a solution to V ϵ ( µ ) . The following energy estimates hold.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We obtain the energy estimates by taking p ϵ as the test function in (25), and the computations are the same as for (34)-(36).

Proposition 3.13. Under Condition ( C ) , V L 2 ( µ ) has a solution p , which satisfies the same energy estimates as the solutions to V ϵ ( µ ) , and that are given by (51)-(53). Moreover, a.e. on (0 , T ) × R , ∑ d i =1 p i ( t, x ) = µ ∗ h t ( x ) .

Proof. For ϵ &gt; 0 , let us now denote by p ϵ a solution to V ϵ ( µ ) , which exists under Condition ( C ) according to Proposition 3.10. The family ( p ϵ ) ϵ&gt; 0 is bounded in L 2 ([0 , T ]; H ) ∩ L ∞ ([0 , T ]; L ) , as the energy estimates (51)(53) have bounds that do not depend on ϵ . There exists a limit function p ∈ L 2 ([0 , T ]; H ) ∩ L ∞ ([0 , T ]; L ) and a subsequence ( ϵ k ) k ≥ 1 decreasing to 0 , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

and p also satisfies Inequalities (51)-(53), where we replace p ϵ by p . Moreover, in the sense of [30, III, Lemma 1.1], we check with arguments similar to (38) that the family ( dp ϵ k dt ) k ≥ 1 is bounded in L 2 ([0 , T ] , H ′ ) and by [30, III, Theorem 2.3], for any bounded open subset O ⊂ R , there is a subsequence of ( p ϵ k ) k ≥ 1 converging to p in L 2 ([0 , T ] , L ( O )) strongly and a.e. on [0 , T ] ×O . Then by diagonal extraction, similarly to the proof of Proposition 3.10, we can also assume that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and that p is non negative as p ϵ is non negative for ϵ &gt; 0 . For any function ψ ∈ C 1 ([0 , T ] , R ) , with ψ ( T ) = 0 , and k ≥ 1 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The sequence ( p ϵ φ ( k ) ) k ≥ 0 converges weakly to p in L 2 ([0 , T ]; H ) so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We show that p takes values in D a.e. on [0 , T ] × R . As for ρ ∈ ( R + ) d , and 1 ≤ j ≤ d , ∑ d i =1 M ϵ,ij ( ρ ) = 0 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, in the sense of distributions on (0 , T ) , for ˜ v ∈ H 1 ( R ) , and v := (˜ v, ..., ˜ v ) ∈ H ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also have for ϵ &gt; 0 , ∑ d i =1 p ϵ,i (0 , x ) dx = µ ( dx ) . Then the function ∑ d i =1 p ϵ,i is a solution to the formulation H L 2 ( µ ) defined by :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The problem H L 2 ( µ ) is a variational formulation to the heat PDE

∂

z

t

z

(0)

=

=

1

2

∂

µ,

and it is well known that the solution of H L 2 ( µ ) is unique and expressed as the convolution of µ with the heat kernel h t ( x ) = 1 √ 2 πt exp ( -x 2 2 t ) . Consequently, for a subsequence ( p ϵ k ) k ≥ 1 such that p ϵ k → k →∞ p a.e. on (0 , T ] × R , the sequence ( z ϵ k ) k ≥ 1 , defined by z ϵ k = ∑ d i =1 p ϵ k ,i satisfies

for almost every ( t, x ) ∈ (0 , T ] × R , ∀ k ≥ 1 , z ϵ k ( t, x ) = µ ∗ h t ( x ) &gt; 0 ,

and the value of z ϵ k ( t, x ) is independent from ϵ k . If we define z 0 = ∑ d i =1 p i , we have that z 0 ( t, x ) = µ ∗ h t ( x ) &gt; 0 a.e. on (0 , T ] × R . As the limit p has every component non-negative, we can thus conclude that p takes values in D , a.e. on (0 , T ] × R . Then for almost every ( t, x ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R , there exists k 0 ( t, x ) such that ∀ k ≥ k 0 ( t, x ) , ∑ λ i p ϵ φ ( k ) ,i ( t, x ) ≥ 1 2 ∑ i λ i p i ( t, x ) &gt; ϵ φ ( k ) . For k ≥ k 0 ( t, x ) , A ϵ φ ( k ) ( p ϵ φ ( k ) ( t, x )) = A ( p ϵ φ ( k ) ( t, x )) , and as A is continuous on D , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

z

xx By Lemma 3.7, the family ( A ϵ φ ( k ) ) k ≥ 1 has bounds uniform in k . Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the same manner as in (42). Consequently, we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly to the proof of Proposition 3.10, we prove (21) and obtain p ∈ C ([0 , T ] , L ) . Finally we repeat the same arguments as in (46) to conclude that p is a solution to V L 2 ( µ ) .

## 3.3 Proof of Theorem 2.1

We first introduce a lemma that will be used later in the proof.

Lemma 3.14. Let γ ≥ 0 and let φ be a non-negative function, s.t. ∀ t ∈ (0 , T ] , T t φ 2 ( s ) ds ≤ γ √ t .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. With monotone convergence, then using the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, we obtain, for t ∈ (0 , T ] :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now let ( σ k ) k ≥ 0 be a sequence decreasing to 0 as k → ∞ . In order to rely on Theorem 3.5, we approximate µ by a sequence of measures µ σ k , weakly converging to µ and that have densities in L 2 ( R ) . To do so, we apply a convolution product on µ by setting µ σ k := µ ∗ h σ 2 k . The measure µ σ k is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure, with the density

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With Jensen's inequality and Fubini's theorem, we check that µ σ k ∈ L 2 ( R ) . Indeed,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us define p 0 ,σ k := ( α 1 µ σ k , ..., α d µ σ k ) ∈ L and let us denote by p σ k = ( p σ k , 1 , ..., p σ k ,d ) a solution to the variational formulation V L 2 ( µ σ k ) , which exists as an application of Theorem 3.5, and that satisfies equality (58) with initial condition p 0 ,σ k as in the proof of Proposition 3.13. We compute the same energy estimates as previously. As p σ k ,i is non-negative for 1 ≤ i ≤ d and ∑ d i =1 p σ k ,i = µ σ k ∗ h t a.e. on (0 , T ) × R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Π p σ k as a test function in (21) and the fact that Π A is uniformly coercive on D with coefficient κ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us remark that the estimates T 0 | p σ k ( t ) | 2 d dt and T t | ∂ x p σ k ( t ) | 2 d ds, for t ∈ (0 , T ) have bounds that are independent from the choice of σ k . Then for a sequence ( s n ) n ≥ 1 with values in (0 , T ) and decreasing to 0 as n →∞ , there exists a function p defined a.e. on (0 , T ] × R such that for each n ≥ 1 , there exists a converging subsequence called again p σ k with the following convergences:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly to the proof of Proposition 3.13, we can also suppose, modulo the extraction of a subsection that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By diagonal extraction, we obtain a subsequence, called again p σ k such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us remark that p ≥ 0 as p σ k ≥ 0 for k ≥ 1 . Moreover, for a.e. ( t, x ) ∈ (0 , T ] × R , µ σ k ∗ h t ( x ) = ∑ d i =1 p σ k ,i ( t, x ) → k →∞ ∑ d i =1 p ( t, x ) = µ σ k ∗ h t ( x ) , so p takes values in D a.e. on (0 , T ] × R . Let us prove that p is a solution to V ( µ ) . For k ≥ 0 , as p σ k satisfies (58) with initial condition p 0 ,σ k , for ψ ∈ C 1 ([0 , T ] , R ) such that ψ ( T ) = 0 , v ∈ H 1 ( R ) , we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We study the limit as k →∞ . First,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as p σ k → p in L 2 ((0 , T ]; L ) weakly. Since p 0 ,σ k → p 0 weakly and v ∈ H is continuous and bounded, we have the following convergence

To show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we check that the family ( ∂ x p σ k ) k ≥ 1 and ∂ x p belong to a bounded subset of L 1 ((0 , T ] , L ) . More precisely, for q ∈ ( ∂ x p σ k ) k ≥ 1 ∪ { ∂ x p } , using (59) we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and by Lemma 3.14, we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We then write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For fixed t &gt; 0 , the first term of the r.h.s. goes to 0 as k → ∞ with the same reasoning used to obtain (43). Moreover,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality and Lemma 3.7. Using (61), the l.h.s. of Inequalities (62) and (63) can be made arbitrarily small, uniformly in k , choosing t small enough, so we obtain (60). Gathering the convergence results we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and this is enough to obtain (11). As it is easy to check that the function s → ( v, p ( s )) belongs to H 1 (( t, T )) for t ∈ (0 , T ) , similarly to (45), we also have the following integration by parts formula:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

The integrals on the l.h.s converge to -T 0 ( ψ ′ ( s ) v, p ( s )) d ds + T 0 ( ψ ( s ) ∂ x v, A ( p ) ∂ x p ) d ds as t → 0 , as it is easy to check by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality that the functions s → ( ψ ′ ( s ) v, p ( s )) d and s → ( ψ ( s ) ∂ x v, A ( p ) ∂ x p ) d belong to L 1 ((0 , T ) , R ) . If we choose ψ (0) = 0 , we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by comparing (64) with (65) and this gives existence to V ( µ ) . Moreover, we obtain, with the same arguments as the end of Proposition 3.10 p ∈ C ((0 , T ] , L ) , and this concludes the proof.

## 3.4 Proof of Theorem 2.2

The existence of a solution to the variational formulation V ( µ ) will give the existence of a weak solution to the original SDE (1). This essentially comes from the equivalence between existence to a Fokker-Planck equation and existence to the corresponding martingale problem, established by Figalli in [12]. To use that result, we first give a lemma that makes V ( µ ) compatible with the variational formulation described in [12].

Lemma 3.15. Let p be a solution to V ( µ ) . Then, for 1 ≤ i ≤ d and a.e. s ∈ (0 , T ) , ( ∑ k p k ∑ k λ k p k λ i p i ) ( s, · ) ∈ H 1 ( R ) and 1 2 ∂ x ( ∑ k p k ∑ k λ k p k λ i p i ) ( s, · ) = ( A ( p ) ∂ x p ) i ( s, · ) .

Proof. It is sufficient to show that for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d and a.e. s ∈ (0 , T ) , p i p j ∑ k λ k p k ( s, · ) ∈ H 1 ( R ) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as we conclude by linearity. For a.e. s ∈ (0 , T ) , p i p j ∑ k λ k p k ( s, · ) and ( p i ∂ x p j + p j ∂ x p i ∑ k λ k p k -p i p j ( ∑ k λ k p k ) 2 ∑ k λ k ∂ x p k ) ( s, · ) belong to L 2 ( R ) , as ∀ i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , p i ∑ k λ k p k ∈ [0; 1 λ min ] , a.e. on (0 , T ) × R . It is sufficient to show that for K ⊂ R compact, φ ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) with support included in K , and a.e. s ∈ (0 , T ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ( ρ n ) n ≥ 1 be a regularizing sequence, where ρ n ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) , with a support included in ( -1 n , 1 n ) , R ρ n = 1 , and ρ n ≥ 0 for n ≥ 1 . We define p n,i ( s, · ) := ρ n ∗ p i ( s, · ) . Then for a.e. s ∈ (0 , T ) , ( p n,i ( s, · )) n ≥ 0 , i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } are sequences of non negative functions in C ∞ ( R ) ∩ H 1 ( R ) such that for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , the following strong convergences hold, by [7, Theorem 4.22]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We first check that for n ≥ 1 , x ∈ R and a.e. s ∈ (0 , T ) , ∑ d k =1 λ k p n,k ( s, x ) &gt; 0 . Indeed, as ∑ i p i is a solution to the heat equation, ∑ d i =1 p i ( s, x ) = µ ∗ h s ( x ) a.e. on (0 , T ) × R , we have that for x ∈ R and a.e. s ∈ (0 , T ) , ∑ d k =1 λ k p n,k ( s, x ) ≥ λ min ∑ d k =1 p n,k ( s, x ) = λ min ρ n ∗ µ ∗ h s ( x ) &gt; 0 . Then for a.e. s ∈ (0 , T ) , we have the equality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For a.e. s ∈ (0 , T ) , modulo the extraction of a subsequence (which can depend on s ), we can assume that for 1 ≤ l ≤ d and a.e. x ∈ K , p n,l ( s, x ) → n →∞ p l ( s, x ) . As ∑ d l =1 p l ( s, x ) = µ ∗ h s ( x ) &gt; 0 for a.e. x ∈ R , we have p n,l ∑ k λ k p n,k ( s, x ) → p l ∑ k λ k p k ( s, x ) for a.e. x ∈ K . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The first term of the r.h.s converges to 0 as n → ∞ , as p n,i ( s, · ) → n →∞ p i ( s, · ) in L 2 ( R ) , and the second term also converges to 0 by dominated convergence as p n,i ∑ k λ k p n,k ( s, · ) → p i ∑ k λ k p k ( s, · ) a.e. on K , and ∀ i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , ∀ n ≥ 1 , p n,i ∑ k λ k p n,k ( s, x ) ∈ [0; 1 λ min ] . This ensures that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for a.e. s ∈ (0 , T ) . With similar arguments, we let n → ∞ in the r.h.s. of (67), we have the convergence of the r.h.s. term to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for a.e. s ∈ (0 , T ) and this concludes the proof.

We can now prove Theorem 2.2. By Lemma 3.15 the solution of the variational formulation V ( µ ) satisfies :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the sense of distributions. Then through an integration by parts,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For y i ∈ Y , [12, Theorem 2.6] gives the existence of a probability measure P y i on the space C ([0 , T ] , R ) with canonical process ( X t ) 0 ≤ t ≤ T satisfying :

X

0

∼

µ

under

P

y

i

,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and for t &gt; 0 , X t has the density p i ( t, · ) α i under P y i . We then form the measure Q = ∑ d i =1 α i P y i ( dX ) ⊗ δ y i ( dY ) and show that it solves the following martingale problem:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For φ ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) and t ≥ 0 , M φ,Y t is bounded as ∣ ∣ ∣ f 2 ( Y ) ∑ d i =1 p i ( s,X s ) ∑ d i =1 f 2 ( y i ) p i ( s,X s ) ∣ ∣ ∣ ≤ λ max λ min . For s ≥ 0 , we define F s = σ ( { X u , u ≤ s } ) . To obtain our result it is enough to check that for 0 ≤ s ≤ t ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For φ ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) and g measurable and bounded on R p ×Y , p ≥ 1 , and 0 ≤ s 1 ≤ ... ≤ s p ≤ s ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as M φ,y i t is a P y i -martingale for 1 ≤ i ≤ d . So E Q [ M φ,Y t |F s , Y ] = M φ,Y s , and M φ,Y t is a Q -martingale. For 0 ≤ s ≤ T , we compute the conditional expectation E Q [ f 2 ( Y ) | X s ] . Given a bounded measurable function g on R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus under Q , X s has the density ∑ d i =1 p i ( s, · ) , which is equal to µ ∗ h s ( · ) by Theorem 2.1, so X s has the same law as Z + W s , where Z ∼ µ and Z is independent from ( W t ) t ≥ 0 . Moreover, we have the equality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore Q is a solution to the martingale problem:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and this ensures the existence of a weak solution to the SDE (1).

## 4 Calibrated RSLV models

We extend the results obtained in the previous sections to the case when the asset price S follows the dynamics:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Y 0 is a random variables with values in Y , µ is a probability measure on R ×Y , Y is a process evolving in Y , with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for j = Y t , and for 1 ≤ i = j ≤ d , the function q ij : R → R is non negative. Moreover, for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , we define q ii := -∑ j = i q ij . We assume that (log ( S 0 ) , Y 0 ) and ( W t ) t ≥ 0 are independent. In addition, we assume that there exists q &gt; 0 such that || q ij || ∞ ≤ q for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d , and that the risk free rate r is constant. We define ˜ σ Dup ( t, x ) := σ Dup ( t, e x ) . The asset log-price X t = log S t follows the dynamics:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Formally, if we apply Gyongy's theorem, any solution to the SDE (68) should have the same time marginals as the solution to the Dupire SDE for the asset's log-price:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ X 0 is the law of X 0 . The Fokker-Planck PDS associated with the SDE (68)-(69) writes, for 1 ≤ i ≤ d :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , µ i is the conditional law of X 0 given { Y 0 = i } , and as before, α i = P ( Y 0 = i ) ≥ 0 . We denote by Λ the diagonal d × d matrix with coefficients ( λ i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d . We define, for ρ ∈ D , R ( ρ ) := ∑ d i =1 ρ i ∑ d i =1 λ i ρ i , and for x ∈ R , Q ( x ) = ( q ij ( x )) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ d . Moreover, we assume that the European call prices given by the market have sufficient regularity so that the following assumption holds.

Assumption (B) . The function ˜ σ Dup belongs to the space L ∞ ([0 , T ] , W 1 , ∞ ( R )) , and there exists a constant σ &gt; 0 such that a.e. on [0 , T ] × R , σ ≤ ˜ σ Dup .

We will denote by σ &gt; 0 some constant such that a.e. on [0 , T ] × R , ˜ σ Dup ≤ σ . For the PDS (72)-(73), we introduce an associated variational formulation, called V Fin ( µ ) :

Find

p

∈

L

2

loc

p

((0

= (

, T

p

];

1

, ..., p

d

)

satisfying:

H

)

∩

L

∞

loc

((0

, T

];

L

)

,

p takes values in D , a.e. on (0 , T ) × R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the sense of distributions on (0 , T ) , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us remark that if we sum the PDS (72) over the index i , as ∑ d i =1 q ji = 0 for 1 ≤ j ≤ d , then ∑ d i =1 p i satisfies the Fokker-Planck equation associated to the SDE (71):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

In the same way, if p is a solution to V Fin ( µ ) , then u := ∑ d i =1 p i solves LV ( µ X 0 ) , where for ν ∈ P ( R ) , LV ( ν ) is defined by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

u ∈ L 2 loc ((0 , T ]; H 1 ( R )) ∩ L ∞ loc ((0 , T ]; L 2 ( R )) , u ≥ 0 , ∀ v ∈ H 1 ( R ) , d dt ( v, u ) 1 -r ( ∂ x v, u ) 1 + ( ∂ x v, 1 2 ˜ σ Dup (˜ σ Dup +2 ∂ x ˜ σ Dup ) u ) 1 + 1 2 ( ∂ x v, ˜ σ 2 Dup ∂ x u ) 1 = 0 in the sense of distributions on (0 , T ) , and u ( t, · ) weakly-* → t → 0 + ν.

Lemma 4.1. Under Assumption (B), for ν ∈ P ( R ) , the solutions of LV ( ν ) are continuous and positive on (0 , T ] × R .

The proof of Lemma 4.1 is postponed to Appendix C. We make here an additional assumption on the regularity of the function ˜ σ Dup .

Assumption (H) . The function ˜ σ Dup is continuous and there exist two constants H 0 &gt; 0 and χ ∈ (0 , 1] such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If ˜ σ Dup ∈ L ∞ ([0 , T ] , W 1 , ∞ ( R )) and ˜ σ Dup is continuous, then ˜ σ Dup and ˜ σ 2 Dup have the Lipschitz property in the space variable, uniformly in time so that existence and trajectorial uniqueness hold for (70)-(71). Moreover, Assumptions ( H ) and ( B ) imply that there exists ˜ H 0 &gt; 0 such that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, for ν ∈ P ( R ) , they are sufficient to obtain uniqueness to LV ( ν ) and Aronson-like upper-bounds on the solution of LV ( ν ) . The proof of Proposition 4.2 that follows is also postponed to Appendix C.

Proposition 4.2. Under Assumptions ( B ) and ( H ) , there exists a unique solution u to LV ( µ X 0 ) and the time marginals of the solution ( X t D ) t ∈ (0 ,T ] to the SDE (70)-(71) are given by ( u ( t, · )) t ∈ (0 ,T ] . Moreover, there exists a finite constant ζ , independent from µ X 0 and such that u satisfies || u ( t ) || 2 L 2 ≤ ζ √ t for a.e. t ∈ (0 , T ] .

We give here the main results on the calibrated RSLV model, that we prove in Section 5.

Theorem 4.3. Under Condition ( C ) , Assumptions ( B ) and ( H ) , there exists a solution p ∈ C ((0 , T ] , L ) to V Fin ( µ ) such that ∑ d i =1 p i is the unique solution to LV ( µ X 0 ) .

Theorem 4.4. Under Condition ( C ) , Assumptions ( B ) and ( H ) , there exists a weak solution to the SDE (68)-(69). which has the same time marginals as those of the solution to the SDE (70)-(71).

## 5 Proofs of Section 4

## 5.1 Proof of Theorem 4.3

Similarly to the proof of Theorem 2.1, in Subsection 5.1.1, under the hypothesis that for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , µ i has a square integrable density with respect to the Lebesgue measure, we prove existence to a variational formulation slightly stronger than V Fin ( µ ) . Then, in Subsection 5.1.2, when µ is a general probability measure on R ×Y , we mollify µ i for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , in order to use the results of Subsection 5.1.1 and obtain a solution to V Fin ( µ ) .

## 5.1.1 Case when µ has square integrable densities

In this section, the measures ( µ i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d are assumed to have square integrable densities which are also denoted by µ i for notational simplicity. We define p 0 := ( α 1 µ 1 , ..., α d µ d ) ∈ L . We define the variational formulation V Fin,L 2 ( µ ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the sense of distributions on (0 , T ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To show existence to V Fin,L 2 ( µ ) , we use Galerkin's procedure, as in the proof of Theorem 2.1. It is not obvious that p takes values in D a.e. on (0 , T ) × R at the discrete level, that is why for ϵ &gt; 0 , we define, for ρ ∈ ( R + ) d , R ϵ ( ρ ) = ∑ d i =1 ρ i ϵ ∨ ( ∑ d i =1 λ i ρ i ) and we introduce the variational formulation V Fin,ϵ ( µ ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the sense of distributions on (0 , T ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us remark that if p (resp. p ϵ ) satisfies (76)-(78) (resp. (80)-(82)), those conditions imply that dp dt (resp. dp ϵ dt ) belongs to L 2 ([0 , T ] , H ′ ) in the sense of [30, III, Lemma 1.1], so by [30, III, Lemma 1.2], p (resp. p ϵ ) is equal a.e. on [0 , T ] to a function of C ([0 , T ] , L ) , so that the initial condition (79) (resp. 83) makes sense.

To take advantage of the fact that under Condition ( C ) , there exists Π ∈ S ++ d ( R ) and κ &gt; 0 such that Π A and Π A ϵ , for ϵ &gt; 0 , are uniformly coercive on D with the coefficient κ , we introduce, for ϵ &gt; 0 and m ≥ 1 , the approximate variational formulation V m Fin,ϵ ( µ ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p m 0 is the orthogonal projection of p 0 in L on the space spanned by ( w j ) 1 ≤ j ≤ m . For z ∈ R m and t ≥ 0 , we define K m ϵ, 1 ( t, z ) the matrix, where for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ m :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

K m ϵ, 2 ( t, z ) the matrix where for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ m ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and K m ϵ, 3 the constant matrix where for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ m :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We then define F m ϵ,k ( t, z ) := ( W ( m ) ) -1 K m ϵ,k ( t, z ) z , for k = 1 , 2 , and F m ϵ, 3 ( z ) := ( W ( m ) ) -1 K m ϵ, 3 z , Finally we define for z ∈ R m , G ϵ m ( t, z ) := -F m ϵ, 1 ( t, z ) -F m ϵ, 2 ( t, z ) + F m ϵ, 3 ( z ) . The ODE for g ϵ m rewrites:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the vector g m ϵ, 0 is the expression of p m 0 on the basis ( w i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ m . We prove existence and uniqueness to V m Fin,ϵ ( µ ) . We clearly have the following lemma.

Lemma 5.1. The functions R and R ϵ , for ϵ &gt; 0 , are uniformly bounded. More precisely, || R ϵ || L ∞ ( ( R + ) d ) ≤ 1 λ min , || R || L ∞ ( D ) ≤ 1 λ min .

Lemma 5.2. Under Assumption (B), for m ≥ 1 , the functions K m ϵ, 1 and K m ϵ, 2 are uniformly bounded.

Proof. Using Assumption ( B ) , Lemma 5.1 and Lemma 3.7, for t ∈ [0 , T ] , x ∈ R , ρ ∈ D , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is sufficient to show that K m ϵ, 1 and K m ϵ, 2 are uniformly bounded, as the functions ( w ik ∂ x w jl ) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ m, 1 ≤ k,l ≤ d and ( ∂ x w ik ∂ x w jl ) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ m, 1 ≤ k,l ≤ d belong to L 1 ( R ) .

Lemma 5.3. Under Assumption ( B ) , for m ≥ 1 , the functions F m ϵ, 1 and F m ϵ, 2 are locally Lipschitz in z , uniformly in t ∈ [0 , T ] .

The proof of Lemma 5.3 is similar to the proof of Lemma 3.6 and is postponed to Appendix A.

Lemma 5.4. Under Assumption (B), V m Fin,ϵ ( µ ) has a unique solution.

Proof. In addition to Lemma 5.3, F ϵ, 3 is clearly a Lipschitz function. Therefore the function G ϵ is locally Lipschitz in z uniformly in t . Caratheodory's theorem (see e.g. [17, Theorems 5.2, 5.3]) gives the existence of a unique maximal absolutely continuous solution g ϵ m on an interval [0 , T ∗ ) , with T ∗ &gt; 0. In addition, as the function ( t, z ) →-W -1 K ϵ, 1 ( t, z ) -W -1 K ϵ, 2 ( t, z )+ W -1 K ϵ, 3 is uniformly bounded on R + × R m , we conclude as in the proof of Lemma 3.8, using Gronwall's lemma, that T ∗ = ∞ . Consequently, g ϵ m is defined on [0 , T ] , and there exists a unique solution to V m Fin,ϵ ( µ ) .

We now compute energy estimates on the solution p ϵ m to V m Fin,ϵ ( µ ) , for m ≥ 1 and ϵ &gt; 0 . Taking p ϵ m as a test function in (84), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For η &gt; 0 , by Young's inequality we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C := d || Π || ∞ ( λ max 2 λ min σ ( σ +2 || ∂ x ˜ σ || ∞ ) + r ) . As for ϵ &gt; 0 , Π A ϵ is uniformly coercive with coefficient κ , and ˜ σ Dup is bounded from below by σ &gt; 0 , so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We then choose η = κ 2 C σ 2 , so that Cη = κ 2 σ 2 . Moreover, for b := d 2 q || Π || ∞ we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Gathering the previous inequalities we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As | p ϵ m | 2 d ≤ 1 l min (Π) | √ Π p ϵ m | 2 d , we also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Integrating the inequality (87), and using the fact that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we obtain the following lemma.

Lemma 5.5. The following energy estimates hold.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we can prove existence to V Fin,ϵ ( µ ) .

## Proposition 5.6. There exists a solution p ϵ to ( V Fin,ϵ ( µ )) .

Proof. Given ϵ &gt; 0 , the family ( p ϵ m ) m ≥ 0 has standard energy estimates with bounds independent from m . We also check that (84) rewrites for 1 ≤ j ≤ m

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where for q ∈ H , G ϵ q ∈ H ′ , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We see that for almost every t ∈ [0 , T ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Lemma 5.5 the family ( p ϵ m ) m ≥ 1 is bounded in L 2 ([0 , T ] , H ) and through the equality (91) the family ( G ϵ p ϵ m ) m ≥ 1 is bounded in L 2 ([0 , T ] , H ′ ) . What follows is a repetition of arguments used in the proof of Proposition 3.10. We extract a subsequence of ( p ϵ m ) m ≥ 1 , also denoted by ( p ϵ m ) m ≥ 1 , and a function p ϵ ≥ 0 such that as m →∞ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For j ≥ 1 , ψ ∈ C 1 ( R ) , with ψ ( T ) = 0 , and m ≥ j , we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following convergences hold, using the same arguments as in the proof of Proposition 3.10.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We only explain how to deal with the additional terms. As p ϵ m → p ϵ weakly in L 2 ([0 , T ]; L ) , we have that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As the function R ϵ is continuous and bounded on ( R + ) d , and as p ϵ m → m →∞ p ϵ a.e. on (0 , T ] × R , we have that R ϵ ( ( p ϵ m ) + ) → m →∞ R ϵ ( ( p ϵ ) + ) a.e. on [0 , T ] × R . As the bounds (88)-(90) are independent from m , we show, with the same arguments as for (43), that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As the family ( w j ) j ≥ 1 is total in H , and the function v → Π v is a bijection from H to H , we conclude that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus we have checked that p ϵ satisfies (82). With the same arguments as the end of the proof of Proposition 3.10, we can show that for v ∈ H , the function t → ( v, p ϵ ( t )) d belongs to H 1 (0 , T ) , and that p ϵ satisfies the initial condition (83), so that p ϵ is a solution to V Fin,ϵ ( µ ) .

We now show that the solutions of V Fin,ϵ ( µ ) are non negative.

Proposition 5.7. The solutions of V Fin,ϵ ( µ ) are non negative.

Proof. Let us take p -ϵ as a test function in (82). We obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the proof of Proposition 3.11, we have shown that A ϵ,ii ( p + ϵ ) ( ∂ x p -ϵ,i ) 2 ≥ λ min 2 λ max ( ∂ x p -ϵ,i ) 2 , so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the Young inequality, for η &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where K = 1 2 λ max λ min σ ( σ +2 || ∂ x ˜ σ Dup || ∞ ) + r . We set η = σ 2 λ min 4 Kλ max , so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

We also check that ( Qp -ϵ , p + ϵ ) d ≤ 0 . Indeed, as for i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , p -ϵ,i p + ϵ,i = 0 and q ij ≥ 0 for j = i ,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so the r.h.s of (92) is nonpositive. Moreover, ( Qp -ϵ , p -ϵ ) d ≤ dq | p -ϵ | 2 d , so we have the inequality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We thus obtain that the function t → exp ( -2 ( dq + K 2 σ 2 λ max λ min ) t ) | p -ϵ ( t ) | 2 d is non increasing. As p -ϵ (0) = 0 , we can conclude that p -ϵ ≡ 0 .

We check that if p is the limit of a sequence ( p ϵ k ) k ≥ 1 , with p ϵ k being a solution of V Fin,ϵ k ( µ ) for k ≥ 1 , then p takes values in D .

Lemma 5.8. Let ( p ϵ k ) k ≥ 1 be a sequence such that for k ≥ 1 , p ϵ k is a solution to V Fin,ϵ k ( µ ) , and ϵ k → k →∞ 0 . If the sequence ( p ϵ k ) k ≥ 1 has the limit p , in the sense:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then under Assumptions ( B ) and ( H ) , ∑ d i =1 p i is the unique solution to LV ( µ X 0 ) and p takes values in D .

Proof. For k ≥ 1 , we define u ϵ k := ∑ d i =1 p ϵ k ,i , and u := ∑ d i =1 p i . Then u ϵ k satisfies, for ψ ∈ C ∞ c ((0 , T ) , R ) and v ∈ H 1 ( R ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as for i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , ∑ d j =1 q ij = 0 and ∑ d j =1 A ϵ,ij = 1 2 . As p ϵ k → p in L 2 ([0 , T ]; H ) weakly, the terms on the r.h.s of the first line converge to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is sufficient to show that the term on the r.h.s of the second line converges to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For a.e. ( t, x ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R , u ϵ k ( t, x ) → u ( t, x ) . Let us remark that by Proposition 5.7, for k ≥ 1 , p ϵ k ≥ 0 , so p and u are nonnegative. If u ( t, x ) &gt; 0 , then ∑ d i =1 λ i p ϵ k ,i ϵ k ∨ ( ∑ d i =1 λ i p ϵ k ,i ) ( t, x ) → 1 . If u ( t, x ) = 0 , ∑ d i =1 λ i p ϵ k ,i ϵ k ∨ ( ∑ d i =1 λ i p ϵ k ,i ) u ϵ k ( t, x ) → 0 as

∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∑ d i =1 λ i p ϵ k ,i ϵ k ∨ ( ∑ d i =1 λ i p ϵ k ,i ) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ≤ 1 . Let us use the following decomposition : u ϵ k = 1 { u&gt; 0 } u ϵ k +1 { u =0 } u ϵ k . We first study the limit, as k →∞ , of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The function u ϵ k converges weakly to u in L 2 ([0 , T ] , L 2 ( R )) . Moreover the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

converges strongly to 1 2 ˜ σ Dup (˜ σ Dup +2( ∂ x ˜ σ Dup ))1 { u&gt; 0 } ∂ x v , in L 2 ([0 , T ] , L 2 ( R )) . Indeed, the convergence is a.e. and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we conclude by dominated convergence. Therefore, I 1 ( k ) converges, as k →∞ , to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

because u ≥ 0 . We then study the term

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We notice that I 2 ( k ) ≤ 1 2 σ ( σ +2 || ∂ x ˜ σ || ∞ ) T 0 | ψ ( t ) | ( | ∂ x v | 1 { u =0 } , u ϵ k ) 1 , and the r.h.s. converges to 0 as k →∞ , as u ϵ k → u weakly in L 2 ([0 , T ] , L ) . We prove that the initial condition is satisfied with the arguments at the end of the proof of Proposition 3.10. So we conclude that u is, by Proposition 4.2, the unique solution to LV ( µ X 0 ) and by Lemma 4.1, u &gt; 0 a.e. on (0 , T ) × R . Finally, as p is nonnegative, p takes values in D a.e. on [0 , T ] × R .

Proposition 5.9. Under Assumption (B), (H) and Condition (C), there exists a solution p ∈ C ([0 , T ] , L ) to V Fin,L 2 ( µ ) such that ∑ d i =1 p i is the unique solution to LV ( µ X 0 ) .

Proof. It is easy to check that the family ( p ϵ ) ϵ&gt; 0 satisfies uniform in ϵ energy estimates. Using (91), we also obtain that the family ( dp ϵ dt ) ϵ&gt; 0 is bounded in L 2 ([0 , T ] , H ′ ) . Similarly to the proof of Proposition 3.13, there exists a subsequence ( p ϵ k ) k ≥ 1 converging to a function p ≥ 0 , with the convergences as ϵ k → 0 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We check that for v ∈ H and ψ ∈ C 1 ([0 , T ] , R ) with ψ ( T ) = 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The convergence is justified as p takes values in D a.e. by Lemma 5.8, R ϵ k ( p ϵ k ) → k →∞ R ( p ) a.e. on [0 , T ] × R (with the same argument that justifies A ϵ ( p ϵ ) → A ( p ) a.e. in (57)), the functions R ϵ and R have uniform bounds by Lemma 5.1, and p ϵ k → p weakly in L 2 ([0 , T ] , H ) . Similarly we also obtain the convergence:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As p ϵ k → p weakly in L 2 ([0 , T ] , L ) , we finally obtain the equality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that (78) is verified and we conclude the proof with the same arguments as in the end of the proof of Proposition 3.10 to obtain existence to V Fin,L 2 ( µ ) . By Lemma 5.8, ∑ d i =1 p i solves LV ( µ X 0 ) , which has a unique solution by Proposition 4.2. Finally, if p is a solution to V Fin,L 2 ( µ ) , then p is a.e. equal to a function that belongs to C ([0 , T ] , L ) and this concludes the proof.

## 5.1.2 Case when µ is a general probability measure on R ×Y

We now prove Theorem 4.3. When µ is a general probability measure on R × Y , for σ &gt; 0 , we mollify each µ i , 1 ≤ i ≤ d into measures µ σ,i := µ i ∗ h σ with square integrable densities, also denoted by µ σ,i , and we define µ σ as the measure under which the conditional law of X 0 given { Y 0 = i } is given by µ σ,i and P ( Y 0 = i ) = α i . Let ( σ k ) k ≥ 0 be a decreasing sequence converging to 0 as k → ∞ . Let us denote by p σ k a solution to V Fin,L 2 ( µ σ k ) , which exists by Proposition 5.9. Let us remark that for k ≥ 0 , ∑ d i =1 p σ k ,i satisfies LV ( ∑ d i =1 α i µ σ k ,i ) . We compute energy estimates, using Proposition 4.2:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we used (89) for the last inequality. Repeating the arguments of the proof in Subsection 3.3, we obtain a subsequence again called p σ k , such that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We show that p takes values in D a.e. on (0 , T ] × R . To do so, we show that u := ∑ d i =1 p i is a solution to ( LV ) with initial condition µ X 0 . For ψ ∈ C 1 ([0 , T ] , R ) , and v ∈ H 1 ( R ) , as u σ k := ∑ d i =1 p σ k ,i → u in L 2 ((0 , T ] , L 2 ( R )) weakly,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us define Υ := 1 2 1 / 4 -1 ( l max (Π) ζ κ σ e 2 l min (Π) ( b + C 2 2 κσ 2 ) T ) 1 / 2 . By Lemma 3.14, we have that for ∀ t ∈ (0 , T ) and k ≥ 1 , t 0 | ∂ x p σ k ( s ) | d ds ≤ Υt 1 / 4 and t 0 | ∂ x p ( s ) | d ds ≤ Υt 1 / 4 . Then, ∀ t ∈ (0 , T ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and t 0 | ∂ x u | d dt ≤ √ dΥt 1 / 4 . The same arguments as those leading to (60) enable to prove that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The initial condition is treated as before. This is sufficient to prove that u solves LV ( µ X 0 ) and assert that p takes values in D by Lemma 4.1. For ψ ∈ C 1 ([0 , T ] , R ) , such that ψ ( T ) = 0 and v ∈ H , as p σ k → p weakly in L 2 ((0 , T ] , L ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We check that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is the case as the sequence ( p σ k ) k ≥ 0 converges to p weakly in L 2 ((0 , T ] , L ) , R is bounded and continuous on D , and R ( p σ k ) → R ( p ) a.e. on (0 , T ] × R . We also check that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

using the same argument as for (60). Arguments similar to (66) enable to check the initial condition and thus assert existence to V Fin ( µ ) . As any solution to V Fin ( µ ) has a representative in C ((0 , T ] , L ) , this concludes the proof of Theorem 4.3.

## 5.2 Existence of a weak solution to the SDE (68)

To prove Theorem 4.4, we use Theorem 5.11 below, which is a generalization of [12, Theorem 2.6] to make a link between the existence to a Fokker-Planck system and the existence to the corresponding martingale problem. Theorem 5.11 is proved in Appendix D. There exist several generalizations of [12, Theorem 2.6], among whom we can mention [13], where the coefficients of the generator are no longer bounded but have linear growth, and [32], where the author deals with a partial integro differential equation with a Lévy generator.

## 5.2.1 Generalization of [12, Theorem 2.6]

Given functions ( b i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d , ( a i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d , ( q ij ) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ d defined on [0 , T ] × R and a finite measure µ 0 on R ×Y , we study the following PDS, where for 1 ≤ i ≤ d :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 5.10. A family of vectors of Borel measures ( µ 1 ( t, · ) , ..., µ d ( t, · )) t ∈ (0 ,T ] is a solution to the PDS (94)-(95) if for any function φ defined on S such that ∀ i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , φ ( · , i ) ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the distributional sense on (0 , T ) , and for 1 ≤ i ≤ d and ψ ∈ C 2 b ( R ) , the function t → R ψ ( x ) µ i ( t, dx ) is continuous on (0 , T ] and converges to R ψ ( x ) µ 0 ( dx, { i } ) as t → 0 .

̸

̸

We suppose that all the coefficients b i , a i , q ij , 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d, are uniformly bounded on [0 , T ] × R , that the coefficients ( a i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d are non negative, that the coefficients ( q ij ) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ d are non negative functions for i = j , and q ii = -∑ j = i q ij . We introduce the SDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where Y t is a stochastic process with values in Y , and that satisfies, for j = Y t ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We define E = { ( X,Y ) , X ∈ C ([0 , T ] , R ) , Y càdlàg with values in Y} endowed with the Skorokhod topology. For a probability measure m on R ×Y , a probability measure ν on E is a martingale solution to the SDE (97) with initial condition m if under the probability ν , the canonical process ( X,Y ) on E satisfies ( X 0 , Y 0 ) ∼ m and for any function φ defined on R ×Y s.t. ∀ i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , φ ( · , i ) ∈ C 2 b ( R ) , the process

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a ν -martingale. Now we can state the generalization of [12, Theorem 2.6], that will be used in the following section.

Theorem 5.11. Let ( µ 1 ( t, · ) , ..., µ d ( t, · )) t ∈ (0 ,T ] be a solution to the PDS (94)-(95) where the initial condition µ 0 is a probability measure on R ×Y . We moreover suppose that there exists B &gt; 0 , s.t. for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , and t ∈ (0 , T ] , µ i ( t, R ) ≤ B . Then the SDE (97) with initial distribution µ 0 has a martingale solution ν which satisfies the following representation formula: for 1 ≤ i ≤ d and ψ ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 5.2.2 Proof of Theorem 4.4

Let p be a solution to V Fin ( µ ) with the properties stated in Theorem 4.3. To show that ( p 1 ( t, x ) dx, ..., p d ( t, x ) dx ) t ∈ (0 ,T ] satisfies the variational formulation in the sense of distributions (96), we check that for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , ˜ σ 2 Dup ∑ d k =1 p k ∑ d k =1 λ k p k λ i p i ∈ H 1 ( R ) , and ∂ x ( ˜ σ 2 Dup ∑ d k =1 p k ∑ d k =1 λ k p k λ i p i ) = ˜ σ 2 Dup ( A ( p ) p ) i + ∑ d k =1 p k ∑ d k =1 λ k p k λ i p i ∂ x ˜ σ 2 Dup . As ˜ σ Dup ∈ L ∞ ([0 , T ] , W 1 , ∞ ( R )) , it is sufficient to check that ∑ d k =1 p k ∑ d k =1 λ k p k λ i p i ∈ H 1 ( R ) and that ∂ x ( ∑ d k =1 p k ∑ d k =1 λ k p k λ i p i ) = ( A ( p ) p ) i , and the proof is exactly the same as the one of Lemma 3.15, thanks to Lemma 4.1 which ensures the positivity of ∑ d i =1 p i a.e. on (0 , T ] × R . Then by Theorem 5.11, there exists a measure ν under which ( X 0 , Y 0 ) ∼ µ and for any function φ defined on S s.t. ∀ i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , φ ( · , i ) ∈ C 2 b ( R ) , the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a ν -martingale. Moreover, for h : Y → R and g : R → R continuous and bounded functions, we have that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking h ≡ 1 and h ≡ f , we check that the time marginals of X are given by ∑ d i =1 p i and that E ( f 2 ( Y s ) | X s ) = ∑ d k =1 λ k p k ∑ d k =1 p k ( s, X s ) . Therefore ν is a solution to the martingale problem associated to the SDE (68), and we obtain existence of a weak solution to the SDE (68) by [22, Theorem 2.3], and which has the same time marginals as the solution of the SDE (71).

## 5.3 A more general fake Brownian motion

We consider the SDE:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where the process ( Y t ) t ≥ 0 takes values in Y and P ( Y t + dt = j | ( X s , Y s ) , 0 ≤ s ≤ t ) = q Y t j ( X t ) dt , for 1 ≤ j ≤ d and j = Y t , with the functions ( q ij ) 1 ≤ i = j ≤ d non negative and bounded, and q ii = -∑ j = i q ij for 1 ≤ i ≤ d . The vector ( X 0 , Y 0 ) has the probability distribution µ on R ×S and is independent from ( W t ) t ≥ 0 . The associated Fokker-Planck PDS writes:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with ( α i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d and ( µ i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d defined as in Section 4. We introduce an associated variational formulation V Jump ( µ ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the sense of distributions on (0 , T ) , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With the same arguments used to prove Theorems 4.3 and 4.4, we can prove the following results. The main difference is that ∑ d i =1 p is solution to the heat equation and not the Dupire PDE, but existence and uniqueness, positivity and Aronson-like estimates of the solution hold in both cases, so it does not affect the proof.

Theorem 5.12. Under Condition (C), V Jump ( µ ) has a solution p ∈ C ((0 , T ] , L ) . Moreover, ∑ d i =1 p i ( t, x ) = µ X 0 ∗ h t ( x ) a.e. on (0 , T ] × R .

Theorem 5.13. Under Condition (C), SDE (98) has a weak solution, and its time marginals are those of ( Z + W t ) t ≥ 0 , where Z has the law µ X 0 and is independent from ( W t ) t ≥ 0 .

Moreover, the solutions to SDE (98) are also continuous fake Brownian motions provided that f ( Y 0 ) can take at least two distinct values with positive probability. Let us define ˜ Y := { i ∈ Y , P ( Y 0 = i ) &gt; 0 } .

Proposition 5.14. Under Condition (C), if f is non constant on ˜ Y , the solutions to SDE (98) with initial condition µ = δ 0 are continuous fake Brownian motions.

Proof. Let ( X t ) t ≥ 0 be a solution to SDE (98), with initial condition X 0 = 0 . The process X is a continuous martingale, and by [16, Theorem 4.6], for t ≥ 0 , X t ∼ N (0 , t ) . We consider its quadratic variation d 〈 X 〉 t = f 2 ( Y t ) E [ f 2 ( Y t ) | X t ] dt . We reason by contraposition and first suppose that a.s., for a.e. t &gt; 0 , the equality f 2 ( Y t ) = E [ f 2 ( Y t ) | X t ] . Then a.s., for t &gt; 0 , X t = W t and there exists a measurable function ψ t , such that ψ t ( X t ) = f 2 ( Y t ) . For i ∈ ˜ Y and g : R → R measurable and non negative, let us fix t &gt; 0 such that those properties hold and consider the term:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by independence between Y 0 and ( W t ) t ≥ 0 . Therefore on the event {∀ s ∈ [0 , t ] , Y s = y i } , the random variable X t belongs with positive probability to any Borel set with positive Lebesgue measure. By the equality ψ t ( X t ) = f 2 ( Y t ) , the previous observation implies that f is constant on ˜ Y . To conclude the proof, if f is non constant on ˜ Y , by contraposition, the function t → 〈 X 〉 t is not equal to the identity function, and ( X t ) t ≥ 0 is a fake Brownian motion.

## A Local Lipschitz property

## A.1 Proof of Lemma 3.6

Proof. Let m ≥ 1 . It is sufficient to show that the function z ∈ R m → K ϵ m ( z ) is locally Lipschitz to have z ∈ R m → F ϵ m ( z ) locally Lipschitz. Let us remark that for a, b ∈ { 1 , ..., m } , ( K ϵ ( z ) -K ϵ (˜ z )) ab only contains integrals of type:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Θ ∈ L 1 ( R ) , as for c, d ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , ∂ x w ac ∂ x w bd ∈ L 1 ( R ) . For Θ ∈ L 1 ( R ) , 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d and z ∈ R m , let us define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Let C be a compact subset of R m . Let us show that the function z → g ij ( z ) is Lipschitz on C and conclude by linearity. For i = j , ρ, ˜ ρ ∈ R d ,

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where we used the fact that ∀ a, b ∈ R , | a + -b + | ≤ | a -b | and that in the last inequality, ∀ ϵ, a, b ≥ 0 , | ( ϵ ∨ a ) 2 -( ϵ ∨ b ) 2 | = | ϵ ∨ a + ϵ ∨ b || ϵ ∨ a -ϵ ∨ b | ≤ | 2 ϵ + a + b || a -b | . We now replace ρ by ∑ m k =1 z k w k , and ˜ ρ by ∑ m k =1 ˜ z k w k . As the sequence ( w k ) k ≥ 1 belongs to H , by [7, Corollary VIII.8], for k ≥ 1 and 1 ≤ i ≤ d , w ki ∈ L ∞ ( R ) and the

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with function ( x, z ) ∈ R × C → ∑ m k =1 z k w k ( x ) ∈ R d takes values for a.e. x ∈ R in a bounded subset of R d . Then there exists an uniform bound B &lt; ∞ s.t. ∀ z, ˜ z ∈ C,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so after integration against Θ ∈ L 1 ( R ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and g ij is Lipschitz on C . Exactly in the same way, we also obtain that the functions ( g ii ) i ∈{ 1 ,...,d } , are Lipschitz on C , so K ϵ m is locally Lipschitz and this concludes the proof.

## A.2 Proof of Lemma 5.3

Proof. Let m ≥ 0 . It is sufficient to prove that K m ϵ, 1 and K m ϵ, 2 are locally Lipschitz in z uniformly in t . In the proof of Lemma 3.6, we have shown that the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is locally Lipschitz, uniformly for Θ in a bounded subset of L 1 ( R ) . As the family ( ˜ σ 2 Dup ( t, · ) ∂ x w ik ∂ x w jl ) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ m, 1 ≤ k,l ≤ d,t ∈ [0 ,T ] belongs to a bounded subset of L 1 ( R ) , we then have that F ϵ, 2 is locally Lipschitz in z uniformly in t . To show the local Lipschitz property of F ϵ, 1 , it is sufficient to prove that for any function Θ ∈ L 1 ( R ) , the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is locally Lipschitz in z uniformly in t , as the functions ( w jk ∂ x w il ) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ m, 1 ≤ k,l ≤ d belong to L 1 ( R ) , and ˜ σ Dup and ∂ x ˜ σ Dup are uniformly bounded. The result is obtained since the function ρ → R ϵ ( ρ + ) is locally Lipschitz and the functions ( w ki ) 1 ≤ k ≤ m, 1 ≤ i ≤ d belong to L ∞ ( R ) , as in the proof of Lemma 3.6.

## B About Condition ( C )

In Subsection B.1, we give a necessary and sufficient condition for a diagonal matrix to satisfy Condition ( C ) . We also give a numerical procedure to check if there exists a diagonal matrix that satisfies ( C ) . Then, in Subsection B.2, we focus on the case d = 3 , and give a simple necessary and sufficient condition for ( C ) to be satisfied. When d = 3 , ( C ) is satisfied if and only if it is satisfied by a diagonal matrix. When d ≥ 4 , we do not know if this property still holds.

## B.1 The diagonal case

For k ≥ 1 , δ := ( δ 1 , ..., δ k ) ∈ R k , let us denote by Diag ( δ ) ∈ M k ( R ) the diagonal matrix with coefficients δ 1 , ..., δ k .

Proposition B.1. For d ≥ 2 and α := ( α 1 , ..., α d ) ∈ ( R ∗ + ) d , Diag ( α ) satisfies Condition ( C ) if and only if

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

Proof. For 1 ≤ k ≤ d , the symmetric matrix D ( k ) with coefficients

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d , is positive definite on e ⊥ k if and only if the matrix ˜ D ( k ) defined as D ( k ) with its k -th row and k -th column removed, is positive definite on R d -1 . Here we only show how to deal with the case k = d , but the same arguments can be used for the indices 1 ≤ k ≤ d -1 . The matrix ˜ D ( d ) has coefficients

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d -1 . We define ∆ := Diag ( ( √ λ i α i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d -1 ) . The matrix ˜ D ( d ) rewrites

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a = (√ λ i α i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d -1 and b = ( 1 √ λ i α i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d -1 . The matrix ˜ D ( d ) is positive definite if and only if the matrix

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

has positive eigenvalues. The columns of the matrix ab ∗ + ba ∗ are linear combinations of a and b . If a and b are not colinear (resp. colinear), then the matrix ab ∗ + ba ∗ has eigenvalues 0 with multiplicity d -2 and ∑ d -1 i =1 a i b i -√ ∑ d -1 i =1 a 2 i √ ∑ d -1 i =1 b 2 &lt; 0 for the eigenvector a -√ ∑ d -1 i =1 a 2 i √ ∑ d -1 i =1 b 2 b (resp. 0 with multiplicity d -1 ), and ∑ d -1 i =1 a i b i + √ ∑ d -1 i =1 a 2 i √ ∑ d -1 i =1 b 2 &gt; 0 for the eigenvector a + √ ∑ d -1 i =1 a 2 i √ ∑ d -1 i =1 b 2 b . Thus, ˜ D ( d ) is definite positive if and only if

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

which is equivalent to (99) for k = d . Using the same arguments on ˜ D ( k ) for 1 ≤ k ≤ d -1 , we obtain (99).

The choice α = (1 , ..., 1) ∈ R d in Inequality (99) gives a sufficient condition for the identity matrix I d to satisfy Condition ( C ) .

## Corollary B.2. If the condition

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

is satisfied then Condition ( C ) is satisfied for the choice Γ = I d . In particular, if λ 1 = ... = λ d , then ( C ) is satisfied.

Moreover, for d = 2 , Inequality (100) is always satisfied, as for k = 1 , 2 , √ λ k 1 λ k = 1 &lt; 3 .

## Corollary B.3. If d = 2 , then Condition ( C ) is satisfied for the choice Γ = I 2 .

From Inequality (99), we deduce a method to check numerically whether there exists a diagonal matrix that satisfies Condition ( C ) . We suppose that the values of λ 1 , ..., λ d are not equal, otherwise by Corollary B.2, I d satisfies Condition ( C ) . For z = ( z 1 , ..., z d ) ∈ ( R 2 ) d , let us denote by C ( z ) = { x ∈ R 2 |∃ µ 1 , ..., µ d &gt; 0 , ∑ d i =1 µ i = 1 , x = ∑ d i =1 µ i z i } , the strict convex envelope of z . Let α := ( α 1 , ..., α d ) ∈ ( R ∗ + ) d , such that Diag ( α ) satisfies Condition ( C ) . By Proposition B.1, (99) holds and rewrites

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If we define ˜ λ = ∑ d i =1 λ i 1 α i ∑ d k =1 1 α k ∈ C ( ( λ i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d ) , ˜ λ -1 = ∑ d i =1 1 λ i 1 α i ∑ d k =1 1 α k ∈ C ( ( 1 λ i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d ) , then Inequality (101) writes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We deduce that there exists a diagonal matrix that satisfies Condition ( C ) if and only if there exists ( x, y ) ∈ C (( λ 1 , 1 λ 1 ) , ..., ( λ d , 1 λ d )) and a probability distribution ( p 1 , ..., p d ) ∈ ( R + ∗ ) d such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For ( x, y ) ∈ C (( λ 1 , 1 λ 1 ) , ..., ( λ d , 1 λ d )) , let us define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proposition B.4. If λ 1 , ..., λ d are not all equal, there exists a diagonal matrix that satisfies Condition ( C ) if and only if there exists ( x, y ) ∈ C (( λ 1 , 1 λ 1 ) , ..., ( λ d , 1 λ d )) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. If a diagonal matrix Diag ( α ) , where α := ( α 1 , ..., α d ) ∈ ( R ∗ + ) d , satisfies Condition ( C ) , then (102) holds and it is easy to check that if we set p i = 1 α i ∑ d k =1 1 α k for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , x = ∑ d i =1 λ i p i and y = ∑ d i =1 p i λ i , the conditions in (103) hold so the conditions in (104) are satisfied, as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Conversely, if ( x, y ) ∈ C ( ( λ i , 1 λ i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d ) and satisfies (104), then there exists a probability distribution ( q 1 , ..., q d ) ∈ ( R + ∗ ) d such that X ( x, y ) = ∑ d i =1 λ i q i and Y ( x, y ) = ∑ d i =1 1 λ i q i and it is easy to check that if we set p i = (1 -M 0 ( x, y )) q i +( xy -1) ( 2 + x λ i + λ i y ) -1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ d then the conditions in (103) are satisfied.

Given a discretization parameter n and the vector ( l 1 , ..., l d ) , which is the nondecreasing reordering of ( λ 1 , ..., λ d ) , the numerical procedure that follows builds a grid G that consists in ( d -1) ( n -1) 2 points of C (( λ 1 , 1 λ 1 ) , ..., ( λ d , 1 λ d )) and returns the list V of the points ( x, y ) ∈ G satisfying (104). The border of the convex C (( λ 1 , 1 λ 1 ) , ..., ( λ d , 1 λ d )) has a simple shape. Indeed, it is a polygon with vertices ( l i , 1 l i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d and edges {( l i , 1 l i ) , ( l i +1 , 1 l i +1 )} 1 ≤ i ≤ d , where we define ( l d +1 , 1 l d +1 ) = ( l 1 , 1 l 1 ) .

and if M 0 ( x, y ) &lt; 1 ,

```
1
```

```
1: V = [] 2: for i = 1 , ..., d -1 do 3: for k 1 = 1 , ..., n -1 do 4: x = l i +( l i +1 -l i ) k 1 n 5: y min = 1 l i n -k 1 n + 1 l i +1 k 1 n 6: y max = 1 l 1 -x -l 1 l 1 l d 7: for k 2 = 1 , ..., n -1 do 8: y = y min +( y max -y min ) k 2 n 9: M 0 = ( xy -1) ∑ d k =1 ( 2 + x l i + l i y ) -1 10: if M 0 < 1 then 11: M 1 = ( xy -1) ∑ d k =1 l i ( 2 + x l i + l i y ) -1 12: X = x -M 1 1 -M 0 13: if l 1 < X < l d then 14: j = Sum ( X > l ) 15: z min = 1 l j -X -l j l j l j +1 16: z max = 1 l 1 -X -l 1 l 1 l d 17: M -1 = ( xy -1) ∑ d k =1 1 l i ( 2 + x l i + l i y ) -18: Y = y -M -1 1 -M 0 19: if z min < Y < z max then 20: V = ( x, y ) :: V 21: end if 22: end if 23: end if 24: end for 25: end for 26: end for 27: return V
```

In Figure 1 below, we give an idea of the shape of this convex and we illustrate the output of the numerical procedure for n = 200 , d = 5 , λ 1 = 1 , λ 2 = 2 , λ 3 = 3 , λ 4 = 5 and λ 5 = 10 . The border of the convex envelope C (( λ 1 , 1 λ 1 ) , ..., ( λ 5 , 1 λ 5 )) is colored in red, and the points ( x, y ) in C (( λ 1 , 1 λ 1 ) , ..., ( λ 5 , 1 λ 5 )) satisfying (104) are colored in black. Condition ( C ) is thus satisfied in this situation.

Figure 1: Condition ( C ) is satisfied for d = 5 , λ 1 = 1 , λ 2 = 2 , λ 3 = 3 , λ 4 = 5 and λ 5 = 10 , where n = 200 .

<!-- image -->

The advantage of such a numerical procedure is that it operates in a bounded convex of R 2 with a simple shape, instead of a bounded convex of R d , as Inequality (99) would suggest.

## B.2 The case d = 3

In the following, we study the case d = 3 . We recall that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us first explicit the link between the values of r 1 , r 2 , r 3 .

Lemma B.5. The values of r 1 , r 2 , r 3 are linked by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. As r 1 = λ 3 λ 2 + λ 2 λ 3 ≥ 2 and r 2 = λ 1 λ 3 + λ 3 λ 1 ≥ 2 , we have that λ 2 λ 3 , λ 3 λ 2 ∈ { 1 2 ( r 1 -√ r 2 1 -4 ) , 1 2 ( r 1 + √ r 2 1 -4 )} and λ 1 λ 3 , λ 3 λ 1 ∈ { 1 2 ( r 2 -√ r 2 2 -4 ) , 1 2 ( r 2 + √ r 2 2 -4 )} . As λ 1 λ 2 = λ 1 λ 3 λ 3 λ 2 , we deduce the two values that r 3 can take.

We now give the main result concerning the case d = 3 .

Proposition B.6. There is equivalence between:

(i) The inequality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds, with the convention 1 0 = + ∞ .

(ii) Condition ( C ) is satisfied by a diagonal matrix.

- (iii) Condition ( C ) is satisfied.

We now prove Proposition B.6. To show that ( i ) ⇒ ( ii ) , we first study the case where there cardinality of { λ 1 , λ 2 , λ 3 } is smaller than 3 , which is equivalent to min( r 1 , r 2 , r 3 ) = 2 and implies (105).

Lemma B.7. If min( r 1 , r 2 , r 3 ) = 2 , then there exists a diagonal matrix that satisfies Condition ( C ) , i.e. ( ii ) holds.

Proof. Let α 1 , α 2 , α 3 &gt; 0 and p i = 1 α i 1 α 1 + 1 α 2 + 1 α 3 , i = 1 , 2 , 3 . Inequality (101) rewrites, for k = 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Writing p 2 1 = (1 -p 2 -p 3 ) 2 , and then using the fact that p 1 + p 2 + p 3 = 1 , we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With similar computations for k = 2 , 3 we moreover obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To prove Lemma B.7, it is sufficient to exhibit a probability distribution ( p 1 , p 2 , p 3 ) ∈ ( R + ∗ ) 3 such that Inequalities (106)- (107) are satisfied. In the case where r 1 = r 2 = 2 , we have that λ 1 = λ 2 = λ 3 so r 3 = 2 , and the choice p 1 = p 2 = p 3 = 1 3 satisfies (106)-(107). In the case where r 1 = 2 , r 2 &gt; 2 and r 3 &gt; 2 , we have that it is sufficient to choose p 1 ∈ ( 0 , min ( 1 , 4 r 2 -2 , 4 r 3 -2 )) and p 2 = p 3 = 1 -p 1 2 to satisfy (106)-(107).

To complete the proof of ( i ) ⇒ ( ii ) , we show that in the case min( r 1 , r 2 , r 3 ) &gt; 2 , if (105) holds, then Condition ( C ) is satisfied by a diagonal matrix.

Lemma B.8. Let us assume that min( r 1 , r 2 , r 3 ) &gt; 2 . If Inequality (105) holds, then ( ii ) holds.

Proof. Using the proof of Lemma B.7, it is easy to check that that if Inequality (105) is satisfied then (106)-(107) are satisfied for the choice p i = √ r i -2 √ r 1 -2+ √ r 2 -2+ √ r 3 -2 &gt; 0 , for i = 1 , 2 , 3 , so that the matrix Diag ( 1 p 1 , 1 p 2 , 1 p 3 ) satisfies Condition ( C ) .

As the relation ( ii ) ⇒ ( iii ) is trivial, we have obtained ( i ) ⇒ ( ii ) ⇒ ( iii ) . To prove ( iii ) ⇒ ( i ) , by Lemma B.7, it is sufficient to show that in the case min( r 1 , r 2 , r 3 ) &gt; 2 , if Condition ( C ) is satisfied then (105) holds. Let us remark that we can assume without loss of generality that r 1 ≤ r 2 ≤ r 3 , so in what follows we suppose that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The next lemma deals with the case r 3 -2 r 3 +2 ≥ r 1 -2 r 1 +2 + r 2 -2 r 2 +2 .

Lemma B.9. Let us assume that min( r 1 , r 2 , r 3 ) &gt; 2 . Then Inequality (105) is equivalent to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, if moreover r 3 -2 r 3 +2 ≥ r 1 -2 r 1 +2 + r 2 -2 r 2 +2 , then Inequality (105) holds.

Proof. Under the assumption that min( r 1 , r 2 , r 3 ) &gt; 2 , Inequality (105) rewrites 1 √ r 3 -2 ( 1 √ r 1 -2 + 1 √ r 2 -2 ) &gt; 1 4 -1 √ ( r 1 -2)( r 2 -2) , so it is equivalent to (108). The term r 1 -2 r 1 +2 + r 2 -2 r 2 +2 rewrites

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If √ ( r 1 -2) ( r 2 -2) &gt; 4 , then r 1 -2 r 1 +2 + r 2 -2 r 2 +2 &gt; 1 . Thus, since 1 &gt; r 3 -2 r 3 +2 , if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then √ ( r 1 -2) ( r 2 -2) ≤ 4 and Inequality (105) holds.

Let us now suppose that Condition ( C ) is satisfied by a matrix Γ ∈ S ++ 3 ( R ) . We consider, for k = 1 , 2 , 3 , the matrices Γ ( k ) with coefficients

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

v 1 := Γ 22 +Γ 33 -2Γ 23 , v 2 := Γ 11 +Γ 33 -2Γ 13 , v 3 := Γ 11 +Γ 22 -2Γ 12 .

The matrix Γ (3) rewrites

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We deduce that Γ (3) is positive definite on e ⊥ 3 if and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the determinant of the matrix ( Γ (3) ) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ 2 is positive, which rewrites 16 v 1 v 2 &gt; (√ λ 2 λ 1 + √ λ 1 λ 2 ) 2 ( v 1 + v 2 -v 3 ) 2 = ( r 3 +2)( v 1 + v 2 -v 3 ) 2 and therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We define With similar computations for Γ (1) and Γ (2) , we obtain the additional inequalities

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If Condition ( C ) is satisfied, then there exists v 1 , v 2 , v 3 satisfying (109)-(113). Let us define for i = 1 , 2 , 3 , γ i = 4 r i -2 r i +2 ∈ (0 , 4) . If we assume that moreover, γ 3 v 1 v 2 = γ 1 v 2 v 3 = γ 2 v 1 v 3 , that is γ 3 v 3 = γ 1 v 1 = γ 2 v 2 , then we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the case r 3 -2 r 3 +2 ≥ r 2 -2 r 2 +2 + r 1 -2 r 1 +2 , by Lemma B.9, Inequality (105) holds. We show in Lemma B.11 below that under the assumption r 3 -2 r 3 +2 &lt; r 2 -2 r 2 +2 + r 1 -2 r 1 +2 , Condition ( C ) implies Inequality (114). To conclude the proof of ( iii ) ⇒ ( i ) and therefore the proof of Proposition B.6, we show in Lemma B.10 below that (114) implies (105).

Lemma B.10. Let us assume that 2 &lt; r 1 ≤ r 2 ≤ r 3 , then Inequality (114) implies Inequality (105).

Proof. We see the term on the r.h.s. of Inequality (114) as a second degree polynomial in the variable γ 3 , which has two distinct roots z -&lt; z + . Indeed, γ 1 , γ 2 ∈ (0 , 4) , and the discriminant of the polynomial is γ 1 γ 2 (4 -γ 1 ) (4 -γ 2 ) &gt; 0 . As γ 3 = 4 r 3 -2 r 3 +2 , Inequality (114) is equivalent to r 3 ∈ ( 8+2 z -4 -z -, 8+2 z + 4 -z + ) , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Lemma B.9, we conclude that Inequality (114) implies Inequality (105).

Lemma B.11. Let us assume that 2 &lt; r 1 ≤ r 2 ≤ r 3 , and that r 3 -2 r 3 +2 &lt; r 2 -2 r 2 +2 + r 1 -2 r 1 +2 . If Condition ( C ) is satisfied then Inequality (114) holds.

Proof. Let us define the function f : ( R ∗ + ) 3 → R by f ( a 1 , a 2 , a 3 ) = 2 ( a 1 + a 2 + a 3 ) -a 1 a 2 a 3 -a 2 a 3 a 1 -a 1 a 3 a 2 . Reformulating Inequalities (110)-(113) with the change of variables a i = 1 v i , i = 1 , 2 , 3 , we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under the assumption that 2 &lt; r 1 ≤ r 2 ≤ r 3 , we have that 0 &lt; γ 1 ≤ γ 2 ≤ γ 3 , and let us remark that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( a (1) , a (2) , a (3) ) is the nondecreasing reordering of ( a 1 , a 2 , a 3 ) . Let R be the set of elements ( a 1 , a 2 , a 3 ) ∈ ( R ∗ + ) 3 such that a 1 ≤ a 2 ≤ a 3 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If Condition ( C ) is satisfied then R is not empty. Let us remark first that as both sides of (115) are homogeneous of order 1, R is stable by scaling: if ( a 1 , a 2 , a 3 ) ∈ R then for ζ &gt; 0 , ( ζa 1 , ζa 2 , ζa 3 ) ∈ R . Moreover, if we assume that there exists ( a 1 , a 2 , a 3 ) ∈ R such that γ 1 a 3 = γ 2 a 2 = γ 3 a 1 =: ∆ , then we can check that Inequality (114) is satisfied. Indeed, we have that a 3 = ∆ γ 1 , a 2 = ∆ γ 2 , a 3 = ∆ γ 1 , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Multiplying both sides of (116) by γ 1 γ 2 γ 3 ∆ , we obtain (114).

Let ( q 1 , q 2 , q 3 ) ∈ R . To prove that there exists ( u 1 , u 2 , u 3 ) ∈ R , such that γ 1 u 3 = γ 2 u 2 = γ 3 u 1 , and conclude with the previous argument, we construct a path included into R that goes from ( q 1 , q 2 , q 3 ) to ( u 1 , u 2 , u 3 ) . We now distinguish the three cases.

Case 1 : γ 3 q 1 ≤ max( γ 2 q 2 , γ 1 q 3 ) = γ 1 q 3 . Let us remark that if a 1 ≤ a 2 ≤ a 3 , the partial derivative ∂ a 1 f satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For x ∈ [ q 1 , min ( q 2 , γ 1 γ 3 q 3 )] , f ( x, q 2 , q 3 ) ≥ f ( q 1 , q 2 , q 3 ) . If min ( q 2 , γ 1 γ 3 q 3 ) = γ 1 γ 3 q 3 , then for ˜ q 1 = γ 1 γ 3 q 3 , we have that f (˜ q 1 , q 2 , q 3 ) ≥ f ( q 1 , q 2 , q 3 ) &gt; γ 1 q 3 = γ 3 ˜ q 1 ≥ γ 2 q 2 . (118)

We scale (118) and define ζ = γ 1 ˜ q 1 = γ 3 q 3 &gt; 0 so that ζ ˜ q 1 = γ 1 and ζq 3 = γ 3 . We have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now increase q 2 in (119). For a 1 , a 2 , a 3 &gt; 0 , such that a 1 ≤ a 2 ≤ a 3 and a 2 ≤ a 3 a 1 a 3 -a 1 we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so for z ∈ [ q 2 , γ 1 γ 3 ζγ 2 ] , f ( ζ ˜ q 1 , ζz, ζq 3 ) ≥ f ( ζ ˜ q 1 , ζq 2 , ζq 3 ) and in particular for ˆ q 2 = γ 1 γ 3 ζγ 2 , we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so we obtain (114). If min ( q 2 , γ 1 γ 3 q 3 ) = q 2 , as the function x → f ( x, q 2 , q 3 ) is nondecreasing for x ∈ [ q 1 , q 2 ] , we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

defined by

f

2

, a

2

, a

3

)

satisfies

a

In particular for

q

˜

∂

1

a

2

g

(

= ˜

q

2

a

2

, a

=

) = 4

3

γ

1

q

γ

a

2

a

3

2

-

3

3

, we have

(

y, y, q

3

)

g

≥

(

a

f

2

(

, a

q

1

3

) =

, q

2

, q

f

3

)

(

.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and (120) is treated in the same way as (118).

Case 2 : γ 3 q 1 ≤ max( γ 2 q 2 , γ 1 q 3 ) = γ 2 q 2 . Using (117), as ∂ a 1 f ( x, q 2 , q 3 ) ≥ 0 for x ∈ [ q 1 , q 2 ] , we have that for ˜ q 1 = γ 2 γ 3 q 2 ∈ [ q 1 , q 2 ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For θ = γ 3 q 2 = γ 2 ˜ q 1 , we have that

As γ 3 -γ 2 &lt; γ 1 , we have that

Moreover, for 0 &lt; a 1 ≤ a 2 ≤ a 3 such that a 3 ≤ a 2 a 1 a 2 -a 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By hypothesis,

As the function

g

have that for

y

∈

:

R

[

q

2

2

,

→

γ

1

q

3

γ

3

R

]

,

so for ˆ q 3 = γ 2 γ 3 θγ 1 , we obtain

and we deduce (114).

Case 3: γ 3 q 1 &gt; max( γ 2 q 2 , γ 1 q 3 ) . We show that there exists ˜ q 3 ≥ q 3 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

≥

0

if

a

2

≤

a

3

, we Let η = γ 1 q 1 so that ηq 1 = γ 1 . We have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As q 2 &lt; γ 1 γ 3 ηγ 2 and γ 3 -γ 2 &lt; γ 1 , we have that γ 1 γ 3 -γ 2 &gt; 1 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using (121), we deduce that for y ∈ [ q 3 , γ 3 η ] , the function y → f ( ηq 1 , ηq 2 , ηy ) is non decreasing and for ˜ q 3 = γ 3 η , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is equivalent to (122) and we conclude in the same manner as for (118) in Case 1.

## C Additional proofs of Section 4

## C.1 Proof of Lemma 4.1

Proof. Let ν ∈ P ( R ) and let u be a solution to LV ( ν ) . As ˜ σ Dup ∈ L ∞ ([0 , T ] , W 1 , ∞ ( R )) and u ∈ L 2 loc ((0 , T ]; H 1 ( R )) , we have that dt -a.e. on (0 , T ] , ( ˜ σ 2 Dup u ) ( t, · ) ∈ H 1 ( R ) and ˜ σ 2 Dup ( t, · ) ∂ x u ( t, · ) = ∂ x ( ˜ σ 2 Dup u ) ( t, · ) -( u∂ x ˜ σ 2 Dup ) ( t, · ) in the sense of distributions on R . Then for any function φ defined for ( t, x ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R by φ ( t, x ) := g 1 ( t ) g 2 ( x ) , with g 1 ∈ C ∞ c ((0 , T )) and g 2 ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) , the Borel measure dm := udxdt satisfies the equality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By density of the space spanned by the functions of type g 1 ( t ) g 2 ( x ) in C ∞ c ((0 , T ) × R ) for the norm φ ∈ C ∞ c ((0 , T ) × R ) →|| φ || ∞ + || ∂ x φ || ∞ + || ∂ 2 xx φ || ∞ + || ∂ t φ || ∞ , the previous equality is also satisfied for any function φ ∈ C ∞ c ((0 , T ) × R ) . The variational formulation of the PDE (74) as defined in [5, equality 1.5] is then satisfied.

We recall that h 1 ( x ) = 1 √ 2 π exp ( -x 2 2 ) and it is easy to check that h 1 ∈ H 1 ( R ) . As ( u ( t ) , h 1 ) 1 → t → 0 h 1 dν &gt; 0 and as u is non negative, we obtain that for any τ ∈ (0 , T ) , τ 0 ( u ( t ) , h 1 ) 1 dt &gt; 0 , so ess sup (0 ,τ ) × R u ( t, x ) &gt; 0 . In addition, with Assumption ( B ) , the functions 1 2 ˜ σ 2 Dup , ∂ x ( 1 2 ˜ σ 2 Dup ) and ( r -1 2 ˜ σ 2 Dup -∂ x ( 1 2 ˜ σ 2 Dup )) are uniformly bounded, and σ 2 ≤ ˜ σ 2 Dup a.e. on [0 , T ] × R , so by [5, Corollary 3.1] we obtain that u is continuous and positive on (0 , T ] × R .

## C.2 Proof of Proposition 4.2

Let us first remark that if the initial condition ν has a density u 0 ∈ L 2 ( R ) , then by energy estimates, uniqueness holds without Assumption ( H ) for a slightly stronger variational formulation called LV ∗ ( u 0 ) which is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the sense of distributions on (0 , T ) , and u (0 , · ) = u 0

We now prove Proposition 4.2.

Proof. The main ingredient to obtain uniqueness to LV ( ν ) is [12, Proposition 4.2]. In the proof of Theorem 4.3, we obtained existence of a solution to LV ( ν ) . Moreover, if u is a solution to LV ( ν ) , then with the same arguments as in the proof of Lemma 4.1, we show that the Borel measure udtdx solves the PDE (74) with initial condition ν in the sense of distributions, which means that for any φ ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) , the equality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds in the sense of distributions on (0 , T ) , and u converges to ν in duality with C ∞ c ( R ) as t → 0 . Under Assumptions ( B ) and ( H ) , by [12, Proposition 4.2], the measure udtdx is the unique solution to the PDE (74) with initial condition ν in the sense of distributions and therefore u is the unique solution to LV ( ν ) .

It is then sufficient to exhibit a solution udtdx to the PDE (74) in the distributional sense with initial condition ν and such that u 2 ( t, x ) dx ≤ ζ √ t for a.e. t ∈ (0 , T ) , where ζ &gt; 0 is a constant that does not depend on ν . Under Assumptions ( B ) and ( H ) , the martingale problem associated to the SDE (71) is well posed by [29, Theorems 6.1.7 and 7.2.1], and as mentioned in [26, Paragraph 4.1], there exists two constants c := c ( σ, χ ) and C := C ( T, σ, H 0 , χ ) such that for y ∈ R , the solution ( X y t ) t ≥ 0 to the SDE (71) with initial distribution δ y has the density p y ( t, x ) that satisfies ∀ ( t, x ) ∈ (0 , T ] × R , p y ( t, x ) ≤ Cu c ( t, x, y ) , with u c ( t, x, y ) := √ c 2 πt exp ( -c ( x -y ) 2 2 t ) for t ∈ (0 , T ] , x, y ∈ R , and the function y → p y ( t, x ) dx is measurable. For φ ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) , by Itô's Lemma,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the sense of distributions, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and lim t → 0 R φ ( x ) p y ( t, x ) dx = φ ( y ) . We set u := R p y ν ( dy ) and we check that udtdx solves the PDE (74) with initial condition ν in the distributional sense. Indeed, for ψ ∈ C ∞ c ((0 , T ) , R ) , we check, using Fubini's theorem, that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and using Lebesgue's theorem, that lim t → 0 R 2 φ ( x ) p y ( t, x ) dxν ( dy ) = R ( lim t → 0 R φ ( x ) p y ( t, x ) dx ) ν ( dy ) = R φ ( y ) ν ( dy ) , and we conclude that u is the unique solution to LV ( ν ) and that moreover u coincides with the time marginals of the solution to the SDE (71) with initial distribution ν . Finally we define ζ := C 2 √ c 2 √ π and for a.e. t ∈ (0 , T ] , by Jensen's inequality, R u 2 ( t, x ) dx ≤ R 2 ( p y ( t, x )) 2 ν ( dy ) dx ≤ cC 2 2 πt R exp ( -c x 2 t ) dx ≤ ζ √ t .

## D Proof of Theorem 5.11

Let us define S := R ×Y , b := max i ∈{ 1 ,...,d } || b i || ∞ , a := max i ∈{ 1 ,...,d } || a i || ∞ and q := max i,j ∈{ 1 ,...,d } || q ij || ∞ . For ( x, y ) ∈ S we denote by δ x,y the Dirac distribution on { ( x, y ) } . Lemma D.1 below is a consequence of the constant expectation of a martingale combined with Fubini's theorem.

Lemma D.1. Let { ν x,y } ( x,y ) ∈S be a measurable family of probability measures on E such that for µ 0 -a.e. ( x, y ) , ν x,y is a martingale solution to the SDE (97) with initial distribution δ x,y . Define the measure µ i ( t, · ) , for 1 ≤ i ≤ d and t ∈ (0 , T ] by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any function ψ ∈ C 2 b ( R ) . Then ( µ 1 ( t, · ) , ..., µ d,t ( t, · )) t ∈ (0 ,T ] is a solution to the PDS (94)-(95).

We now prove Theorem 5.11.

Step 1: We first establish the result for a regularized version of the PDS (94)-(95). Let ρ X and ρ T be convolution kernels defined by ρ X ( x ) = ρ T ( x ) = C 0 e - √ 1+ x 2 , for x ∈ R , and where C 0 = ( R 2 e - √ 1+ x 2 dx ) -1 . For ϵ &gt; 0 and ( t, x ) ∈ R 2 , we define the functions ρ ϵ X ( x ) := 1 ϵ ρ X ( x ϵ ) , ρ ϵ T := 1 ϵ ρ T ( t ϵ ) and ρ ϵ ( t, x ) := ρ ϵ T ( t ) ρ ϵ X ( x ) . For 1 ≤ i ≤ d , we extend the definition of t → µ i ( t, · ) to R , by setting for t ≤ 0 , µ i ( t, · ) = µ 0 ( · , { i } ) and for t &gt; T , µ i ( t, · ) = µ i ( T, · ) . As a consequence, given ψ ∈ C 2 b ( R ) and 1 ≤ i ≤ d , the extended function t → R ψ ( x ) µ i ( t, dx ) is now continuous and bounded on R . For 1 ≤ i ≤ d , let us also extend the definitions of the functions ( a i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d on R 2 by setting a i ( t, · ) = 0 if t / ∈ [0 , T ] . In the same way, we extend the functions ( b i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d and ( q ij ) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ d . Then the family ( µ 1 ( t, · ) , ..., µ d,t ( t, · )) t ∈ R satisfies the equality (96) in the distributional sense on R . We define for 1 ≤ i ≤ d and ( t, x ) ∈ R 2 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We define a ϵ i = ( a i µ i ) ∗ ρ ϵ µ ϵ i , b ϵ i = ( b i µ i ) ∗ ρ ϵ µ ϵ i , q ϵ ij = ( q ij µ i ) ∗ ρ ϵ µ ϵ i for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d . The family ( µ ϵ 1 ( t, · ) , ..., µ ϵ d ( t, · )) t ∈ R is a smooth solution of the following PDS, denoted by ( PDS ) ϵ , where for 1 ≤ i ≤ d ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Without loss of generality, we suppose that for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , µ ϵ i has a positive density on R 2 . If not, then µ i ( t, R ) is equal to zero for all t ∈ (0 , T ] . In that case, it is sufficient to consider the PDS (94)-(95) without the state i . Under this assumption, the functions a ϵ i , b ϵ i , q ϵ ij for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d are well defined and for i, j ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , || a ϵ i || ∞ ≤ || a i || ∞ , || b ϵ i || ∞ ≤ || b i || ∞ , || q ϵ ji || ∞ ≤ || q ji || ∞ . It is easy to check that for x ∈ R , and k ≥ 1 , there exists constants C X,k &gt; 0 s.t. ∣ ∣ ∣ ∂ k ρ X ∂x k ( x ) ∣ ∣ ∣ ≤ C X,k | ρ X ( x ) | , so a ϵ i , b ϵ i , q ϵ ij are continuous and bounded on R 2 , as well as their derivatives. Let us denote by ( SDE ) ϵ , the SDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Y ϵ t is a stochastic process with values in Y , and that satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for j = Y ϵ t . As the functions ( a ϵ i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d , ( b ϵ i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d , ( q ϵ ij ) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ d are continuous, Lipschitz and bounded, by [25, Theorem 5.3] and the Kunita-Watanabe theorem, for any ( x, y ) ∈ S there exists a unique martingale solution ν x,y to ( SDE ) ϵ with initial distribution δ ( x,y ) and by [25, Proposition 5.52], the function ( x, y ) → ν ϵ x,y is measurable. We define ν ϵ := ∑ d i =1 R ν ϵ x,i ( µ i ∗ ρ ϵ ) (0 , x ) dx . For t ∈ (0 , T ] , 1 ≤ i ≤ d , we define the measure ˜ µ ϵ i ( t, · ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for ψ ∈ C 2 b ( R ) . By Lemma D.1, (˜ µ ϵ i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ d solves ( PDS ) ϵ with initial condition ( µ i ∗ ρ ϵ (0 , · )) 1 ≤ i ≤ d . Since ( PDS ) ϵ has a unique solution by Proposition D.3 below, we obtain that for t ∈ (0 , T ] , 1 ≤ i ≤ d , ˜ µ ϵ i ( t, · ) = µ ϵ i ( t, · ) , and for ψ ∈ C 2 b ( R ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Step 2: Let ( ϵ n ) n ≥ 0 be a positive sequence decreasing to 0, we check the family of measures ( ν ϵ n ) n ≥ 0 has a converging subsequence. For n ≥ 0 , as we might not have ∑ d i =1 R µ i ∗ ρ ϵ (0 , x ) dx = 1 , we define ν ϵ n := ν ϵn ∑ d i =1 R µ i ∗ ρ ϵn (0 ,x ) dx , so that ν ϵ n is a probability measure. We use Aldous' criterion to show the tightness of the family ( ν ϵ n ) n ≥ 0 . Let us denote by ( X ϵ n , Y ϵ n ) the solution to ( SDE ) ϵ n where the initial law satisfies, for a non negative and measurable function ψ on R :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for 1 ≤ i ≤ d . The process ( X ϵ n , Y ϵ n ) has the law ν ϵ n . First we check that for any η &gt; 0 , there exists a constant K η &gt; 0 such that ∀ n ≥ 0 , P (sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | X ϵ n t | + | Y ϵ n t | &gt; K η ) ≤ η . For K &gt; 0 , n ≥ 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the second line, for the first term of the r.h.s., since Y ϵ n only takes values in { 1 , ..., d } , we have that ∀ n ≥ 0 , ∀ K &gt; 3 d , P (sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | Y ϵ n t | ≥ K/ 3) = 0 . For the second term, by Markov's inequality and Lemma D.2 below, we have that for n ≥ 0 , P ( sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | X ϵ n t -X ϵ n 0 | ≥ K/ 3 ) ≤ 3 K E ( sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | X ϵ n t -X ϵ n 0 | ) ≤ 3 K ( Tb +2 √ Ta 1 / 2 ) . For

̸

K ≥ K 1 := 6 η ( Tb +2 √ Ta 1 / 2 ) , P ( sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | X ϵ n t -X ϵ n 0 | ≥ K/ 3 ) ≤ η 2 . To study the last term, let us prove that for t ∈ R , 1 ≤ i ≤ d and φ ∈ C 2 b ( R ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We study the difference:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The first term of the r.h.s converges to 0 as n →∞ as the function t → φ ( x ) µ i ( t, dx ) is continuous and bounded. For the last term, as φ ∈ C 2 b ( R ) , φ is globally lipschitz and we observe that for x ∈ R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so φ ∗ ρ ϵ n X converges uniformly to φ and as µ ( t, R ) ≤ B for t ∈ R , we conclude that for t ∈ [0 , T ] and i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, as the random variable X ϵ n 0 has the density ∑ d i =1 µ i ∗ ρ ϵn (0 ,x ) ∑ d i =1 R µ i ∗ ρ ϵn (0 ,x ) dx dx , the convergence (126) implies that for ψ ∈ C 2 b ( R ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so there exists K 2 &gt; 0 such that P ( | X ϵ n 0 | ≥ K 2 / 3) ≤ η 2 . As a consequence, for K η := max(3 d, K 1 , K 2 ) and ∀ n ≥ 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now check that for ζ &gt; 0 , K &gt; 0 , there exists δ ζ,K &gt; 0 such that ∀ n ≥ 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where T f [0 ,T ] denotes the set of stopping times taking values in a finite subset of [0 , T ] . For K &gt; 0, δ ≥ 0 , n ≥ 0 and τ ∈ T f [0 ,T ] , we have the following inequality,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Markov's inequality on P 1 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the one hand E [ ∣ ∣ ∣ τ + δ τ b ϵ n Y ϵn s ( s, X ϵ n s ) ds ∣ ∣ ∣ 2 ] ≤ δ E [ τ + δ τ ( b ϵ n Y ϵn s ) 2 ( s, X ϵ n s ) ds ] ≤ δ 2 b 2 by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, and on the other hand E [ ∣ ∣ ∣ τ + δ τ √ a ϵ n Y ϵn s ( s, X ϵ n s ) dW s ∣ ∣ ∣ 2 ] = E [ ∣ ∣ ∣ T 0 1 { s ∈ [ τ, ( τ + δ ) ∧ T ] } √ a ϵ n Y ϵn s ( s, X ϵ n s ) dW s ∣ ∣ ∣ 2 ] ≤ δa by Ito's isometry. For P 2 we notice that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We gather the upper bounds on P 1 and P 2 , and to satisfy Aldous' criterion, it is sufficient to choose δ ζ,K small enough so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have then shown that the family of processes ( X ϵ n , Y ϵ n ) n ≥ 0 is tight so the family of measures ( ν ϵ n ) n ≥ 0 is tight. As E is Polish, by Prohorov's theorem there exists a measure ν which is a limit point of ( ν ϵ n ) n ≥ 0 . Let us remark that by (126), ∑ d i =1 R µ i ∗ ρ ϵ n (0 , x ) dx → 1 , so ν is also a limit point of ( ν ϵ n ) n ≥ 0 . For notational simplicity, we suppose in what follows that ( ν ϵ n ) n ≥ 0 and ( ν ϵ n ) n ≥ 0 converge to ν as n → ∞ . By [10, Lemma 7.7 and Theorem 7.8], D ( ν ) := { t ∈ [0 , T ] , ν (( X t -, Y t -) = ( X t , Y t )) = 1 } has a complement in [0 , T ] which is at most countable. Moreover, for any k ≥ 1 , and t 1 , t 2 , ..., t k ∈ D ( ν ) , the sequence (( X ϵ n t 1 , Y ϵ n t 1 ) , ..., ( X ϵ n t k , Y ϵ n t k )) n ≥ 0 converges to (( X t 1 , Y t 1 ) , ..., ( X t k , Y t k )) in distribution as n → ∞ . Consequently, for t ∈ D ( ν ) , 1 ≤ i ≤ d , and φ ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, by (125) and (126) we obtain the following equality, for t ∈ D ( ν ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As the function t → E φ ( X t )1 { Y t = i } dν ( X,Y ) is right-continuous and the function t → R φ ( x ) µ i ( t, dx ) is continuous, the previous equality holds for t ∈ (0 , T ] .

Step 3: we check that ν is a martingale solution of the SDE (97) with initial distribution µ 0 . We define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let s ∈ [0 , T ] , p ∈ N ∗ , 0 ≤ s 1 ≤ ... ≤ s p ≤ s and let ψ 1 , ..., ψ p be bounded and continuous functions on S , with || ψ i || ∞ ≤ 1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ d . Since for n ≥ 0 , ν ϵ n is a martingale solution to ( SDE ) ϵ n , and ν ϵ n = ( ∑ d i =1 R µ i ∗ ρ ϵ n (0 , x ) dx ) ν ϵ n , we have that for t ≥ s ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ˜ b i : R + × R → R , ˜ a i : R + × R → R , ˜ q ij : R + × R → R be bounded and continuous functions for 1 ≤ i, j ≤ d . Let us also define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and for n ≥ 0 ,

and for n ≥ 0 , where ˜ b ϵ n i , ˜ a ϵ n i , ˜ q ϵ n ij are built analogously to b ϵ n i , a ϵ n i , q ϵ n ij . Then, recalling that || ψ i || ∞ ≤ 1 for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our goal now is to let n → ∞ in the terms (127)-(130), and obtain that for any s 1 , ..., s p , s, t ∈ [0 , T ] , such that 0 ≤ s 1 ≤ ... ≤ s p ≤ s ≤ t ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here we explain how to conclude the proof of Theorem 5.11, if we suppose that (131)-(134) hold. Let us notice that the term

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is also dominated by the sum of the terms in the lines (132)-(134). By [8, Theorem 3.45], for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , we can choose sequences of continuous functions ( ˜ a k i ) k ≥ 0 , ( ˜ b k i ) k ≥ 0 , and ( ˜ q k ij ) k ≥ 0 for 1 ≤ j ≤ d converging respectively to a i , b i , q ij in L 1 ([0 , T ] × R , η i ) , with η i := µ i ( t, · ) dt , to finally obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is enough to conclude that ν is a martingale solution to the SDE (97) with initial condition µ 0 and end the proof of Theorem 5.11.

In what follows, we show how to obtain (131)-(134). As the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is right-continuous, and as the terms in (132)-(134) are continuous in the variables ( s, t ) , it is sufficient to show that the inequality in the lines (131)-(134) holds if we moreover assume that s 1 , ..., s p , s, t ∈ D ( ν ) . Let us show that for s 1 , ..., s p , s, t ∈ D ( ν ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By convergence of the finite dimensional distributions of ( ν ϵ n ) n ≥ 0 and the fact that ν ϵ n = ( ∑ d i =1 R µ i ∗ ρ ϵ n (0 , x ) dx ) ν ϵ n with ∑ d i =1 R µ i ∗ ρ ϵ n (0 , x ) dx → n →∞ 1 , the following convergence holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With the same argument, we have that for u ∈ D ( ν ) ∩ ( s, t ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then by Fubini's theorem,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The term on line (137) converges to zero as n →∞ , by (136) and Lebesgue's theorem. For the term (138), we write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As the terms in ( ˜ L ϵ n u φ ( · , k ) ) 1 ≤ k ≤ d and ( ˜ L u φ ( · , k ) ) 1 ≤ k ≤ d are continuous and bounded, it is sufficient to show that for 1 ≤ k ≤ d , z k : R 2 → R a continuous and bounded function and z ϵ k := ( z k µ k ) ∗ ρ ϵ µ ϵ k , for ϵ &gt; 0 , the following convergence holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The previous term rewrites:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us notice that lim M →∞ sup t ∈ R µ k ( t, R \ ( -M,M )) = lim M →∞ sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] µ k ( t, R \ [ -M,M ]) = 0 . Indeed, if there exists δ &gt; 0 , and a sequence ( t n ) n ≥ 1 in the compact [0 , T ] converging to t ∈ [0 , T ] such that ∀ n ≥ 1 , µ k ( t n , R \ ( -n, n )) &gt; δ , then by continuity, ∀ n ≥ 1 , µ k ( t, R \ ( -n, n )) &gt; δ , which is impossible.

For ζ &gt; 0 , let M &gt; 0 be such that sup t ∈ R µ k ( t, R \ [ -M,M ]) ≤ ζ , and let η ∈ (0 , 1) such that | z ( v, y ) -z ( u, x ) | ≤ ζ if v, u ∈ [ s -1 , t +1] , x, y ∈ [ -M -1 , M +1] , and max( | x -y | , | u -v | ) ≤ η . Then, as

1 ≤ 1 {| x -y | &gt;η } +1 {| u -v | &gt;η } +1 {| x -y |≤ η, | u -v |≤ η, ( x,y ) ∈ [ -M -1 ,M +1] 2 } +1 {| x -y |≤ η, | u -v |≤ η, ( x,y ) / ∈ [ -M -1 ,M +1] 2 } , we have that ∀ u ∈ [ s, t ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for ϵ small enough. Then we obtain that the term in line (139) converges to 0 as ϵ → 0 . We now analyze the term on the line (128). We define the function g : R → R by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and for ϵ &gt; 0 , the function g ϵ : R → R by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We study, for c &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the first term of the r.h.s., as there exists γ &gt; 0 such that sup ϵ&gt; 0 || g ϵ || ∞ ≤ γ , the change of variables w := u -v ϵ gives

t

(

)

Proof. For t ∈ [0 , T ] ,

s

R

For the second term of the r.h.s,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We then set c = 1 √ ϵ , and obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the r.h.s of the inequality converges to t s g ( u ) du as ϵ → 0 , since ρ ϵ n X ∗ | ∂ 2 xx φ | →| ∂ 2 xx φ | uniformly. A similar argument applies to the two last terms of Inequality (129)-(130), so that (131)-(134) holds.

Lemma D.2. Let ϵ &gt; 0 , and let ( X ϵ , Y ϵ ) be the solution to ( SDE ) ϵ . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

1

{|

u

-

v

|

}

&gt;cϵ

ρ

ϵ

T

(

u

-

v

)

g

ϵ

(

v

)

dv du

≤

γ

(

t

-

s

)

R

1

{|

w

|

}

&gt;c

ρ

T

(

w

)

dw.

Taking the supremum on t ∈ [0 , T ] and then the expectation, we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, according to Doob's inequality,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and this concludes the proof.

Proposition D.3. For ϵ &gt; 0, ( PDS ) ϵ has a unique solution.

Proof. For 0 &lt; s ≤ t ≤ T , let us define ( X t ( s, x, y ) , Y t ( s, x, y )) the value at t of the solution to the SDE (97) starting at s from ( x, y ) ∈ S . For φ : S → R such that for i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , φ ( · , i ) ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) , we define T t φ ( s, x, y ) = E [ φ ( X t ( s, x, y ) , Y t ( s, x, y ))] , and for f : [0 , t ] ×S → R , such that for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , f ( · , · , i ) ∈ C 1 , 2 b ([0 , t ] × R ) , we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By [31, Theorem 5.2], for 1 ≤ y ≤ d , the function ( s, x ) → ( T t φ ) ( s, x, y ) belongs to C 1 , 2 b ([0 , t ] × R ) , and the function s, x, y → T t φ ( s, x, y ) satisfies the backward Kolmogorov equation ∂ s ( T t φ ) + L ϵ ( T t φ ) = 0 . Now, let (ˆ µ ϵ 1 ( t, · ) , ..., ˆ µ ϵ d ( t, · )) t ∈ (0 ,T ] and (ˇ µ ϵ 1 ( t, · ) , ..., ˇ µ ϵ d ( t, · )) t ∈ (0 ,T ] be two solutions to ( PDS ) ϵ with the same initial condition, and let us define for 1 ≤ i ≤ d and t ∈ (0 , T ] , z i ( t, · ) := ˆ µ ϵ i ( t, · ) -ˇ µ ϵ i ( t, · ) . It is sufficient to prove

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to obtain uniqueness. Indeed, s → ∑ d i =1 ( T t φ ) ( s, x, i ) z i ( s, dx ) would be constant on (0 , t ) , and moreover, for s ∈ (0 , t ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as ˆ µ ϵ i and ˇ µ ϵ i satisfy the same initial conditions. Moreover, at the limit s → t , we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any function φ : S → R such that for i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , φ ( · , i ) ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) . Thus, we can conclude that z i ( t, · ) = 0 for 1 ≤ i ≤ d and t ∈ (0 , T ] , hence the uniqueness.

We now prove equality (140) by a density argument. Let κ ∈ C ∞ c ((0 , t )) , and let us show that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For ψ, ϕ two real valued functions defined on S such that for i ∈ { 1 , ..., d } , ϕ ( · , i ) ∈ C ∞ c ((0 , t )) and ψ ( · , i ) ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) , we have in the sense of distributions,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let h ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) be such that 0 ≤ h ≤ 1 , h (0) = 1 , and h ( x ) = 0 if x / ∈ ( -1 , 1) . For M &gt; 0 , we define h M ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) such that h M ( x ) = 1 if x ∈ [ -M,M ] , h M ( x ) = 0 if x / ∈ [ -M -1 , M +1] , h M ( x ) = h ( x + M ) if x ∈ [ -M -1 , -M ] , and h M ( x ) = h ( x -M ) if x ∈ [ M,M +1] . Let us remark that the family ( h M T t φ ) M&gt; 0 has uniform in M bounds. Let η 1 &gt; 0 , and choose M such that ∑ d i =1 t 0 R \ [ -M,M ] ˆ µ ϵ 1 ( s, dx ) &lt; η 1 , and ∑ d i =1 t 0 R \ [ -M,M ] ˇ µ ϵ 1 ( s, dx ) &lt; η 1 . For η 2 &gt; 0 , there exists p ∈ N ∗ , a family ( ψ k ) 1 ≤ k ≤ p of functions defined on (0 , t ) ×{ 1 , ..., d } , such that for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , and 1 ≤ k ≤ p , ψ k ( · , i ) ∈ C ∞ c ((0 , t )) and a family ( ϕ k ) 1 ≤ k ≤ p of functions defined on S such that for 1 ≤ i ≤ d , and 1 ≤ k ≤ p , ϕ k ( · , i ) ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) , and moreover, ∑ p k =0 ψ k ( · , i ) ϕ k ( · , i ) has support in (0 , t ) × [ -M -2; M + 2] , and such that the function ∑ p k =0 ψ k ϕ k -h M T t φ and its derivatives are smaller than η 2 . Using the decomposition T t φ = ( h M +1 -h M ) T t φ , it is easy to check that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where K j , j = 1 , 2 , are positive values that do not depend on M or p , and this concludes the proof.

## References

- [1] F. Abergel and R. Tachet. A non-linear partial integro-differential equation from mathematical finance. Discrete Contin. Dyn. Syst.(3) , 907-917, 2010.
- [2] J. M. P. Albin. A continuous non-Brownian motion martingale with Brownian motion marginal distributions. Statistics and Probability Letters , 78(6):682, January 2010.
- [3] A. Alfonsi, C. Labart, and J. Lelong. Stochastic local intensity loss models with interacting particle systems. Mathematical Finance , 26(2):366-394, 2016.
- [4] D. Baker, C. Donati-Martin, and M. Yor. A Sequence of Albin Type Continuous Martingales with Brownian Marginals and Scaling , pages 441-449. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.
- [5] V. I. Bogachev, M. Röckner, and S. V. Shaposhnikov. Positive densities of transition probabilities of diffusion processes. Theory of Probability &amp; Its Applications , 53(2):194-215, 2009.
- [6] D. T. Breeden and R. H. Litzenberger. Prices of state-contingent claims implicit in option prices. The Journal of Business , 51(4):621-51, 1978.
- [7] H. Brezis. Analyse fonctionnelle, Théorie et applications . Masson, Paris, 1983.
- [8] P. Cannarsa and T. D'Aprile. Lecture notes on measure theory and functional analysis, 2006.
- [9] B. Dupire. Pricing with a S mile. Risk , 7, 18-20, 1994.
- [10] S. N. Ethier and T. G. Kurtz. Markov processes: characterization and convergence . Wiley series in probability and mathematical statistics. Probability and mathematical statistics. Wiley, 1986.
- [11] J. Y. Fan, K. Hamza, and F. Klebaner. Mimicking self-similar processes. Bernoulli , 21(3):1341-1360, 08 2015.
- [12] A. Figalli. Existence and uniqueness of martingale solutions for sdes with rough or degenerate coefficients. Journal of Functional Analysis , 254(1):109 - 153, 2008.

- [13] N. Fournier and M. Hauray. Propagation of chaos for the Landau equation with moderately soft potentials. ArXiv e-prints , January 2015.
- [14] H. Guennoun and P. Henry-Labordère. Local volatility models enhanced with jumps. Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2781102 , May. 2016.
- [15] J. Guyon and P. Henry-Labordère. Being particular about calibration. Risk magazine , pages 88-93, Jan. 2012.
- [16] I. Gyöngy. Mimicking the one-dimensional marginal distribution of processes having an I to differential. Probab. Theory Relat. Fields , 71(4), 501-516, 1986.
- [17] J.K. Hale. Ordinary Differential Equations . Dover Books on Mathematics Series. Dover Publications, 2009.
- [18] K. Hamza and F. C. Klebaner. A family of non-gaussian martingales with gaussian marginals. J. Appl. Math. and Stochastic Analysis , 2007.
- [19] P. Henry-Labordere, X. Tan, and N. Touzi. An explicit martingale version of the one-dimensional B renier's theorem with full marginals constraint. Stochastic Processes and their Applications , 126(9):2800 - 2834, 2016.
- [20] F. Hirsch, C. Profeta, B. Roynette, and M. Yor. Constructing Self-Similar Martingales via Two Skorokhod Embeddings , pages 451-503. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.
- [21] D. G. Hobson. Fake exponential brownian motion. Statistics &amp; Probability Letters , 83(10):2386 - 2390, 2013.
- [22] Thomas G. Kurtz. Equivalence of Stochastic Equations and Martingale Problems , pages 113-130. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011.
- [23] A. Lipton. The vol smile problem. Risk Magazine , 15:61-65, 2002.
- [24] D. B. Madan and M. Yor. Making markov martingales meet marginals: with explicit constructions. Bernoulli , 8(4):509-536, 08 2002.
- [25] J. L. Menaldi. Stochastic differential equations with jumps . 2014.
- [26] S. Menozzi and V. Lemaire. On some non asymptotic bounds for the euler scheme. Electron. J. Probab. , 15:1645-1681, 2010.
- [27] K. Oleszkiewicz. On fake Brownian motions. Statistics and Probability Letters , 78(11):1251, March 2010.
- [28] V. Piterbarg. Markovian projection method for volatility calibration. Risk Magazine , 20:84-89, 2007.
- [29] D. W. Stroock and S. R. S. Varadhan. Multidimensional diffusion processes , volume 233 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences] . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1979. Reprinted in 2006.
- [30] R. Temam. Navier-Stokes Equations . North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1979.
- [31] G. Yin and C. Zhu. Properties of solutions of stochastic differential equations with continuous-state-dependent switching. Journal of Differential Equations , 249(10):2409 - 2439, 2010.
- [32] X. Zhang. Degenerate irregular sdes with jumps and application to integro-differential equations of fokkerplanck type. Electron. J. Probab. , 18:25 pp., 2013.