## Talking Condition Identification Using Second-Order Hidden Markov Models

Ismail Shahin Electrical and Computer Engineering Department University of Sharjah ismail@sharjah.ac.ae

Abstract -This  work  focuses  on  enhancing  the performance of text-dependent and speakerdependent talking condition identification systems using second-order hidden Markov models  (HMM2s).  Our  results  show  that  the talking condition identification performance based on HMM2s has been improved significantly compared to first-order hidden Markov models (HMM1s). Our talking conditions  in  this  work  are  neutral,  shouted, loud, angry, happy, and fear.

Keywords-confusion matrix; second-order hidden Markov models; talking condition identification

## I. INTRODUCTION

Talking condition identification is the process of determining  from  which  of  the  registered  talking conditions an unknown talking condition comes.

Talking condition identification systems typically operate in one of two cases: textdependent case or text-independent case. In the textdependent case, utterances of the same text are used for both training and testing. In the text-independent case,  training  and  testing  involve  utterances  from different  texts.  The  process  of  talking  condition identification  can  be  divided  into  two  categories: 'open  set'  and  'closed  set'.  In  the  'open  set' category, a reference model for an unknown talking condition  may  not  exist;  however,  in  the  'closed set'  category,  a  reference  model  for  an  unknown talking condition is available.

Hidden Markov models (HMMs) are considered in  the  last  three  decades  as  one of the most widely used  modeling  techniques  in  the  fields  of  speech recognition and speaker recognition [1]. HMMs use Markov  chain  to model  the  changing  statistical characteristics  that  exist  in  the  actual  observations of  speech  signals.  The  Markov  process  is  a  double stochastic  process  where  there  is  an  unobservable Markov  chain  defined  by  a  state  transition  matrix. Each  state  of  the  Markov  chain  is  associated  with either a discrete output probability distribution (discrete HMMs) or a continuous output probability density function (continuous HMMs) [2].

HMMs  are  powerful  models  in  optimizing  the parameters that are used in modeling speech signals. This optimization decreases the computational complexity in the decoding procedure and improves the recognition accuracy [2].

## II. MOTIVATION

A major motivation of talking condition identification systems  comes  from  the  desire  to develop human machine interface that is more adaptive  and  responsive  to  a  user's  identity.  The main  task  of  intelligent  human-machine  interaction is to empower a computer with the affective computing ability so that a computer can recognize speakers for many different applications.

Most  of  the  people  who  work  in  the  areas  of speech  recognition  and  speaker  recognition  focus their work  on  speech  under  the  neutral  talking condition and few people focus their  work  on speech under stressful and emotional talking conditions. Stressful and emotional talking conditions can be defined as talking conditions that cause  speakers  to  vary  their  production  of  speech from the neutral talking condition. The  neutral talking  condition  is  defined  as the talking condition in  which  speech  is  produced  assuming  that  the speakers uttering their voice in a 'quiet room' with no  task  obligations.  Some  talking  conditions  are designed  to  simulate  speech  produced  by  different speakers  under  real  stressful  and  emotional  talking conditions.

There  were  some  work  on  emotion  or  talking condition  recognition  using  HMM1s.  Li  and  Zhao used three classification methods to recognize emotions  in  speech.  These  methods  include  vector quantization, artificial neural networks, and Gaussian  mixture  density  model  [3].  Zhao et  al. used HMM1s  in  studying  the  nonlinear feature based classification of speech under stress [4]. DeSilva  and  Ng  described  the  use  of  statistical techniques and HMM1s  in the recognition of emotions [5]. Nogueiras et al. used semi-continuous HMM1s  in  emotion  recognition  [6].  Shahin  used first-order circular hidden Markov models to enhance talking condition identification performance [7].

Our work in this paper focuses on identifying an unknown  talking  condition  of  text-dependent  and speaker-dependent  talking condition  identification systems based on HMM2s.

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  structured  as follows.  Section  III  explains  the  details  of  second order hidden Markov models. Extended Viterbi and Baum-Welch algorithms are covered in Section IV. The speech database used in this work is explained in Section V. Results and discussion of our work are given  in  Section  VI.  Concluding  remarks  of  this work appear in Section VII.

New  models  called  HMM2s  were  introduced and implemented under the neutral talking condition by Mari et al. [8].

In  HMM1s,  the  underlying  state  sequence  is  a first-order Markov chain where the stochastic process  is  specified  by  a  2-D  matrix  of  a  priori transition  probabilities  ( aij )  between  states si and sj where aij are given as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where qt denotes any state at time t .

In  HMM2s,  the  underlying  state  sequence  is  a second-order  Markov  chain  where  the  stochastic process is specified by a 3-D matrix ( aijk ). Therefore,  the  transition  probabilities  in  HMM2s are given as [8],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the constraints,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where N is the number of states.

The probability of the state sequence, q T q q Q ,..., 2 , 1 ∆ , is defined as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where i Ψ is the probability of a state si at time t = 1, aij is the probability of transition from a state si to a state sj at time t = 2, and T is the length or duration of an observation sequence, , ,...,O O ,O O T 2 1 ∆ and it is equal to the total number of frames.

Each  state si is  associated  with  a  mixture  of Gaussian distributions,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the vector Ot is the input vector at time t .

Given a sequence of observed vectors, the joint state-output probability is defined as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( ) t O t b q is the observation symbol probability given as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## IV. EXTENDED VITERBI AND BAUM-WELCH ALGORITHM

The most likely state sequence can be found by using the probability of the partial alignment ending at a transition ( sj ,s k ) at times ( t -1, t ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recursive computation is given by,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The forward function α t (j,k) defines the probability of the partial observation sequence, O1,O2,…,Ot ,  and  the  transition  ( sj ,s k )  between times t -1 and t is given by,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

α t (j,k) can be computed from the two transitions: ( si ,s j )  and ( sj ,s k )  between states si and sk as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  backward  function β t (i,j) can  be  expressed as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where β t (i,j) is  defined  as  the  probability  of  the partial  observation  sequence  from t +1  to T ,  given the  model λ and  the  transition ( si ,s j )  between times t -1 and t .

## V. SPEECH DATABASE

Our speech database in this work was collected from  12  (6  males  and  6  females)  untrained  healthy adult  native  speakers  of  American  English.  Each speaker  uttered  8  sentences  where  each  sentence was  uttered  9  times  (9  utterances  or  tokens)  under each of the neutral, shouted, loud, angry, happy, and fear talking conditions. The 8 sentences were unbiased towards any talking condition. These sentences were:

- 1) He works five days a week.
- 2) The sun is shining.
- 3) The weather is fair.
- 4) The students study hard.
- 5) Assistant professors are looking for promotion.
- 6) University of Sharjah.
- 7) Electrical and Computer Engineering Department.
- 8) He has two sons and two daughters.

Our  speech  database  was  captured  by  a  speech acquisition  board  using  a  16-bit  linear  coding  A/D converter and sampled at a sampling rate of 16 kHz. Our  database  was  a  16-bit  per  sample  linear  data. Each  sentence  under  each  talking  condition  was then  applied  every  5  ms  to  a  30  ms  Hamming window.  12 th order  linear  prediction  coefficients (LPCs)  were  extracted  from  each  frame  by  the autocorrelation method. The 12 th order LPCs were then  transformed  into  16 th order  linear  prediction cepstral coefficients (LPCCs).

The LPCC feature analysis was used to form the observation vectors in each of HMM1s and HMM2s.  The  number  of  states, N ,  was  5.  The number of mixture components, M , was 5 per state, with  a  continuous  mixture  observation  density  was selected  for  each  of  HMM1s  and  HMM2s.  Our speech  database  in  this  work  was  a  'closed  set'. Our database was divided into training data and test data.

In  the training session, one reference model per speaker per sentence per talking  condition  was derived  using  5  of  the  9  utterances.  Training  of models  in  this  session  had  been  done  separately based on each of HMM1s and HMM2s.

In  the  testing  (identification)  session,  each  one of the 12 speakers used 4 of the 9 utterances per the same  speaker  per  the  same  sentence  under  each talking condition. This session had been done separately  based  on  each  of  HMM1s and HMM2s. Based on the probability of generating an utterance, the  model  with  the  highest  probability  was  chosen as  the  output  of  the  talking  condition  identification system based on each of HMM1s and HMM2s.

## VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Table  I  and  Table  III  summarize  the  results  of talking  condition  identification  performance  using our speech database based on HMM1s and HMM2s respectively.

Table II  and  Table  IV  show confusion matrices that  represent  the percentage of confusion of a test talking  condition  with  the  other  talking  conditions based on HMM1s and HMM2s respectively.

It is evident from  Table I that the talking condition  identification  system  identifies  correctly the neutral talking condition with an average identification  performance  of  99%.  Table  I  and Table  II  show  that  the  most  easily  recognizable talking  condition  is  the  neutral  talking  condition (99%).  On  the  other  hand,  the  talking  condition identification  performance  for  the  remaining talking conditions is significantly degraded based on HMM1s.  This  is  because  HMM1s  are  inefficient models  under  the  stressful  and  emotional  talking conditions since the changes in the statistical characteristics  that  exist  in  the  actual  observations of the stressful and emotional talking conditions are greater than that of the neutral talking condition.

Table  I  shows  that  the  least  talking  condition identification performance occurs under the shouted talking condition. Hence, the least easily recognizable talking condition is the shouted talking condition (30%). The reason for this poor identification performance is that the shouted talking condition is considered as the most stressful talking condition [9]. It was  reported in  many publications that  HMM1s  did  not  perform  well under such a talking condition [9].

Column  3  of  Table  II  (for  example)  says  that 34%  of the utterances that were portrayed as shouted  talking  condition  were  evaluated  as  loud talking  condition,  31%  of  the  utterances  that  were portrayed as shouted talking condition were evaluated as angry talking condition, etc … Table V shows that HMM2s significantly enhance the shouted talking condition identification performance  compared  to  that  based  on  HMM1s. The  improvement  rate  is  26.7%.  Comparing  Table II  with  Table  IV,  the  shouted talking condition has the  highest  confusion  percentage  with  each  of  the loud and angry talking conditions.

Using HMM1s, the loud talking condition identification  performance  is  quite  low.  Comparing the loud talking condition identification performance with that of the shouted talking condition,  it  is  clear  that  the  loud  talking  condition identification  performance  is  almost  twice  as  that for  the  shouted  talking  condition.  This  is  because the shouted talking condition consists of two components:  loud  talking  condition  and  noise  [10]. The  percentage  of  confusion  of  the  loud  talking condition based on HMM1s is significant with each of the happy talking condition (16%) and the angry talking condition (15%).

Table V shows that HMM2s significantly enhance  the  loud  talking  condition  identification performance  compared  to  that  using  HMM1s.  The improvement rate is 11.1%.

The angry talking condition identification performance  based  on  HMM1s  is  very  low.  The identification  performance  for  this  talking condition is  the  second  lowest  identification  performance  in our  results.  The  identification  performance  of  each of the shouted  talking condition  and  the  angry talking  condition  is  close  to  each  other  since  the shouted talking condition can not be entirely separated  from  the  angry  talking  condition  in  real life.  Table  II shows that the angry talking condition is  highly  confusable  with  each  of  the  shouted  and loud talking conditions.

TABLE I. TALKING CONDITION IDENTIFICATION PERFORMANCE BASED ON HMM1S

| Talking  condition  Males  Females  Average  Neutral  99%  99%  99%  Shouted  29%  31%  30%  Loud  52%  56%  54%  Angry  37%  39%  38%  Happy  58%  60%  59%  Fear  48%  50%  49%   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

TABLE II. CONFUSION MATRIX BASED ON HMM1S

TABLE III. TALKING CONDITION IDENTIFICATION PERFORMANCE BASED ON HMM2S

| Percentage of confusion of a test talking condition  with the other talking conditions  Model  Neutral  Shouted  Loud  Angry  Happy  Fear  Neutral  99%  2%  1%  3%  1%  4%  Shouted  0%  30%  7%  28%  10%  7%  Loud  1%  34%  54%  17%  25%  17%  Angry  0%  31%  15%  38%  0%  15%  Happy  0%  0%  16%  4%  59%  8%  Fear  0%  3%  7%  10%  5%  49%   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

TABLE IV. CONFUSION MATRIX BASED ON HMM2S

| Talking  condition  Males  Females  Average  Neutral  99%  99%  99%  Shouted  37%  39%  38%  Loud  58%  62%  60%  Angry  44%  48%  46%  Happy  62%  66%  64%  Fear  54%  56%  55%   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Percentage of confusion of a test talking condition

with the other talking conditions

| Model  Neutral  Shouted  Loud  Angry  Happy  Fear  Neutral  99%  2%  1%  3%  1%  4%  Shouted  0%  38%  8%  25%  8%  6%  Loud  1%  29%  60%  12%  22%  14%  Angry  0%  28%  12%  46%  0%  13%  Happy  0%  0%  13%  4%  64%  8%  Fear  0%  3%  6%  10%  5%  55%   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

TABLE V. AVERAGE IMROVEMENT RATE OF USING HMM2S OVER HMM1S

| Model  Neutral  Shouted  Loud  Angry  Happy  Fear  %  0  26.7  11.1  21.1  8.5  12.2   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

The angry talking condition identification performance based on HMM2s has been significantly improved. The  improvement  rate  is 21.1%.

Our  results  in  this  work  show  that  the  happy talking  condition  identification  performance  based on  HMM1s  is  quite  low.  The  reason  for  this  low talking  condition  identification  performance  is  that when  people  are  happy,  they  do  not  usually  talk clearly.  Consequently,  there  will  be  confusion  and ambiguity in their speech production. The percentage of confusion of the happy talking condition is significant with the loud talking condition (25%) and with the shouted talking condition (10%).

The happy talking condition identification performance based on HMM2s has been remarkably improved. The improvement rate is 8.5%.

The fear talking condition identification performance based on HMM1s is worst than that for the  happy  talking  condition.  This  is  because  when people  speak  under  the  fear  mode,  they  produce speech  with  more  ambiguity  and  less  clarity  than that under the happy mode. Table II shows that the fear talking condition has confusion  with every talking  condition  especially  with  each  of  the  loud and angry talking conditions.

It  is  evident  from Table III that the fear talking condition identification performance has been drastically improved based on HMM2s compared to HMM1s. Table 5 shows that the improvement rate is 12.2%.

This is the first known investigation into HMM2s evaluated for talking condition identification systems. This work shows that HMM2s significantly enhance the recognition performance of text-dependent and speakerdependent  talking  condition  identification  systems based  on  HMM2s  compared  to  HMM1s.  This  is because  in  HMM2s,  the  state-transition  probability at  time t +1  depends  on  the  states  of  the  Markov chain  at  times t and t -1.  Therefore,  the  underlying state sequence in HMM2s is a second-order Markov chain  where the stochastic process is specified by a 3-D  matrix.  On  the  other  hand,  in  HMM1s  it  is assumed that the state-transition probability  at  time t +1 depends only on the state of the Markov chain at time t . Therefore, in HMM1s the underlying state sequence  is  a  first-order  Markov  chain  where  the stochastic process is specified by a 2-D matrix. The stochastic  process  that  is  specified  by  a 3-D matrix gives  more  accurate  talking  condition  recognition performance than that specified by a 2-D matrix.

## VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

As  a  conclusion  of  this  work,  the  improvement rate  of  talking  condition  identification  performance based  on  HMM2s  is  limited.  The  reason  is  that HMM2s are inefficient models to integrate observations from different modalities because observations within HMM2s  have to be at a constant  rate;  therefore,  it  is  impossible  to  look  at the  dynamic behavior over the course of a word if, meanwhile, we want to observe acoustic events at a much smaller time scale.

## REFERENCES

[1] B. H. Juang and L. R. Rabiner, 'Hidden Markov models for speech recognition,' Technometrics, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 251-272, August 1991.

[2] X. D. Huang, Y. Ariki, and M. A. Jack, Hidden Markov Models for Speech Recognition, Edinburgh University Press, Great Britain, 1990.

[3]  Y.  Li  and  Y.  Zhao,  Recognizing  emotions  in speech using short-term and  long-term  features, Proceedings of International Conference on Spoken Language  Processing  (ICSLP),  (1998),  pp.  22552558.

[4]  G.  Zhou,  J.  H.  L.  Hansen,  and  J.  F.  Kaiser, 'Nonlinear  feature  based  classification  of  speech under  stress,'  IEEE  Transaction  on  Speech  and Audio Processing, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 201-216, March 2001.

[5]  L. C. DeSilva and P. C. Ng, 'Bimodal emotion recognition,' Fourth IEEE International Conference on  Automatic  Face  and Gesture Recognition 2000, 2000, p. 332.

[6] A. Nogueiras, A. Moreno, A. Bonafonte, and  J. Mario,  'Speech  emotion  recognition  using  hidden Markov models,'  European Conference on Speech Communication  and  Technology,  EUROSPEECH 2001. Aalborg, Denmark, September 2001.

[7] I. Shahin, 'Talking condition identification using circular hidden Markov models,' 2 nd International Conference on Information &amp; Communication Technologies: from Theory to Applications  (ICTTA'06,  IEEE  Section  France), Damascus, Syria, April 2006.

[8] J. F. Mari, J. P. Haton, and A. Kriouile, "Automatic word recognition based on second-order hidden  Markov  models,"  IEEE  Trans.  on  Speech and  Audio  Processing,  vol.  5,  no.  1,  pp.  22-25, January 1997.

[9] Y. Chen, 'Cepstral domain talker stress compensation for robust speech recognition,' IEEE Transaction on ASSP, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 433-439, April 1988.

[10]  R.  Schulman,  "Articulatory  dynamics  of  loud and normal speech," Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, Vol. 85, No. 1 (1989), pp. 295312.