Speaker Identification in a Shouted Talking Environment Based on Novel Third-

Order Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models

## Ismail Shahin

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering

University of Sharjah

P. O. Box  27272

Sharjah, United Arab Emirates

Tel: (971) 6 5050967

Fax: (971) 6 5050877

E-mail: ismail@sharjah.ac.ae

## Abstract

It  is  well  known  that  speaker  identification  yields  very  high  performance  in  a  neutral talking environment; on the other hand, the performance has been sharply declined in a shouted talking environment. This work aims at proposing, implementing, and evaluating novel  Third-Order  Circular  Suprasegmental  Hidden  Markov  Models  (CSPHMM3s)  to improve  the  low  performance  of  text-independent  speaker  identification  in  a  shouted talking environment. CSPHMM3s possess combined characteristics of: Circular Hidden Markov  Models  (CHMMs),  Third-Order  Hidden  Markov  Models  (HMM3s),  and Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (SPHMMs). Our results show that CSPHMM3s are superior to each of: First-Order Left-to-Right Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (LTRSPHMM1s), Second-Order Left-to-Right Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (LTRSPHMM2s),  Third-Order  Left-to-Right  Suprasegmental  Hidden  Markov  Models (LTRSPHMM3s), First-Order Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (CSPHMM1s),  and  Second-Order  Circular  Suprasegmental  Hidden  Markov  Models (CSPHMM2s) in a shouted talking environment. Using our collected speech  database, average  speaker  identification  performance  in  a  shouted  talking  environment  based  on LTRSPHMM1s,  LTRSPHMM2s,  LTRSPHMM3s,  CSPHMM1s,  CSPHMM2s,  and CSPHMM3s is 74.6%, 78.4%, 81.7%, 78.7%, 83.4%, and 85.8%, respectively. Speaker identification performance that has been achieved based on CSPHMM3s is close to that attained based on subjective assessment by human listeners.

Keywords: shouted  talking  environment;  speaker  identification;  third-order  circular suprasegmental hidden Markov models; third-order hidden Markov models.

## 1.  Introduction and Literature Review

The process of determining from which of the registered speaker a given utterance comes is  defined  as  speaker  identification.  Speaker  identification  can  be  used  in  criminal investigations  to  determine  the  suspected  persons  produced  the  voice  recorded  at  the scene of the crime. Speaker identification can also be used in civil cases or for the media. These  cases  include  calls  to  radio  stations,  local  or  other  government  authorities, insurance companies, recorded conversations, and many other applications [1].

Speaker identification typically functions in one of two cases: text-dependent (fixed text) case  or  text-independent  (free-text)  case.  In  the  text-dependent  case,  utterances  of  the same  text  are  used  for  both  training  and  testing.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  textindependent case,  training  and  testing  involve  utterances  from  different  texts.  Speaker identification  can  be  divided  into  two  categories:  'open  set'  and  'closed  set'.  In  the 'open set' category, a reference model for the unknown speaker may not exist; whereas, in  the  'closed  set'  category,  a  reference  model  for  the  unknown  speaker  should  be available to the system.

Speaker identification performance in a neutral talking environment is extremely high [13]; however, the performance becomes very low in a stressful talking environment [4-11]. The talking environment in which speech is uttered assuming that speakers do not suffer from any stressful or emotional talking condition is called a neutral talking environment. The talking environment that makes speakers to vary their production of speech from a neutral talking condition to other stressful talking conditions such as shouted, loud, and fast is named a stressful talking environment.

Chen  [4]  studied  talker-stress-induced  intra-word  variability  and  an  algorithm  that compensates  for  the  systematic  changes  observed  based  on  hidden  Markov  models (HMMs) trained by speech tokens under various talking conditions. Raja and Dandapat [5]  studied  speaker  recognition  under  stressed  conditions  to  enhance  the  declined performance  under  such  conditions. Four  different  stressed  conditions  of  SUSAS database  [12],  [13]  have  been  used  in  their  study.  These  conditions  are  neutral,  angry, Lombard,  and  question.  Their  work  [5]  showed  that  the  least  speaker  identification performance happened when speakers talk angrily. Angry talking environment has been used as an alternative talking environment to a shouted talking environment since it can not be completely separated from a shouted talking environment in our real life [6-10]. Zhang  and  Hansen  [11]  reported  on  the  analysis  of  characteristics  of  speech  in  five different  vocal  modes:  whispered,  soft,  neutral,  loud,  and  shouted;  and  to  identify categorizing features of speech modes.

In  one  of  their  works,  Hadar  and  Messer  [14]  proposed  an  easy  method  based  on transforming  any  high  order  HMM  (including  models  in  which  the  state  sequence  and observation  dependency  are  of  different  orders)  into  an  equivalent  first  order  HMM. Chatzis  [15]  focused  in  one  of  his  studies  on  proposing  infinite-order  HMMs  to  learn from data with sequential dynamics. These models typically depend on the postulation of first-order Markovian dependencies between the successive label values y . There are two main advantages of the designed models over the other approaches. The first advantage is that such models allow for capturing very long and complex temporal dependencies. The second advantage is that these models use a margin maximization paradigm to carry out model training, which yields a convex optimization design [15].

In five of our previous studies [6-10], we  focused on improving  poor speaker identification performance in a shouted talking environment based on different classifiers and models. Second-Order Hidden Markov Models (HMM2s) have been used to improve the recognition performance of isolated-word text-dependent speaker identification in a shouted talking environment [6]. The achieved speaker identification performance based on  these  models  is  59.0%.  Second-Order  Circular  Hidden  Markov  Models  (CHMM2s) have  been  proposed,  implemented,  and  tested  to  enhance  the  performance  of  isolatedword text-dependent speaker identification in such a talking environment [7]. Based on such  models,  the  obtained  speaker  identification  performance  is  72.0%.  In  one  of  our works [8], we exploited Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (SPHMMs) to alleviate the  degraded  performance of text-dependent  speaker identification  in  a  shouted  talking environment.  The  attained  speaker  identification  performance  using  these  models  is 75.0%.  Second-Order  Circular  Suprasegmental  Hidden  Markov  Models  (CSPHMM2s) have been proposed, applied, and evaluated to improve text-dependent speaker identification  performance  in  a  shouted  talking  environment  [9].  The  reported  speaker identification performance based on these models is 83.4%. Novel Third-Order Hidden Markov Models (HMM3s) have been designed, implemented, and assessed to enhance the  low  performance  of  text-independent  speaker  identification  in  such  a  talking environment  [10].  These  novel  models  yield  a  text-independent  speaker  identification performance of 63.5%.

The main motivation of this research is to further enhance low text-independent speaker identification performance in a shouted talking environment over that obtained in the five prior  works  [6-10].  This  will  be  achieved  by  proposing,  implementing,  and  assessing novel  classifiers  called  Third-Order  Circular  Suprasegmental  Hidden  Markov  Models (CSPHMM3s).  The  proposed  models  are  comprised  of  combinations  from  each  of: CHMMs, SPHMMs, and HMM3s. We believe that CSPHMM3s will outperform each of: First-Order  Left-to-Right  Suprasegmental  Hidden  Markov  Models  (LTRSPHMM1s), Second-Order Left-to-Right Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (LTRSPHMM2s), Third-Order  Left-to-Right  Suprasegmental  Hidden  Markov  Models  (LTRSPHMM3s), First-Order Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov  Models  (CSPHMM1s),  and CSPHMM2s.  This  is  because  the  characteristics  of  LTRSPHMM1s,  LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s,  CSPHMM1s,  and  CSPHMM2s  are  all  combined  and  integrated  into novel models called CSPHMM3s.

The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: The fundamentals of SPHMMs are given in Section 2. Section 3 summarizes LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s, and  CSPHMM2s.  The  details  of  CSPHMM3s  are  discussed  in  Section  4.  Section  5 describes  the  collected  speech  database  used  in  the  experiments  and  the  extraction  of features. Section 6 discusses speaker identification algorithm and the experiments based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s. Discussion of the achieved results appears in Section 7. Concluding remarks are given in Section 8.

## 2.  Fundamentals of Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models

Shahin has developed, implemented, and evaluated SPHMMs as classifiers for speaker recognition in stressful and emotional talking environments [8, 9, 16, 17] and for talking condition recognition in stressful and emotional talking environments [18, 19]. SPHMMs have proved to be superior classifiers over HMMs for speaker identification in each of shouted  [8,  9]  and  emotional  talking  environments  [16,  17]  and  for  talking  condition recognition  in  stressful  and  emotional  talking  environments  [18,  19].  SPHMMs  are capable of summarizing several states of HMMs into a new state called suprasegmental state. Suprasegmental state has the ability to look at the observation sequence through a larger  window.  This  state  permits  observations  at  rates  suitable  for  the  situation  of modeling. Prosodic information, as an example, can not be sensed at a rate that is used for acoustic  modeling.  The main  acoustic parameters that describe  prosody are fundamental frequency, intensity, and duration of speech signals [20]. Prosodic parameters of a unit of speech are named suprasegmental parameters since they have an impact  on  all  segments  of  the  unit  of  speech.  Hence,  prosodic  events  at  the  levels  of phone, syllable, word, and utterance are expressed using suprasegmental states; on the other hand, acoustic events are expressed using conventional states.

The combination and integration of prosodic and acoustic information can be performed as given in the following formula [21],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  is a weighting factor. When:

| $$                  no  impact of  acoustic  model biased  completely  towards  prosodic  model  and 1 α not  biased  towards  any  model 0.5 α no  effect  of prosodic  model biased  completely  towards  acoustic  model  and 0 α prosodic  model biased towards 0.5 α 1 acoustic model biased towards 0 α 0.5$$   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

 v is  the  acoustic  model  of  the v th speaker,  v is  the  suprasegmental model  of  the v th speaker, O is  the  observation  vector  or  sequence  of  an  utterance,       O λ v P is  the probability  of  the v th HMM  speaker  model  given  the  observation  vector O ,  and        O v P is the probability of the v th SPHMM speaker model given the observation vector O .  More  details  about  suprasegmental  hidden  Markov  models  can  be  obtained from references [8, 9, 16, 17, 18, 19].

## 3.  Overview of: LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s

## 3.1.  First-order left-to-right suprasegmental hidden Markov models

LTRSPHMM1s  have  been  derived  from  acoustic  First-Order  Left-to-Right  Hidden Markov Models (LTRHMM1s). LTRHMM1s have been used in the last four decades in many works in  the  areas  of  speech,  speaker,  and  emotion  recognition  since  phonemes follow strictly left to right sequence [1, 3, 4, 22-26]. Fig. 1 illustrates an example of a basic structure of LTRSPHMM1s that has been obtained from LTRHMM1s. This figure illustrates an example of six first-order acoustic hidden Markov states ( q1, q 2, …,q6 ) with a left-to-right transition. In this figure, p1 is a first-order suprasegmental state which is made up of q1, q 2 and q3 , p2 is a first-order suprasegmental state which is composed of q4, q 5 and q6 . The suprasegmental states p1 and p2 are placed in a left-to-right form. p3 is a first-order suprasegmental  state  which  is  comprised  of p1 and p2 . aij is  the  transition  probability between  the i th and  the j th acoustic  hidden  Markov  states,  while bij is  the  transition probability between the i th and the j th suprasegmental states.

Figure 1. Basic structure of LTRSPHMM1s obtained from LTRHMM1s

<!-- image -->

In  LTRHMM1s, the state sequence is a first-order Markov chain where the  stochastic process is modeled in a 2-D matrix of a priori transition probabilities (a ij ) between states s i and s j where aij are given as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  such  acoustic  models,  it  is  assumed  that  the  state-transition  probability  at  time t+1 depends only on the state of the Markov chain at time t . Readers can get more information about acoustic first-order left-to-right hidden Markov models from references [25, 26].

## 3.2.  Second-order left-to-right suprasegmental hidden Markov models

LTRSPHMM2s  have  been  derived  from  acoustic  Second-Order  Left-to-Right  Hidden Markov  Models  (LTRHMM2s).  As  an  example  of  such  models,  the  six  first-order acoustic left-to-right hidden Markov states of Fig. 1  have been changed by six secondorder acoustic hidden Markov states positioned in a left-to-right form. The suprasegmental  second-order  states p1 and p2 are  located  in  a  left-to-right  form.  The suprasegmental state p3 in such models becomes a second-order suprasegmental state.

In LTRHMM2s, the state sequence is a second-order Markov chain where the stochastic process  is  expressed  by  a  3-D  matrix  (a ijk ).  Therefore,  the  transition  probabilities  in LTRHMM2s are given as [27]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the constraints,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  state-transition  probability  in  LTRHMM2s  at  time t+1 relies  on  the  states  of  the Markov chain at times t and t-1 .  More information about acoustic second-order left-toright hidden Markov models can be obtained from references [6, 7, 27].

## 3.3.  First-order circular suprasegmental hidden Markov models

CSPHMM1s  have  been  obtained  from  acoustic  First-Order  Circular  Hidden  Markov Models (CHMM1s). CHMM1s have been proposed and implemented by Zheng and Yuan for speaker identification in a neutral talking environment [28]. Shahin showed that these models outperform LTRHMM1s  for  speaker identification in a shouted talking environment [7]. Interested readers can get more details about CHMM1s from references [7, 28].

Fig.  2  shows  an  example  of  a  fundamental  structure  of  CSPHMM1s  that  has  been constructed  from  CHMM1s.  This  figure  is  made  up  of  six  first-order  acoustic  hidden Markov states: q 1 , q 2 ,…, q6 arranged in a circular form. p1 is a first-order suprasegmental state  that  is  composed  of q4,  q 5 ,  and q6 . p2 is  a  first-order  suprasegmental  state  which consists of q1, q 2 , and q3 . The suprasegmental states p1 and p2 are placed in a circular form. p3 is a first-order suprasegmental state that is comprised of p1 and p2 .

## 3.4.  Second-order circular suprasegmental hidden Markov models

CSPHMM2s have been derived from acoustic Second-Order Circular Hidden  Markov Models (CHMM2s) [9]. CHMM2s have been proposed, applied, and evaluated by Shahin for speaker identification in each of shouted and emotional talking environments [7, 16]. CHMM2s have shown to be superior models over each of LTRHMM1s, LTRHMM2s, and  CHMM1s  because  CHMM2s  possess  the  characteristics  of  both  CHMMs  and HMM2s [7]. More information about CSPHMM2s can be obtained from reference [9].

## 4.  Third-Order Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models

Third-Order  Circular  Suprasegmental  Hidden  Markov  Models  have  been  derived  from acoustic Third-Order Hidden Markov Models (HMM3s). HMM3s have been proposed, implemented,  and  assessed  by  Shahin  [10]  to  enhance  the  declined  text-independent speaker identification performance in a shouted talking environment. In one of his works, Shahin [10]  showed that  HMM3s  outperform  each  of  HMM1s  and  HMM2s  in  such  a talking environment.

Figure 2. Basic structure of CSPHMM1s derived from CHMM1s

<!-- image -->

## 4.1 Basics of HMM3s

In  HMM3s,  the  underlying  state  sequence  is  a  third-order  Markov  chain  where  the stochastic process  is expressed  by  a  4-D  matrix  ( a ijkw ). Therefore,  the transition probabilities in HMM3s are given as [10],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the constraints,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The probability of the state sequence, , ,...,q Q Δ q ,q T 2 1 is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where i  is  the  probability of a state  s i at  time t =  1,  and a ijk is  the  probability of the transition from a state s i to a state s k at time t = 3.

Given a sequence of observed vectors, , ,...,O O ,O O T 2 1  the joint state-output probability is expressed as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4.2 Extended Viterbi and Baum-Welch Algorithms of HMM3s

Based on the probability of the partial alignment ending at a transition (s k ,s w) at times ( t -1, t ), the most likely state sequence can be obtained as [10]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recursive computation can be calculated as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The forward function,  t (j,k,w) ,  which defines the probability of the partial observation sequence, O1,O2,…,OT , and the transition (sj,sk,sw) among times: t -2, t -1, and t is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->



 t (j,k,w) can be computed from the two transitions: (si ,s j ,s k ) and (s j ,s k ,s w) between states s i and sw as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The summation of the forward variable can be obtained as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The backward function,  t (i, j, k) , can be defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The last equation expresses  t (i,j,k) as the probability of the partial observation sequence from t+ 1 to T given the model  and the transition (s i ,s j,sk) among times: t -2, t -1, and t .  t (i,j,k) can be calculated from the two transitions: (sj ,s k ,s w) and (si ,s j ,s k) between states sw and si as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Readers  can  obtain  more  information  about  third-order  hidden  Markov  models  from reference [10].

## 4.3 LTRSPHMM3s

LTRSPHMM3s have  been  developed  from  acoustic  Third-Order  Left-to-Right  Hidden Markov  Models  (LTRHMM3s).  As  an  example  of  these  models,  the  six  first-order acoustic  left-to-right  hidden  Markov  states  of  Fig.  1  are  replaced  by  six  third-order acoustic hidden Markov states located in a left-to-right form. The suprasegmental third- order  states p1 and p2 are  positioned  in  a  left-to-right  form.  In  these  models,  the suprasegmental state p3 becomes a third-order suprasegmental state.

## 4.4 CSPHMM3s

Within  CHMM3s,  prosodic  and  acoustic  information  can  be  combined  and  integrated into CSPHMM3s as given by the following formula,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

v th

speaker  and CSPHMM3s Ψ model of the v th speaker.

where, CHMM3s λ is  the  acoustic  third-order  circular  hidden  Markov  model  of  the v v is  the  suprasegmental  third-order  circular  hidden  Markov

As an example of CSPHMM3s, the six first-order acoustic circular hidden Markov states of Fig. 2 are replaced by six third-order acoustic circular hidden Markov states organized in the same shape. p1 and p2 become third-order suprasegmental states placed in a circular form. p3 is a third-order suprasegmental state which is made up of p1 and p2 .

We  believe that CSPHMM3s  are  superior models to each  of  LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s for speaker identification because the characteristics of CSPHMM3s  are comprised of the characteristics of both CSPHMMs and SPHMM3s:

1. In SPHMM3s, the state sequence is a third-order suprasegmental chain where the stochastic process is expressed by a 4-D matrix since the state-transition probability at time t +1 depends on the states of the suprasegmental chain at times t , t -1, and t -2.  Consequently,  the  stochastic  process  that  is  specified  by  a  4-D  matrix  gives

- greater  speaker  identification  performance  than  that  specified  by  either  a  2-D matrix (SPHMM1s) or a 3-D matrix (SPHMM2s).
2. Suprasegmental chain in CSPHMMs is more powerful and more efficient than that in LTRSPHMMs to express the changing statistical characteristics that exist in the actual observations of speech signals. This is because:
- a) The  underlying  Markov  chain  in  CSPHMMs  has  no  final  or  absorbing  state. Therefore,  the  corresponding  SPHMMs  can  be  trained  by  as  long  training sequence as needed. This property does not exist in LTRSPHMMs.
- b) The absorbing state in LTRSPHMMs governs the fact that the rest of a single and  long  observation  sequence  provides  no  further  information  about  earlier states once the underlying Markov chain reaches the absorbing state. In speaker recognition systems, it is true that a Markov chain should be able to revisit the earlier states because the states of SPHMMs  reflect  the  vocal organic configuration of the speaker. Therefore, the vocal organic configuration of the speaker  is  reflected  to  states  more  conveniently  using  CSPHMMs  than  using LTRSPHMMs. Therefore, it is inconvenient to utilize LTRSPHMMs having one absorbing state for speaker identification systems.

## 5.  Speech Database and Extraction of Features

## 5.1  Collected Speech Database

In  this  work,  CSPHMM3s  have  been  tested  on  our  collected  speech  database.  The database is comprised of eight different sentences captured in each of neutral and shouted talking environments. The eight sentences are:

- 1) He works five days a week.
- 2) The sun is shining.
- 3) The weather is fair.
- 4) The students study hard.
- 5) Assistant professors are looking for promotion.
- 6) University of Sharjah.

- 7) Electrical and Computer Engineering Department.
- 8) He has two sons and two daughters.

Fifty  (twenty  five  male  students  and  twenty  five  female  students)  healthy  adult  native speakers of American English were asked to utter the eight sentences. These speakers were untrained to avoid overstressed expressions. The speakers were separately asked to utter each sentence a number of times in each of neutral and shouted talking environments. The total number of utterances recorded in both talking environments were 5400 ((50 speakers × first 4 sentences  ×  9  repetitions/sentence  in  neutral  talking  environment)  +  (50  speakers  ×  last  4 sentences × 9 repetitions/sentence × 2 talking environments)).

The captured database was collected in a clean environment by a speech acquisition board using a 16-bit linear coding A/D converter and sampled at a sampling rate of 16 kHz. The database was a wideband 16-bit per sample linear data. A high emphasis filter, H(z) = 1 0.95z -1 , was applied to the collected speech signals. The emphasized speech signals were applied every 5 ms to a 30 ms Hamming window.

## 5.2 Extraction of Features

Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (static MFCCs) and delta Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients  (delta  MFCCs)  have  been  used  in  this  work  to  characterize  the  phonetic content of speech signals. Such coefficients have been  adopted in stressful speech  and speaker recognition areas because these coefficients outperform other coefficients in the two  areas  and  because  they  yield  a  high-level  approximation  of  a  human  auditory perception [29], [30], [31].

A  32-dimension  feature  analysis  of  both  static  MFCCs  and  delta  MFCCs  (16  static MFCCs and 16 delta MFCCs) has been used in the present work to form the observation vectors  in  each  of  LTRSPHMM1s,  LTRSPHMM2s,  LTRSPHMM3s,  CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s. The number of conventional states, N ,  is  nine  and  the number of suprasegmental states is three (each suprasegmental state is comprised of three conventional states) in each suprasegmental model with a continuous mixture observation density has been chosen for each model.

## 6.  Speaker Identification Algorithm Based on Each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s and the Experiments

The  training  phase  of  each  of  LTRSPHMM1s,  LTRSPHMM2s,  LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s is very alike to the training phase of the conventional  LTRHMM1s,  LTRHMM2s,  LTRHMM3s,  CHMM1s,  CHMM2s,  and CHMM3s, respectively. In the training phase of each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s (completely  six  separate  and  independent  training  phases),  suprasegmental:  first-order left-to-right, second-order left-to-right, third-order left-to-right, first-order circular, second-order circular, and third-order circular models are trained on top of acoustic: firstorder left-to-right, second-order left-to-right, third-order left-to-right, first-order circular, second-order  circular,  and  third-order  circular  models,  respectively.  In  each  training phase, the v th speaker model has been derived using the first four sentences of the speech database  with  9  repetitions  per  sentence  uttered  by  the  v th speaker  in  neutral  talking environment. The total number of utterances that have been used to derive the v th speaker model in each training phase are 36 (first 4 sentences × 9 repetitions/sentence).

In the test (identification) phase of each of  LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s (totally six separate and independent test phases), each one of the fifty speakers separately uses each one of the last four sentences of the database (text-independent) with 9 repetitions per sentence in each of  neutral  and  shouted  talking  environments.  The  total  number  of  utterances  that have been used in each evaluation phase per talking environment are 1800 (50 speakers ×

last 4 sentences × 9 repetitions/sentence). The probability of generating every utterance per speaker is separately computed based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s. For each one of these six suprasegmental models, the model with the highest probability is chosen as the output of speaker identification as given in the following formula per talking environment:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where O is  the  observation  vector  or  sequence  that  belongs  to  the  unknown  speaker, v model  is the acoustic hidden Markov model (this model can be one of: LTRHMM1s, LTRHMM2s, LTRHMM3s, CHMM1s, CHMM2s, and CHMM3s) of the v th speaker and v model  is  the  suprasegmental  hidden  Markov  model  (this  model  can  be  one  of: LTRSPHMM1s,  LTRSPHMM2s,  LTRSPHMM3s,  CSPHMM1s,  CSPHMM2s,  and CSPHMM3s) of the v th speaker.

## 7.  Results and Discussion

This  work  proposes,  implements,  and  tests  novel  classifiers  called  CSPHMM3s  for speaker identification in each of neutral and shouted talking environments. In this work, the weighting factor  has  been  selected  to  be  equal  to  0.5  to  avoid  biasing  towards either acoustic or prosodic model.

To assess the proposed models, speaker identification performance based on such models has been separately compared with that based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s in each of neutral and shouted  talking  environments.  Text-independent  speaker  identification  performance  in each of neutral and shouted talking environments using the collected database based on each  of  LTRSPHMM1s,  LTRSPHMM2s,  LTRSPHMM3s,  CSPHMM1s,  CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s is given in Table 1. This table apparently demonstrates that each model performs almost ideal in neutral talking environment. This is because each acoustic model (LTRHMM1s, LTRHMM2s, LTRHMM3s, CHMM1s, CHMM2s, and CHMM3s) yields very high text-independent speaker identification performance in such a talking environment as given in Table 2. On the other hand, the suprasegmental models perform non-ideally  in  shouted  talking  environment  as  shown  in  Table  1.  This  is  because  each corresponding acoustic model gives low speaker identification performance in this talking environment as shown in Table 2.

Table 1 Text-independent speaker identification performance in each of neutral and shouted talking environments using the collected database based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s

| Models  Gender  Speaker identification performance (%)  Neutral talking environment  Shouted talking environment  LTRSPHMM1s  Male  96.6  73.5  Female  96.8  75.7  Average  96.7  74.6  LTRSPHMM2s  Male  97.5  78.9  Female  97.5  77.9  Average  97.5  78.4  LTRSPHMM3s  Male  97.9  81.6  Female  98.1  81.8  Average  98.0  81.7  CSPHMM1s  Male  97.4  78.3  Female  98.4  79.1  Average  97.9  78.7  CSPHMM2s  Male  98.9  82.9  Female  98.7  83.9  Average  98.8  83.4  CSPHMM3s  Male  99.0  85.7  Female  99.2  85.9  Average  99.1  85.8   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2 Text-independent speaker identification performance in each of neutral and shouted talking environments using the collected database based on each of LTRHMM1s, LTRHMM2s, LTRHMM3s, CHMM1s, CHMM2s, and CHMM3s

| Models  Gender  Speaker identification performance (%)  Neutral talking environment  Shouted talking environment  LTRHMM1s  Male  90  20  Female  91  22  Average  90.5  21   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

| LTRHMM2s  Male  91  55  Female  94  58  Average  92.5  56.5  LTRHMM3s  Male  93  63  Female  95  64  Average  94  63.5  CHMM1s  Male  92  41  Female  92.4  43  Average  92.2  42  CHMM2s  Male  94  62  Female  94  62.8  Average  94  62.4  CHMM3s  Male  95  67.2  Female  95.6  68.2  Average  95.3  67.7   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 3 summarizes improvement rate of speaker identification performance in shouted talking environment based on CSPHMM3s over that based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s and number of extra characteristics  possessed  by  CSPHMM3s  as  compared  to  each  of  LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s. It is apparent from this table that as the number of extra characteristics possessed by CSPHMM3s compared to the other models decreases, the improvement rate decreases. This shows the significance of  CSPHMM3s and their ability  to  enhance  speaker  identification  performance  in  this talking  environment compared to the other models.  For example, 15.0% (improvement rate of using CSPHMM3s over using LTRSPHMM1s) is higher than 2.9% (improvement rate  of  using  CSPHMM3s over using CSPHMM2s). This is because CSPHMM3s have the  advantage  of  possessing  three  extra  characteristics  compared  to  LTRSPHMM1s: circular hidden Markov models outperform left-to-right hidden Markov models (one extra characteristic)  and  third-order  hidden Markov  models  are superior to  first-order  hidden Markov  models  (two  extra  characteristics).  On  the  other  hand,  CSPHMM3s  have  the advantage  of  possessing  only  one  extra  characteristic  compared  to  CSPHMM2s:  thirdorder hidden Markov models insignificantly lead second-order hidden Markov models.

Table 3 Improvement rate of speaker identification performance in shouted talking environment based on CSPHMM3s over that based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s and the number of extra characteristics possessed by CSPHMM3s compared to each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s

| Models  Improvement rate (%)  Number of extra characteristics  LTRSPHMM1s  15.0  3  LTRSPHMM2s  9.4  2  LTRSPHMM3s  5.0  1  CSPHMM1s  9.0  2  CSPHMM2s  2.9  1   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

A  statistical  significance  test  has  been  carried  out  to  demonstrate  whether  speaker identification  performance  differences  (speaker  identification  performance  based  on CSPHMM3s and that based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s in each of neutral and shouted talking environments) are real or simply due to statistical fluctuations. The statistical significance test  has  been  conducted  based  on  the  Student's t Distribution  test  as  given  by  the following formula,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where model   1 x is the mean of the first sample (model 1) of size n , model   2 x is the mean of the  second  sample  (model  2)  of  the  same  size,  and  SD pooled is  the  pooled  standard deviation of the two samples (models) given as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  SDmodel 1 is  the  standard  deviation  of  the  first  sample  (model  1)  of  size n and SDmodel 2 is the standard deviation of the second sample (model 2) of the same size.

In this work, the calculated t values between CSPHMM3s and each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s in each of neutral and shouted talking environments using the collected database are tabulated in Table 4. Based on this table,  each calculated t value  in  neutral talking  environment is  smaller than the tabulated critical value t 0.05 = 1.645 at 0.05 significant level. On the other hand, in shouted talking environment, each calculated t value is higher than the tabulated critical value t 0.05 =  1.645.  Hence,  CSPHMM3s  outperform  each  of  LTRSPHMM1s,  LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s in a shouted talking environment. The reason  of  this  superiority  is  that  CSPHMM3s  possess  the  combined  characteristics  of each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s  as  was  mentioned  in  Section  4.4.  In  neutral  talking  environment,  the superiority of CSPHMM3s over each of the other five models becomes minor since the acoustic  models:  LTRHMM1s,  LTRHMM2s,  LTRHMM3s,  CHMM1s,  CHMM2s,  and CHMM3s perform well in such a talking environment as given in Table 2.

Table 4 Calculated t values between CSPHMM3s and each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s in each of neutral and shouted talking environments using the collected database

| t  model 1, model 2  Calculated  t  value  Neutral environment  Shouted environment  t  CSPHMM3s,  LTRSPHMM1s  1.197  1.932  t  CSPHMM3s,  LTRSPHMM2s  1.335  1.864  t  CSPHMM3s,  LTRSPHMM3s  1.492  1.801  t  CSPHMM3s,  CSPHMM1s  1.531  1.782  t  CSPHMM3s,  CSPHMM2s  1.578  1.753   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 5 shows  calculated t values  between each suprasegmental model  and  its corresponding acoustic model in each of neutral and shouted talking environments using the collected database. This table apparently illustrates that each suprasegmental model is superior  to  its  belonging  acoustic  model  in  each  talking  environment  since  each calculated t value in this table is greater than the tabulated critical value t 0.05 = 1.645.

Table 5 Calculated t values between each suprasegmental model and its corresponding acoustic model in each of neutral and shouted talking environments using the collected database

| t  sup. model, acoustic model  Calculated  t  value  Neutral environment  Shouted environment  t  LTRSPHMM1s, LTRHMM1s  1.712  1.857  t  LTRSPHMM2s, LTRHMM2s  1.789  1.892  t  LTRSPHMM3s, LTRHMM3s  1.826  1.955  t  CSPHMM1s, CHMM1s  1.701  1.798  t  CSPHMM2s, CHMM2s  1.786  1.892  t  CSPHMM3s, CHMM3s  1.894  1.986   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Six  more  experiments  have  been  independently  conducted  in  this  work  to  assess  the achieved  speaker  identification  performance  in  each  of  neutral  and  shouted  talking environments based on CSPHMM3s. The six experiments are:

1. Experiment 1: The six classifiers: LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s have been evaluated on a well-known speech database called Speech Under Simulated and Actual Stress (SUSAS). SUSAS database has been originally designed for speech recognition in neutral and stressful talking conditions [12], [13]. In the current work and using this database, isolated words captured at a sampling rate of 8 kHz have been used under each  of  neutral  and  angry  talking  conditions  in  this  experiment.  Angry  talking condition  has  been  used  as  an  alternative  talking  condition  to  shouted  talking condition  because  angry  talking  condition  can  not  be  completely  separated  from shouted  talking  condition  in  our  genuine  life  [6-10].  Thirty  different  utterances uttered by seven speakers in each of neutral and angry talking conditions have been selected  to  evaluate  the  six  models.  This  number  of  speakers  is  very  limited compared to the number of speakers used in the collected database.

Average  speaker  identification  performance  in  each  of  neutral  and  angry  talking conditions using SUSAS database based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s  is exemplified in Fig. 3. This  figure  evidently shows that  the  performance  based  on each model is nearly perfect in neutral talking condition. This figure demonstrates also  that  speaker  identification  performance  in  angry  talking  condition  based  on CSPHMM3s  is  higher  than  that  based  on  each  of  the  other  models.  Speaker identification performance  based on each model and  using SUSAS database is so close to that using the collected database.

Figure 3. Average speaker identification performance in each of neutral and angry talking conditions using SUSAS database based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s

<!-- image -->

The  calculated t values  between  CSPHMM3s  and  each  of  LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s,  LTRSPHMM3s,  CSPHMM1s,  and  CSPHMM2s  in  each  of neutral and angry talking conditions using SUSAS database are tabulated in Table 6.  This  table  shows  that  CSPHMM3s  outperform  each  one  of  the  other  five suprasegmental models in angry talking condition (the t values are larger than t 0.05 = 1.645). However,  in neutral talking condition, the table illustrates that CSPHMM3s perform almost the same as the other five models (the t values are smaller than t 0.05 = 1.645).

Table 6 Calculated t values between CSPHMM3s and each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, and CSPHMM2s in each of neutral and angry talking conditions using SUSAS database

| t  model 1, model 2  Calculated  t  value  Neutral condition  Angry condition  t  CSPHMM3s,  LTRSPHMM1s  1.266  1.793  t  CSPHMM3s,  LTRSPHMM2s  1.297  1.874  t  CSPHMM3s,  LTRSPHMM3s  1.378  1.896  t  CSPHMM3s,  CSPHMM1s  1.472  1.956  t  CSPHMM3s,  CSPHMM2s  1.501  1.987   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

2. Experiment  2:  The  attained  speaker  identification  performance  in  shouted/angry talking environment based on CSPHMM3s has been compared with that based on the state-of-the-art models and classifiers using each of the collected and SUSAS

databases. Speaker identification performance in shouted/angry talking environment using each of the collected and SUSAS databases based on each of CSPHMM3s, Support Vector Machine (SVM) [32], [33], Genetic Algorithm (GA) [34], [35], and Vector  Quantization  (VQ)  [36],  [37]  is  given  in  Table  7.  This  table  apparently shows  that  CSPHMM3s  are  superior  to  each  of  SVM,  GA,  and  VQ  for  speaker identification in shouted/angry talking environment using each of the collected and SUSAS databases.

Raja  and  Dandapat  [5]  reported,  based  on  different  classifiers  and  compensators, speaker  identification  performance  in  angry  talking  environment  using  SUSAS database [12], [13]. Using MFCCs as the extracted features, their reported speaker identification performance in angry talking environment  is 27.0%, 27.0%, 30.2%, 27.0%,  27.0%  and  30.2%  based,  respectively,  on  Vector  Quantization  (VQ), Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs),  Speaker and Stress Information based Compensation  (SSIC),  Compensation  by  Removal  of  Stressed  Vectors  (CRSV), Cepstral  Mean  Normalization  (CMN),  and  Selection  of  Compensation  by  Sress Recognition (SCSR). It is evident that CSPHMM3s  yield higher speaker identification  performance  in  angry  talking  environment  using  SUSAS  database than each of VQ, GMMs, SSIC, CRSV, CMN, and CRSV.

Table 7 Speaker identification performance in shouted/angry talking environment using each of the collected and SUSAS databases based on each of CSPHMM3s, SVM, GA, and VQ

| Classifier  Gender  Speaker identification performance (%)  Using collected database  Using SUSAS database  CSPHMM3s  Male  85.7  82.0  Female  85.9  81.6  Average  85.8  81.8  SVM  Male  61.0  62.6  Female  60.0  60.6  Average  60.5  61.6  GA  Male  57.0  58.5  Female  58.0  58.1  Average  57.5  58.3  VQ  Male  58.0  56.2  Female  58.0  57.0  Average  58.0  56.6   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

3. Experiment 3: Using our collected database and exploiting CSPHMM3s based on each  of  our  approach,  Hadar  and  Messer  approach,  and  Chatzis  approach,  the achieved speaker identification performance in shouted talking environment is given in Table 8. This table clearly demonstrates that speaker identification performance using CSPHMM3s based on our approach is greater than that based on Hadar and Messer approach and Chatzis approach by 5.8% and 6.5%, respectively.
4. Experiment 4: CSPHMM3s have been assessed for distinct values of the weighting factor (  .  Fig. 4  illustrates average speaker identification performance in each of neutral  and  shouted  talking  environments  using  the  collected  database  based  on CSPHMM3s for different values of  (0.0, 0.1, 0.2, …, 0.9, 1.0). This figure clearly shows that increasing the value of  in the range [0 - 0.5] has a significant effect on improving  speaker  identification  performance  in  a  shouted  talking  environment, while increasing the value of  in the range [0.6 - 1.0] has an insignificant influence on  enhancing  the  performance  in  the  same  talking  environment.  This  figure demonstrates  also  that  increasing  the  value  of  in  the  range  [0.0  -  1.0]  has  an insignificant impact on enhancing the performance in a neutral talking environment. In other words, suprasegmental hidden Markov models have more impact than the acoustic models  on  speaker  identification  performance  in a shouted talking environment.

Table 8 Speaker identification performance in shouted talking environment using CSPHMM3s based on each of our approach, Hadar and Messer approach, and Chatzis approach using the collected database

| CSPHMM3s based on  Gender  Speaker identification performance in  shouted talking environment  Our approach  Male  85.7%  Female  85.9%  Average  85.8%  Hadar and Messer  approach  Male  81.3%  Female  80.9%  Average  81.1%  Chatzis approach  Male  80.4%  Female  80.8%  Average  80.6%   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Figure 4. Average speaker identification performance in each of neutral and shouted talking environments using the collected database based on CSPHMM3s for different values of 

<!-- image -->

5. Experiment 5: To  estimate the standard deviation of speaker identification performance in each of neutral and shouted talking environments based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s,  a  statistical  cross-validation  technique  has  been  conducted  in  this experiment.  Cross-validation  technique  has  been  separately  performed  for  each classifier as follows: the whole collected database (5400 utterances per model) has been partitioned at random into five subsets per classifier. Each subset is comprised of 1080 utterances (360 utterances have been used in the training session and the remaining  have  been  used  in  the  test  session).  Based  on  these  five  subsets  per classifier, the standard deviation has been computed. The standard deviation values per  classifier  are  summarized  in  Fig.  5.  Cross-validation  technique  demonstrates, based  on  this  figure,  that  the  calculated  standard  deviation  values  are  low.  As  a result,  it  is  evident  that  speaker  identification  performance  in  each  of  neutral  and shouted talking environments based on each classifier and using the five subsets is very similar to that using the entire database.

Figure 5. Calculated standard deviation values using statistical cross-validation technique in each of neutral and shouted talking environments of the collected database based on each of LTRSPHMM1s, LTRSPHMM2s, LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s, CSPHMM2s, and CSPHMM3s

<!-- image -->

6. Experiment 6: An informal subjective evaluation of CSPHMM3s using the collected speech  database  has  been  carried  out  with  ten  nonprofessional  listeners  (human judges).  A  total  of  800  utterances  (50  speakers  ×  8  sentences  ×  2  talking environments)  have  been  used  in  this  evaluation.  During  the  assessment,  each listener was separately asked to identify the unknown speaker in each of neutral and shouted  talking  environments  (completely  two  separate  and  independent  talking environments) for every test utterance. The average speaker identification performance in neutral and  shouted talking environments  based on the  subjective evaluation  is  94.8%  and  79.4%,  respectively.  These  averages  are  close  to  the attained averages based on CSPHMM3s (99.1% and 85.8% in neutral and shouted talking environments, respectively).

Finally,  the  computational  costs  and  training  requirements  needed  in  CSPHMM3s  are much grater than those required in each of CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s. The required computations of the forward variable,  t (j) ,  and the backward variable,  t (j) ,  in each of HMM1s, HMM2s, and HMM3s are given in Table 9 where 1 1and     t T j N ( N is the number of states and T is the utterance length) [10]. It is evident from this table that the  required  number  of  computations  for  each  of  the  forward  and  backward  variables have been dramatically increased in HMM3s compared to each of HMM1s and HMM2s.

Table 9 Required computations of the forward and backward variables in each of HMM1s, HMM2s, and HMM3s

| Models  Required number of  computations of the forward  variable  Required number of  computations of the backward  variable  HMM1s  N 2  T  N 2  T  HMM2s  N 3  T  N 3  T  HMM3s  N 4  T  N 4  T   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 8.  Concluding Remarks

Novel  CSPHMM3s  have  been  proposed,  applied,  and  assessed  to  improve  low  textindependent  speaker  identification  performance  in  shouted/angry  talking  environment. Some experiments have been separately and independently carried out in this work using different speech databases based on the novel models. This work shows that CSPHMM3s significantly  outperform  each  of  LTRSPHMM1s,  LTRSPHMM2s,  LTRSPHMM3s, CSPHMM1s,  and  CSPHMM2s  in  such  a  talking  environment.  This  is  because  the characteristics  of  LTRSPHMM1s,  LTRSPHMM2s,  LTRSPHMM3s,  CSPHMM1s,  and CSPHMM2s are all combined and integrated into CSPHMM3s. Also, this work shows that CSPHMM3s slightly perform better than each of CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s in neutral talking environment. In addition, this work demonstrates that the suprasegmental models CSPHMM3s are superior to their corresponding acoustic models HMM3s in each of  neutral  and  shouted  talking  environments.  Furthermore,  our  work  exemplifies  that CSPHMM3s based on our approach are superior to those based on each of Hadar and Messer  approach  and  Chatzis approach  in shouted talking environment. Finally, CSPHMM3s outperform each of SVM, GA, and VQ for speaker identification in shouted talking environment.

There are some  limitations in this work. First,  using  CSPHMM3s  for  speaker identification  nonlinearly  increases  the  computational  costs  and  the  needed  training requirements compared to using each of CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s. This is because HMM3s require on the order of N 4 T operations ( N is  the number of states and T is  the utterance  length),  compared  to N 2 T and N 3 T operations  in  HMM1s  and  HMM2s, respectively. Therefore, it is required much more memory space in CSPHMM3s than that in each of CSPHMM1s and CSPHMM2s. Second, the number of speakers accessible in SUSAS database is inadequate. Third, all the available 7 speakers in SUSAS database are of the same gender (male). Finally, speaker identification performance in shouted/angry talking  environment  based  on  CSPHMM3s  is  imperfect.  A  comprehensive  study  and investigation are underway to further improve speaker identification performance in such a talking environment.

## References

- [1] S. Furui, 'Speaker-dependent-feature-extraction, recognition and processing techniques,' Speech Communication, Vol. 10, March 1991, pp. 505-520.
- [2] K. R. Farrell, R. J. Mammone and K. T. Assaleh, 'Speaker recognition using neural networks  and  conventional  classifiers,'  IEEE  Transactions  on  Speech  and  Audio Processing, Vol. 2, January 1994, pp. 194-205.
- [3]  K. Yu, J. Mason and J. Oglesby, 'Speaker recognition using hidden Markov models, dynamic time warping and vector quantization,' IEE Proceedings on Vision, Image and Signal Processing, Vol. 142, No. 5, October 1995, pp. 313-318.
- [4] Y. Chen, 'Cepstral domain talker stress compensation for robust speech recognition,' IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Vol. 36, No. 4, April 1988, pp. 433-439.
- [5]  G.  S.  Raja  and  S.  Dandapat,  'Speaker  recognition  under  stressed  condition,' International Journal of Speech Technology, Vol. 13, 2010, pp. 141-161.
- [6]  I. Shahin, 'Improving speaker identification performance under the shouted talking condition using the second-order hidden Markov models,' EURASIP Journal on Applied Signal Processing, Vol. 5, issue 4, March 2005, pp. 482-486.

- [7]  I.  Shahin,  'Enhancing speaker  identification performance under the shouted talking condition using second-order circular  hidden Markov models' Speech Communication, Vol. 48, issue 8, August 2006, pp. 1047-1055.
- [8] I. Shahin, 'Speaker identification in the shouted environment using suprasegmental hidden Markov models,' Signal Processing Journal, Vol. 88, issue 11, November 2008, pp. 2700-2708.
- [9] I. Shahin, 'Employing second-order circular suprasegmental hidden Markov models to enhance speaker identification performance in shouted talking environments,' EURASIP  Journal  on  Audio,  Speech,  and  Music  Processing,  Vol.  2010,  Article  ID 862138, 10 pages, 2010. doi:10.1155/2010/862138.
- [10]  I.  Shahin,  'Novel  third-order  hidden  Markov  models  for  speaker  identification  in shouted talking environments,' International Scientific Journal Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 35, October 2014, pp. 316-323, DOI: 10.1016/j.engappai.2014.07.006.
- [11]  C.  Zhang  and  J.  H.  L.  Hansen,  "Analysis  and  classification  of  speech  mode: whispered through shouted," INTERSPEECH 2007-ICSLP, 2007, pp. 2289-2292.
- [12] J.H.L. Hansen and S. Bou-Ghazale, "Getting started with SUSAS: A speech under simulated  and  actual  stress  database",  EUROSPEECH-97:  International  Conference  on Speech Communication and Technology, Rhodes, Greece, Vol. 4, September 1997, pp. 1743-1746.
- [13] https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC99S78
- [14]  U.  Hadar  and  H.  Messer,  'High-order  hidden  Markov  models-estimation  and implementation,' In: Processing IEEE/SP 15th Workshop on Statistical Signal Processing, 2009, pp. 249-252.
- [15] S. P. Chatzis, 'Margin-maximizing classification of sequential data with infinitelylong  temporal  dependencies,'  Expert  Systems  with  Applications:  An  International Journal, Vol. 40, issue 11, September 2013, pp. 4519-4527.
- [16]  I.  Shahin,  'Speaker  identification  in  emotional  environments,'  Iranian  Journal  of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Vol. 8, No. 1, Winter-Spring 2009, pp. 41-46.
- [17] I. Shahin, 'Employing  both  gender and emotion  cues to enhance speaker identification performance in emotional talking environments,' International Journal of Speech Technology, Vol. 16, issue 3, September 2013, pp. 341-351, DOI: 10.1007/s10772-013-9188-2.

- [18]  I.  Shahin,  'Studying  and  enhancing  talking  condition  recognition  in  stressful  and emotional talking environments based on HMMs, CHMM2s and SPHMMs,' Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, Vol. 6, issue 1, June 2012, pp. 59-71, DOI: 10.1007/s12193011-0082-4.
- [19]  I.  Shahin  and  Mohammed  Nasser  Ba-Hutair,  'Talking  condition  recognition  in stressful  and  emotional  talking  environments  based  on  CSPHMM2s,'  International Journal  of  Speech  Technology,  Vol.  18,  issue  1,  March  2015,  pp.  77-90,  DOI: 10.1007/s10772-014-9251-7.
- [20]  J.  Adell,  A.  Benafonte  and  D.  Escudero,  'Analysis  of  prosodic  features:  towards modeling of emotional and pragmatic attributes of speech,' XXI Congreso de la Sociedad Española  para el Procesamiento  del Lenguaje  Natural,  SEPLN,  Granada,  Spain, September 2005.
- [21]  T.  S.  Polzin  and  A.  H.  Waibel,  'Detecting  emotions  in  Speech,'  Cooperative Multimodal Communication, Second International Conference 1998, CMC 1998.
- [22] T. L. Nwe, S. W. Foo, L. C. De Silva, "Speech emotion recognition using hidden Markov models," Speech Communication, Vol. 41, issue 4, November 2003, pp. 603-623.
- [23]  D.  Ververidis  and  C.  Kotropoulos,  "Emotional  speech  recognition:  resources, features and methods," Speech Communication, Vol. 48, issue 9, September 2006, pp. 1162-1181.
- [24] L. T. Bosch, "Emotions, speech and the ASR framework," Speech Communication, Vol. 40, issues 1-2, April 2003, pp. 213-225.
- [25] L. R. Rabiner and B. H. Juang, Fundamentals of Speech Recognition, Prentice Hall, Eaglewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1983.
- [26]  X.  D.  Huang,  Y.  Ariki  and  M.  A.  Jack,  Hidden  Markov  Models  for  Speech Recognition, Edinburgh University Press, Great Britain, 1990.
- [27]  J.  F.  Mari,  J.  P.  Haton  and  A.  Kriouile,  'Automatic  word  recognition  based  on second-order  hidden  Markov  models,'  IEEE  Transactions  on  Speech  and  Audio Processing, Vol. 5, No. 1, January 1997, pp. 22-25.
- [28]  C.  Zheng  and  B.  Z.  Yuan,  'Text-dependent  speaker  identification  using  circular hidden Markov models', IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, S13.3, 1988, pp. 580-582.

- [29] A. B. Kandali, A. Routray and T. K. Basu, 'Emotion recognition from Assamese speeches  using  MFCC  features  and  GMM  classifier,'  IEEE  Region  10  Conference TENCON 2008, Hyderabad, India, November 2008, pp. 1-5.
- [30]  T.  H.  Falk  and  W.  Y.  Chan,  'Modulation  spectral  features  for  robust  far-field speaker identification,' IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing, Vol. 18, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 90-100.
- [31]  I.  Shahin,  'Employing  emotion  cues  to  verify  speakers  in  emotional  talking environments,'  Journal  of  Intelligent  Systems,  Special  Issue  on  Intelligent  Healthcare Systems, DOI: 10.1515/jisys-2014-0118, February 2015.
- [32]  W.  M.  Campbell,  J.  R.  Campbell,  D.  A.  Reynolds,  E.  Singer,  and  P.  A.  TorresCarrasquillo, 'Support vector machines for speaker and language recognition,' Computer Speech and Language, 2006, Vol. 20, pp. 210 - 229.
- [33] V. Wan and W. M. Campbell, 'Support vector machines for speaker verification and identification,' Neural Networks for Signal Processing X, Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE Signal Processing Workshop, 2000, Vol. 2, pp. 775 - 784.
- [34] Q. Y. Hong  and  S.  Kwong,  'A  genetic  classification method  for speaker recognition,' Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 18, 2005, pp. 13 19.
- [35] S. Casale, A. Russo, and S. Serano, 'Multistyle classification of speech under stress using feature subset selection based on genetic algorithms,' Speech Communication, Vol. 49, No. 10, August 2007, pp. 801- 810.
- [36] T. Kinnunen and H. Li, 'An overview of text-independent speaker recognition: From features to supervectors,' Speech Communication, Vol. 52, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 12 40.
- [37]  T.  Kinnunen,  E.  Karpov,  and  P.  Franti,  'Real-time  speaker  identification  and verification,'  IEEE  Transactions  on  Audio,  Speech  and  Language  Processing,  Vol.  14, No. 1, January 2006, pp. 277 - 288.