## Speaker Identification in Shouted Talking Environments Based on Novel Third-Order Hidden Markov Models

Ismail Shahin Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Sharjah

Sharjah, United Arab Emirates

E-mail: ismail@sharjah.ac.ae

Abstract - In this work we propose, implement, and evaluate novel models called  Third-Order  Hidden Markov Models (HMM3s) to enhance low performance of text-independent speaker identification in shouted talking environments. The proposed models have  been  tested  on  our  collected  speech  database using  Mel-Frequency  Cepstral  Coefficients  (MFCCs). Our  results  demonstrate  that  HMM3s  significantly improve  speaker  identification  performance  in  such talking environments by 11.3% and 166.7% compared to second-order hidden Markov models (HMM2s) and first-order hidden Markov models (HMM1s), respectively. The achieved results based on the proposed models are close to those obtained in subjective assessment by human listeners.

Keywords -First-order hidden Markov models; second-order  hidden  Markov  models;  shouted  talking environments; speaker identification; third-order hidden Markov models

## I. INTRODUCTION

Speaker recognition has two types: speaker identification  and speaker  verification (authentication). Speaker  identification is the process of automatically deciding  who  is  speaking  from  a  set  of  known  speakers. Speaker verification is the process of automatically accepting or rejecting the identity of the claimed speaker. Speaker identification can be used in criminal investigations  to  determine  the  suspected  persons  who uttered  the  voice  captured  at  the  scene  of  the  crime. Speaker identification can also be used in civil cases or for the media. Speaker verification is widely used in security access to services via a telephone, including home shopping,  home  banking  transactions  using  a  telephone network,  security  control  for  private  information  areas, remote access to computers, and many telecommunication services  [1].  Based  on  the  text  to  be  spoken,  speaker recognition  is  categorized  into  text-dependent  and  textindependent  cases.  In  the  text-dependent  case,  speaker recognition requires the speaker to generate speech for the same text in both training and testing; on the other hand, in the text-independent case, speaker recognition does not depend on the text being spoken.

## II. LITERATURE REVIEW

Many  studies  in  speech  recognition  area  and  speaker recognition area focus on speech uttered in neutral talking environments [1], [2], [3], [4] and on speech produced in stressful talking environments [5], [6], [7], [8]. In literature,  many  studies  that  focus  on  the  two  areas  in stressful talking environments  study  the  two  areas  in shouted  talking  environments  [8],  [9],  [10],  [11],  [12], [13], [14].

Some  talking  environments  are  designed  to  simulate speech generated by different speakers under real stressful talking  conditions.  Hansen,  Cummings,  and  Clements employed  Speech  Under  Simulated  and  Actual  Stress (SUSAS)  database  in  which  eight  talking  conditions  are used to simulate speech uttered under real stressful talking conditions  and  three  real  talking  conditions  [5-7].  The eight talking conditions are neutral, loud, soft, angry, fast, slow, clear, and question. The three talking conditions are 50% task, 70% task, and Lombard. Chen used six talking environments to simulate speech under real stressful talking environments [8]. These environments are neutral, fast,  loud,  Lombard,  soft,  and  shouted.  Shouted  talking environments  are  defined  as  when  speakers  shout,  their intention is to produce a very loud acoustic signal, either to increase its range of transmission or its ratio to background noise.

Chen [8] studied talker-stress-induced intraword variability and an algorithm that pays off for the systematic  changes  observed  based  on  hidden  Markov models (HMMs) trained by speech tokens under different talking conditions. Raja and Dandapat [9] studied speaker recognition under stressed conditions to improve the decreased performance under such conditions. They used four distinct stressed conditions  of  SUSAS  database. These conditions are neutral, angry, Lombard, and question. They concluded that the least speaker identification  performance  happened  when  speakers  talk in angry talking environments [9]. Angry talking environments  are  used  as  alternatives  to  shouted  talking environments since they can not be totally separated from shouted  talking  environments  in  our  genuine  life  [11], [12],  [13],  [14].  Zhang  and  Hansen  [10]  reported  on  the analysis  of  characteristics  of  the  speech  in  five  different vocal modes: whispered, soft, neutral,  loud, and  shouted;

and to recognize discriminating features of speech modes. Shahin  focused  in  four  of  his  earlier  studies  [11],  [12], [13], [14] on improving speaker identification performance  in  shouted  talking  environments  using  each of Second-Order Hidden Markov Models (HMM2s) [11], Second-Order Circular Hidden Markov Models (CHMM2s) [12], Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (SPHMMs) [13], and Second-Order Circular Suprasegmental  Hidden  Markov  Models  (CSPHMM2s) [14].  The  attained  speaker  identification  performance  in such  talking  environments  is  59.0%,  72.0%,  75.0%,  and 83.4%  based  on  HMM2s,  CHMM2s,  SPHMMs,  and CSPHMM2s, respectively [11], [12], [13], [14].

Most  of  the  works  carried  out  in  speech  recognition field and speaker recognition field based on HMMs have been conducted using First-Order Hidden Markov Models (HMM1s)  [8],  [15],  [16].  HMM1s  give  extremely  high speaker recognition performance in neutral talking environments  [8],  [11],  [14],  while  they  yield  very  low performance  in  shouted  talking  environments  [8],  [11], [14].  Mari et  al. [17],  [18]  proposed,  applied,  and  tested HMM2s in the training and testing phases of a connected word recognition  system  under  neutral  talking  condition. They attained very high performance using such models. Shahin  [11]  exploited  these  models  in  the  training  and testing  phases  of  isolated-word  text-dependent  speaker identification  systems  under  each  of  neutral  and  shouted talking conditions. Based on his work and using HMM2s, Shahin [11] achieved higher speaker identification performance than that using HMM1s  under  shouted talking condition.

The  aim  of  this  work  is  to  propose,  implement,  and evaluate novel models called Third-Order Hidden Markov Models (HMM3s) to further enhance (compared to HMM2s) text-independent speaker identification performance  in  shouted  talking  environments.  Speaker recognition  in  shouted  talking  environments  can  be  used in criminal investigations to recognize the suspected persons who uttered voice in shouted talking envieonments and in the applications of talking condition recognition. Talking condition recognition can be used in medical applications, telecommunications, law enforcement, and military applications [19]. The proposed models  have  been  evaluated  on  our  collected  speech database and SUSAS database.

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  structered  as  follows:  Brief overview of hidden Markov models is given in Section III. The  details  of  the  proposed  third-order  hidden  Markov models are covered in Section IV. Section V describes the collected  speech  database  used  in  this  work  and  the extraction  of  features.  Speaker  identification  algorithm based  on  HMM3s  and  the  experiments  are  discussed  in Section VI. Section VII demonstrates the results achieved in the current work and their discussion. Finally, concluding remarks are presented in Section VIII.

## III.  BRIEF OVERVIEW OF HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS

HMMs  can  be  described  as  being  in  one  of  the N different states: 1, 2, 3,…, N , at any discrete time instant t . The individual states are denoted as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which are generators of a state sequence q t ,  where at any time t : q = {q1 ,q2,…, qT}, T is the length or duration of an observation sequence O of a speech signal. At any discrete time t , the model is in a state q t . At the discrete time t , the model makes a random transition to a state q t+1 .The state transition  probability  matrix A determines the  probability of the next transition between states,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a ij denotes the transition probability from a state i to a state j .

## IV. THIRD ORDER HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS

In  HMM1s,  the  underlying  state  sequence  is  a  firstorder Markov  chain where the stochastic process is expressed by a 2-D matrix of a priori transition probabilities ( a ij ) between states s i and s j where a ij is given as [15], [16],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In HMM2s, the underlying state sequence is a secondorder Markov  chain where the stochastic process is defined  by  a  3-D  matrix  ( a ijk ).  Therefore,  the  transition probabilities in HMM2s are given as [17],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the constraints,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  HMM3s,  the  underlying  state  sequence  is  a  thirdorder Markov  chain where the stochastic process is specified by a 4-D matrix ( a ijkw ). Consequently, the transition probabilities in HMM3s are given as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the constraints,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The probability of the state sequence, , ,...,q ,q 2 Q Δ q 1 T is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where i Ψ is the probability of a state s i at time t = 1, aijk is the probability of transition from a state s i to  a  state s k at time t = 3. aijk can be computed from (2).

Given a sequence of observed vectors, , ,..., 2 , 1 O T O O O  the joint state-output probability is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Extended Viterbi and Baum-Welch Algorithms:

Based on the probability of the partial alignment ending at a transition (s k ,s w) at times ( t -1, t ), the most likely state sequence can be found as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recursive computation is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The forward function  t (j,k,w) defines the probability of the partial observation sequence, O1,O2,…,Ot, and the transition (s j ,sk,sw) among times: t -2, t -1, and t is defined as:



<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 t (j,k,w)  can  be  computed  from  the  two  transitions: (s i ,s j ,s k ) and (s j ,s k ,s w) between states s i and s w as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The backward function  t (i, j, k) can be defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The last equation defines  t (i,j,k)  as the  probability of the  partial  observation  sequence  from t+ 1  to T given  the model  and  the  transition  (s i ,s j ,s k)  among times: t -2, t -1, and t .

## V.  SPEECH DATABASE AND EXTRACTION OF FEATURES

## A.  Collected Speech Database

In  the  current  work,  the  proposed  models  have  been assessed on our collected speech database. Eight sentences were  captured  in  each  of  neutral  and  shouted  talking environments in this database. The eight sentences are:

- 1) He works five days a week.
- 2) The sun is shining.
- 3) The weather is fair.

4)

The students study hard.

- 5) Assistant professors are looking for promotion.
- 6) University of Sharjah.
- 7) Electrical and Computer Engineering Department.
- 8) He has two sons and two daughters.

Forty (twenty male students and twenty female students) healthy adult native speakers of American English  were  asked  to  utter  these  sentences.  The  forty speakers were untrained to avoid exaggerated expressions. Each speaker was separately asked to utter each sentence several  times  in  each  of  neutral  and  shouted  talking environments. The total number of utterances recorded in both talking environments was 4320 ((40 speakers × first 4 sentences × 9 repetitions/sentence in neutral talking environment)  +  (40  speakers  ×  last  4  sentences  ×  9 repetitions/sentence × 2 talking environments)). The collected database was captured in a clean environment by a  speech  acquisition  board  using  a  16-bit  linear  coding A/D converter and sampled at a sampling rate of 16 kHz. The  database  was  a  wideband  16-bit  per  sample  linear data.

## B.  Extraction of Features

In  this  work,  the  features  that  have  been  adopted  to model  the  phonetic  content  of  speech  signals  are  called Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients  (static  MFCCs)  and delta Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (delta MFCCs).  These  coefficients  have  been  used  in  stressful speech and speaker recognition areas since such coefficients outperform other features in the two areas and because they provide a high-level approximation of human auditory perception [20], [21].

In  this  work,  a  32-dimension  feature  analysis  of  both static  MFCC  and  delta  MFCC  (16  static  MFCCs  and  16 delta MFCCs) was used to form the observation vectors in each  of  HMM1s,  HMM2s, and HMM3s. The number  of states  that  was  used  in  the  experiments  was  6  in  each model. The number of mixture components, M , was 5 per state,  with  a  continuous  mixture  observation  density  was selected for each model.

## VI. SPEAKER IDENTIFICATION ALGORITHM BASED ON EACH OF HMM1S, HMM2S, AND HMM3S AND THE EXPERIMENTS

In the training phase of each of HMM1s, HMM2s, and HMM3s (completely three separate phases) the v th speaker model  has  been  derived  using  the  first  four  sentences  of the speech database with 9 repetitions per sentence uttered in  the  neutral  talking  environment.  The  total  number  of utterances  that  has  been  used  to  derive  the  v th speaker model  in  each  training  phase  is  36  (4  sentences  ×  9 repetitions/sentence). Training  of  models  in  HMM1s, HMM2s,  and  HMM3s  training  phases  uses  first-order, second-order, and third-order forward-backward algorithm, respectively.

In the identification phase of each of HMM1s, HMM2s, and HMM3s (completely three separate phases), each one of the forty speakers used separately the last four sentences of the database (text-independent) with 9 repetitions  per  sentence  in  each  of  neutral  and  shouted talking environments. The total number of utterances that has been used in each phase per talking environment was 1440 (40 speakers × 4 sentences × 9 repetitions/sentence). The probability of generating every utterance per speaker was  separately  computed  based  on  each  of  HMM1s, HMM2s, and HMM3s using Viterbi decoding algorithm. For  each  one  of  these  three  models,  the  model  with  the highest  probability  was  chosen  as  the  output  of  speaker identification as given in the following formula, a. In HMM1s,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where O is the observation vector or sequence that belongs to the unknown speaker and v HMM1s  is the acoustic firstorder hidden Markov model of the v th speaker.

b.   In HMM2s,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v HMM2s  is the acoustic second-order hidden Markov model of the v th speaker.

c.   In HMM3s,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v HMM3s  is the acoustic third-order hidden Markov model of the v th speaker.

## VII.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this work, new proposed models called HMM3s have been  employed  as  classifiers in each of neutral and shouted  talking  enviroments.  These  classifiers  have  been tested on our collected speech databae. Table I summarizes speaker  identification  performance  in  neutral and  shouted  talking environments  using  the  collected database based on each of HMM3s,  HMM2s,  and HMM1s. This table evidently shows that speaker identification performance in neutral talking environments has been insignificantly  improved  based  on  HMM3s compared to that based on each of HMM2s and HMM1s. In neutral talking environments, the average improvement rate of speaker identification performance based on HMM3s compared to that based on HMM2s and HMM1s is  1.6%  and  3.3%,  respectively.  On  the  other  hand,  the table apparently illustrates that the performance in shouted talking environments has been significantly enhanced based  on  HMM3s  compared  to  that  based  on  each  of HMM2s and HMM1s. The average improvement rate  of speaker identification performance in shouted talking environments  based  on  HMM3s  compared  to  that  based on HMM2s and HMM1s is 11.3% and 166.7%, respectively.

A  statistical  significance  test  has  been  performed  to show whether speaker identification performance differences  (speaker  identification  performance  based  on HMM3s and that based on each of HMM2s and HMM1s) are  real  or  simply  due  to  statistical  fluctuations.  The statistical  significance  test  has  been  carried  out  based  on the Student's t Distribution test as given by the following formula,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 1 x is  the mean of the first sample of size n , 2 x is the  mean  of  the  second  sample  of  the  same  size,  and SDpooled is the pooled standard deviation of the two samples given as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where SD1 is the standard deviation of the first sample of size n and  SD2  is  the  standard  deviation  of  the  second sample of the same size.

Based  on  Table  I  and  the  last  two  equations,  the calculated t values between HMM3s and each of HMM2s and HMM1s in neutral and shouted talking environments using  the  collected  database  are  given  in  Table  II.  Each calculated t value  in  the  neutral  talking  environments  is smaller  than  the  tabulated  critical  value t 0.05 =  1.645  at 0.05 significant level, while each calculated t value in the shouted talking environments is greater than t 0.05 = 1.645. Therefore, the conclusion  that can be drawn  in  this experiment is that HMM3s insignificantly improve speaker identification performance in neutral talking environments compared to each of HMM2s and HMM1s. It  can  also  be  concluded  in  this  experiment  that  speaker identification performance in shouted talking environments based on HMM3s outperforms that based on each of HMM2s and HMM1s. This significant enhancement  in  shouted  talking  environments  may  be attributed  to  the  fact  that  in  HMM3s  the  state-transition probability  at  time t +1  depends  on  the  states  of  the Markov  chain  at  times t , t -1,  and t -2.  Therefore,  the underlying  state  sequence  in  HMM3s  is  a  third-order Markov chain where the stochastic process is specified by a  4-D  matrix.  On  the  other  hand,  in  HMM2s,  the  statetransition probability at time t +1 depends on the states of the  Markov  chain  at  times t and t -1.  Therefore,  the underlying  state  sequence  in  HMM2s  is  a  second-order Markov chain where the stochastic process is defined by a 3-D  matrix.  In  HMM1s,  it  is  assumed  that  the  statetransition probability at time t +1 depends only on the state of the Markov chain at time t .  Therefore, in HMM1s the underlying  state  sequence  is  a  first-order  Markov  chain where the stochastic process is expressed by a 2-D matrix. Hence,  the  stochastic  process  that  is  specified  by  a  4-D matrix gives higher speaker recognition performance than that specified by either a 3-D matrix or a 2-D matrix.

In this work, the achieved speaker identification performance  based  on  HMM3s  in  each  of  neutral  and shouted talking environments is higher than that reported in  previous  studies  [9],  [11].  Raja  and  Dandapat  [9] attained 28.57%  as  an average speaker identification performance  in  angry  talking  environments  of  SUSAS database. Shahin [11] reported an average speaker identification  performance  of  59.0%  in  shouted  talking environments (collected database) based on HMM2s.

Two extensive experiments have been carried out in this work to evaluate the achieved results of speaker identification performance in each of neutral and shouted talking environments based on HMM3s. The two experiments are:

1. Experiment 1: HMM3s have been assessed on the SUSAS  database.  This  database  does not contain shouted talking condition. Since shouted talking condition  can  not  be  entirely  separated  from  angry talking condition in real life, HMM3s have been used as classifiers to evaluate speaker identification in angry  talking  environments.  In  this  experiment,  only neutral and angry talking conditions of SUSAS database have been used to assess HMM3s. Table III summarizes  speaker  identification  performance  based on each of HMM3s, HMM2s, and HMM1s in neutral and angry talking conditions using such database. The results  of  this  experiment  show  that  HMM3s  are superior to each of HMM2s and HMM1s in significantly improving speaker identification performance  in  angry  talking condition.  Table  IV demonstrates calculated t values between HMM3s and each  of  HMM2s  and  HMM1s  in  the  two  talking conditions  using  this  database.  Table  IV  evidently shows that HMM3s  significantly enhance speaker identification performance compared to each of HMM2s and HMM1s in angry talking condition, while HMM3s insignificantly improve the performance compared to each of HMM2s and HMM1s in neutral talking condition using this database.

2. Experiment  2:  An  informal  subjective  assessment of  HMM3s  using  the  collected  speech  database  has been  performed with ten nonprofessional listeners (human judges). A total of 640 utterances (40 speakers ×  2  talking  environments  ×  8  sentences)  have  been used  in  this  assessment.  During  this  evaluation,  each listener  was  separately  asked  to  identify  the  unknown speaker in each of neutral and shouted talking environments  for  every  test  utterance.  The  average speaker identification performance in neutral and shouted talking  environments  based  on  the  subjective assessment  is  93.4%  and  77.1%,  respectively.  These averages  are  close  to  the  averages  obtained  in  the present work using the same database based on HMM3s.

## VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

In this work, HMM3s have been proposed, implemented, and evaluated in each of neutral and shouted/angry  talking  environments  as  classifiers.  Some experiments have been performed to assess these classifiers in the two talking environments. The proposed classifiers have been tested on two distinct speech databases:  our  collected  database  and  SUSAS  database. HMM3s have proven to be superior  to  each  of  HMM2s and  HMM1s  for  speaker  identification  in  shouted/angry talking environments, while the proposed models perform slightly  better  than  each  of  HMM2s  and  HMM1s  in neutral talking environments.

There are  some  limitations  in  this  work.  First,  a  naïve implementation of the recursion for the computations of  and  in HMM3s necessitates on the order of N 4 T ( N is the number of states and T is the utterance length) operations, compared  to N 3 T and N 2 T operations  in  HMM2s  and HMM1s,  respectively.  Second,  the  number  of  speakers available in SUSAS database is limited to 9. Third, all the 9  speakers  available  in  SUSAS  database  are  of  the  same gender (male). Finally, speaker identification performance in  shouted/angry  talking  environments  based  on  HMM3s is imperfect.

## REFERENCES

[1]  S.  Furui,  'Speaker-dependent-feature-extraction,  recognition  and processing techniques,' Speech Communication, Vol. 10, March 1991, pp. 505-520.

[2]  K.  R.  Farrell,  R.  J.  Mammone  and  K.  T.  Assaleh,  'Speaker recognition  using  neural  networks  and  conventional  classifiers,'  IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, Vol. 2, January 1994, pp. 194-205.

[3]  K. Yu, J. Mason and J. Oglesby, 'Speaker recognition using hidden Markov  models,  dynamic  time  warping  and  vector  quantization,'  IEE Proceedings on Vision, Image and Signal Processing, Vol. 142, No. 5, October 1995, pp. 313-318.

[4]  D.  A.  Reynolds,  'Automatic  speaker  recognition  using  Gaussian mixture speaker models,' The Lincoln Laboratory Journal, Vol. 8, No. 2, 1995, pp. 173-192.

[5]  K.  E.  Cummings  and  M.  A.  Clements,  'Analysis  of  the  glottal excitation  of  emotionally  styled  and  stressed  speech,'  Journal  of  the Acoustical Society of America, Vol. 98, No. 1, July 1995, pp. 88-98.

[6]  S.  E.  Bou-Ghazale  and  J.  H.  L.  Hansen,  'A  comparative  study  of traditional and newly proposed features for recognition of speech under stress,' IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, Vol. 8, No. 4, July 2000, pp. 429-442.

[7] G. Zhou, J. H. L. Hansen, and J. F. Kaiser, 'Nonlinear feature based classification of speech under stress,' IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, Vol. 9, No. 3, March 2001, pp. 201-216.

[8]  Y.  Chen,  'Cepstral  domain  talker  stress  compensation  for  robust speech recognition,' IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, Vol. 36, No. 4, April 1988, pp. 433-439.

[9]  G.  S.  Raja  and  S.  Dandapat,  'Speaker  recognition  under  stressed condition,' International Journal of Speech Technology, Vol. 13, 2010, pp. 141-161.

[10]  C.  Zhang  and  J.  H.  L.  Hansen,  "Analysis  and  classification  of speech  mode:  whispered  through  shouted",  INTERSPEECH  2007ICSLP, 2007, pp. 2289-2292.

[11]  I. Shahin, 'Improving speaker identification performance under the shouted talking condition using the second-order hidden  Markov models,' EURASIP Journal on Applied Signal Processing, Vol. 5, issue 4, March 2005, pp. 482-486.

[12] I. Shahin, 'Enhancing speaker identification performance under the shouted  talking  condition  using  second-order  circular  hidden  Markov models,'  Speech  Communication,  Vol.  48,  issue  8,  August  2006,  pp. 1047-1055.

[13] I. Shahin, 'Speaker identification in the shouted environment using suprasegmental hidden Markov models,' Signal Processing Journal, Vol. 88, issue 11, November 2008, pp. 2700-2708.

[14] I. Shahin, 'Employing second-order circular suprasegmental hidden Markov  models to enhance speaker identification performance in shouted  talking  environments,'  EURASIP  Journal  on  Audio,  Speech, and Music  Processing,  Vol.  2010,  Article  ID  862138,  10  pages,  2010. doi:10.1155/2010/862138.

[15]  J.  Dai,  'Isolated  word  recognition  using  Markov  chain  models,' IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing Journal, Vol. 3, No. 6, November 1995, pp. 458-463.

- [16] L. R. Rabiner, 'A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech recognition,' Proceedings of IEEE, Vol. 77, No. 2, February 1989, pp. 257-286.

[17]  J.  F.  Mari,  J.  P.  Haton,  and  A.  Kriouile,  'Automatic  word recognition  based  on  second-order  hidden  Markov  models,'  IEEE Transactions  on  Speech  and  Audio  Processing,  Vol.  5,  No.  1,  January 1997, pp. 22-25.

[18] J. F. Mari, F. D. Fohr, and J. C. Junqua, 'A second-order HMM for high performance word and phoneme-based continuous speech recognition,'  Proceedings  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing, Atlanta, USA, Vol. 1, May 1996, pp. 435438.

[19] J. H. L. Hansen, C. Swail, A. J. South, R. K. Moore, H. Steeneken, E.  J.  Cupples,  T.  Anderson,  C.  R.  A.  Vloeberghs,  I.  Trancoso  and  P. Verlinde, 'The  impact  of speech  under stress on military  speech technology', NATO Research &amp; Technology Organization RTO-TR-10, Vol. AC/323(IST)TP/ 5IST/TG-01, 2000.

[20] A. B. Kandali, A. Routray, and T. K. Basu, 'Emotion recognition from  Assamese  speeches  using  MFCC  features  and  GMM  classifier,' Proc.  IEEE  Region  10  Conference  TENCON  2008,  Hyderabad,  India, November 2008, pp. 1-5.

[21] T. H. Falk and W. Y. Chan, 'Modulation spectral features for robust far-field  speaker  identification,'  IEEE  Transactions  on  Audio,  Speech and Language Processing, Vol. 18, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 90-100.

Table I

Speaker identification performance in neutral and shouted talking environments using the collected database based on each of HMM3s, HMM2s, and HMM1s

| Models  Gender  Neutral talking environments  Shouted  talking environments  HMM3s  Male  94%  63%  Female  95%  65%  Average  94.5%  64%  HMM2s  Male  92%  57%  Female  94%  58%  Average  93%  57.5%  HMM1s  Male  92%  23%  Female  91%  25%  Average  91.5%  24%   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## values between HMM3s and each of HMM2s and HMM1s in neutral and shouted

Table II Calculated t talking environments using the collected database

Table III

| Calculated  t  value (  t  1,2  )  Neutral talking environments  Shouted talking environments  t  HMM3s, HMM2s  1.018  1.781  t  HMM3s, HMM1s  1.345  1.822   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Speaker identification performance based on each of HMM3s, HMM2s, and HMM1s in neutral and angry talking conditions using SUSAS database

Table IV Calculated t

| Models  Neutral talking condition  Angry talking condition  HMM3s  95%  65.5%  HMM2s  93.5%  58.5%  HMM1s  92%  27%   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## values between HMM3s and each of HMM2s and HMM1s in neutral and angry talking conditions using SUSAS database

| Calculated  t  value (t  1,2  )  Neutral talking condition  Angry talking condition  t  HMM3s, HMM2s  1.042  1.756  t  HMM3s, HMM1s  1.236  1.896   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|