and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## On invariant probability measures of regime-switching diffusion processes with singular drifts

Shao-Qin Zhang

School of Statistics and Mathematics, Central University of Finance and Economics, Beijing 100081, China Email: zhangsq@cufe.edu.cn

November 29, 2018

## Abstract

We introduce integrability conditions involving a nice reference probability measure and the Q -matrix to study the existence of the invariant probability measures of regime-switching diffusion processes. Regularities and the uniqueness of the invariant probability density w.r.t the nice reference probability measure are also considered. Moreover, we study the L 1 -uniqueness of the semigroup generated by regime-switching diffusion processes. Since the generator of the regime-switching diffusion process is a weakly coupled elliptic system, the L 1 -uniqueness of the extension of weakly coupled elliptic systems is obtained.

AMS Subject Classification (2010): 60J60, 47D07

Keywords: Regime-switching diffusions, singular drift, invariant probability measure, integrability conditions, weakly coupled elliptic system

## 1 Introduction

Let S = { 1 , 2 , 3 , · · · , N } , and let (Ω , F , P ) be a completed probability space. A regime-switching diffusion process is a two components process { ( X t , Λ t ) } t ≥ 0 described by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where { W t } t ≥ 0 is a Brownian motion on R d w.r.t a right continuous completed reference { F t } t ≥ 0 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

equ\_b2

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

are measurable functions and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

The matrix Q ( x ) = ( q ij ( x )) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ N is called Q -matrix, see [6]. If Q ( x ) is independent of x and Λ t is independent of { W t } t ≥ 0 , { ( X t , Λ t ) } t ≥ 0 is called a state-independent RSDP, otherwise called a state-dependence RSDP. Let

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If Q ( x ) is conservative, i.e. -q ii ( x ) = q i ( x ), x ∈ R d , then as in [19, Chapter II-2.1] or [11, 23, 18], we can represent { ( X t , Λ t ) } t ≥ 0 in the form of a system of stochastic differential equations(SDEs for short) driven by { W t } and a Poisson random measure. Precisely, for each x ∈ R d , { Γ ij ( x ) : i, j ∈ S } is a family of disjoint intervals on [0 , ∞ ) constructed as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

We set Γ ii ( x ) = ∅ and Γ ij ( x ) = ∅ if q ij ( x ) = 0 for i = j . Define a function h : R d × S × [0 , ∞ ) → R as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let N (d z, d t ) be a Poisson random measure with intensity d z d t and independent of the Brownian motion { W t } t ≥ 0 . Then we turn to consider the following equation

The first component X t can be viewed as a hybrid process from the diffusion X i t in each state in S :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In [25], we have study the existence, uniqueness and strong Feller property of (1.3), where drifts b i , i = 1 , · · · , N can be singular. In this paper, we shall study the existence and uniqueness of invariant probability measures of (1.3) with non-regular drifts.

Recently, in term of a nice reference probability measure, [21, 22] introduce integrability conditions to ensure the existence of invariant probability measures for SDEs with singular or path dependent drifts. We shall extract similar results in [21, 22] for the semigroup corresponding to (1.3). However, for this type of semigroups generated by (1.3), two obstacles have to be concern about. One is that, as pointed out by [17], to have an invariant probability measure, it is not necessary for H1

each diffusion X i t to process an invariant probability measure. The other one is the heavy tail phenomenon found in [10]. Hence the integrability of invariant measures of (1.3) may be worse than the invariant probability measures of some X i t . So new integrability conditions (see (1.10), (1.11) and Remark 1.4) are needed to study to invariant probability measure of (1.3).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let a k ( x ) = σ k ( x ) σ ∗ k ( x ) = ( a i,j k ( x )) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ d and div( a j ( x )) l = ∑ d k =1 ∂ k a kl j ( x ). Let V ∈ C 2 ( R d ) such that µ V (d x ) = e V ( x ) d x is a probability measure. In this paper, we consider the drifts that process the following form

Then σ k Z k is the singular part of the drift b k . For the diffusion part, we define differential operators L 0 k and L Z k , k = 1 , · · · , N as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let P t be the semigroup associated with (1.3). Then the generator of P t , denoted by L , is of the following form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The operator L sometimes is called weakly coupled elliptic system, see [7].

Let µ π,V be a probability measure on R d × S :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Denote by H 1 , 2 σ j ( R d ) the Sobolev space which is the completion of C 2 c ( R d ) under the norm

and by W 1 , 2 σ j ( R d ) the Sobolev space defined as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ We assume that the coefficients of L satisfy the following assumptions

- (H1) V ∈ C 2 ( R d ) such that e V d x is a probability measure, and σ ij k ∈ C 2 ( R d ). For all k ∈ S ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and there is λ k &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

H2

(H2) For x ∈ R d , Q ( x ) = ( q kj ( x )) 1 ≤ k,j ≤ N is a conservative Q -matrix with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The matrix Q is fully coupled on R d , i.e. the set S can not be split into two disjoint non-empty S 1 and S 2 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There is an x ∈ R d such that Q ( x ) being an irreducible Q -Matrix with an invariant probability measure π = ( π 1 , · · · , π N ).

(H3) There are γ 1 , · · · , γ N ∈ (0 , ∞ ) and β 1 , . . . , β N ∈ [0 , ∞ ) such that H3

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

rem\_logSob Remark 1.1. The condition (H1) implies that for all i ∈ S , L 0 i generates a unique non-explosive Markov semigroup. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then E 0 is a Dirichlet form with D ( E 0 ) = { f = ( f 1 , · · · , f N ) | f i ∈ H 1 , 2 σ i ( R d ) , i ∈ S } . The condition (H3) yields that the following defective log-Sobolev inequality holds. For

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

̸

Remark 1.2. The matrix Q is fully coupled in the sense of [16]. It was proved in [8, Proposition 4.1.] that Q is fully coupled on a domain D of R d is equivalent to Q is irreducible on D : for any distinct k, l ∈ S , there exist k 0 , k 1 , · · · , k r in S with k i = k i +1 , k 0 = k and k r = l such that { x ∈ D | q k,k +1 ( x ) = 0 } has positive Lebesgue measure for i = 0 , 1 , · · · , r -1 .

Theorem 1.1. Assume (H1)-(H3), and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

re\_exa Let ¯ Q = (¯ q ij ) 1 ≤ i,j ≤ N be a matrix with ¯ q ij = sup x ∈ R d q ij ( x ) . We suppose in addition that there exist positive vector v = ( v 1 , v 2 , · · · , v N ) and positive constants w 1 , w 2 , · · · , w N such that inequ\_MM

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

Then P t has a unique invariant probability measure µ such that µ ≪ µ π,V . Moreover, the density ρ = d µ d µ π,V is positive on R d × S , and for all p &gt; 0 and k ∈ S , ρ k ( · ) ≡ ρ ( · , k ) ∈ W 1 ,p loc ( R d ) , and √ ρ k ∈ H 1 , 2 σ k ( R d ) .

Remark 1.3. A square matrix A is called an M-Matrix if A = sI -B with some B ≥ 0 and s ≥ r ( B ) , where by B ≥ 0 we mean that all elements of B are non-negative, I is the identity matrix, and r ( B ) is the spectral radius of B . When s &gt; r ( B ) , A is called a nonsingular M-matrix. The inequality (1.11) is equivalent to that -( K + ¯ Q ) is a nonsingular M-Matrix, see [17, Proposition 2.4] or [2] for instance.

In our theorem, we indeed prove the uniqueness in the sense that the set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

contains only one element.

According to [21, Theorem 2.1], (H1) and (1.10) yields that for each i , the SDE (1.4) with generator L Z i has a non-explosive strong solution. Combining with that S is finite and ∪ x ∈ R d ,i ∈ S supp( h ( x, i, · )) is a bounded set of [0 , ∞ ) , it is easy to see, for instance [5, 25], that (1.3) has a non-explosive strong solution.

Remark 1.4. In conditions (1.10) and (1.11) , some w i can be small such that w i &lt; γ i 4 , so not all diffusion processes X i t satisfy the integrability conditions in [21, Thoerem 2.2] and [22, Theorem 1.1(2) or Theorem 5.2]. A concrete example is presented as follows.

To illustrate that Theorem 1.1 can be applied to the regime-switching diffusion process that not all the diffusions in all the environments has an invariant probability measure, we present the following example

Example 1.2. Let N = 2 , d = 1 , b 1 ( x ) = -x , b 2 ( x ) = -x + √ 2 δx , σ 1 ( x ) = σ 2 ( x ) = 1 , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with a &gt; 0 , b &gt; 0 , and | a ( x ) | ≤ θa , | b ( x ) | ≤ θb for some θ ∈ [0 , 1) . Then V ( x ) = c -1 2 x 2 , γ 1 = γ 2 = 2 , β 1 = β 2 = 0 , Z 1 = 0 and Z 2 = √ 2 δx . For all w 1 &gt; 0 , µ V ( e w 1 | Z 1 | 2 ) &lt; ∞ . For 0 &lt; w 2 &lt; 1 2 δ 2 , µ V ( e w 2 | Z 2 | 2 ) &lt; ∞ . Let ¯ Q = ( -(1 -θ ) a (1 + θ ) a (1 + θ ) b -(1 -θ ) b ) . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

un\_semigroup By [17, Proposition 2.4], -( K + ¯ Q ) is a nonsingular M-Matrix if and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, if δ and θ satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then there are w 1 and w 2 such that (1.10) and (1.11) hold. Moreover, if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then there are δ , w 1 and w 2 such that √ 2 δ -1 ≥ 0 and (1.10) and (1.11) hold. That means for the state i = 2 , the diffusion of this state is not recurrent, then it does not have an invariant probability measure.

If P t has an invariant probability measure µ , then P t can be extended to be a semigroup in L 1 ( R d × S , µ ). Consequently, the weakly coupled elliptic system ( L, C 2 c ( R d × S )) has one extension in L 1 ( R d × S , µ ) which generates a semigroup. For the uniqueness of the extension in L 1 ( R d × S , µ ), we present the following result, where µ is introduced in Theorem 1.1

Theorem 1.3. Under the assumption of Theorem 1.1, if in addition there exists ǫ &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then there is only one extension of ( L, C 2 c ( R d × S )) that generates a C 0 -semigroup in L 1 ( R d × S , µ ) .

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we shall study a elliptic system corresponding to invariant measures, called the weak coupled system of measures of (1.3), where some local a priori estimates of measures will be presented. In Section 3, the entropy estimate of the density of invariant probability measures will be concern about. In the last section, we shall prove our main results.

To make the article more concise, we shall introduce the following notations in the rest parts of the paper

- (N1) For all q ∈ [1 , ∞ ], q ∗ := 1 [1 &lt;q&lt; ∞ ] q q -1 + 1 [ q =1] ∞ + 1 [ q = ∞ ] 0.
- (N2) For a Borel measurable function f on R d × S , despite f ( x, k ), we also denote by f k ( x ) the value of f at ( x, k ). | f | ( x ) := ( ∑ N k =1 f 2 k ( x ) ) 1 / 2 .
- (N3) A measure µ on R d × S , we define µ k (d x ) = µ (d x, { k } ).

ex\_den

## 2 Regularity of weak coupled system of measures

In this section, we allow N = ∞ . Let µ be an invariant probability measure of P t on B ( R d × S ). Then for a smooth function f on R d × S with compact support(there is M ≥ 0 such that f ( x, i ) = 0 if | x | ≥ M and i ≥ M ), Itˆ o's formula will yield that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since µ is an invariant measure,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and so µ ( Lf ) = 0. Hence, to study the invariant measure of P t , we shall start form the equation µ ( Lf ) = 0. Since µ is a measure on R d × S , we can view µ as a system of measures ( µ i ) i ∈ S , where µ i is defined as in (N3). Thus the equation µ ( Lf ) = 0 is a system of elliptic equations for measures, called weakly coupled elliptic system of measures.

Elliptic and parabolic equations for measures have been intensively studied, and results on equations for measures are important to the study of invariant probability measures, see [3, 4]. Here, we shall extend some results in [3] to the case of weakly coupled elliptic system of measures.

Lemma 2.1. Assume that (H1) holds. Let p ∈ ( d, ∞ ) ∩ [2 , ∞ ) and µ be a probability measure on R d × S such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose in addition that for all j ∈ S , Z j ∈ L p loc ( R d ) ∩ L loc ( R d , d µ j ) , and q j ( x ) is locally bounded and there exists δ ( j ) ∈ N such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then for each j ∈ S , there is a continuous function ˆ ρ j ∈ W 1 ,p loc ( R d ) such that µ j (d x ) = ˆ ρ j ( x )d x .

̸

Proof. For i ∈ S , let f ( x, k ) = f ( x ) 1 [ k = i ] +0 1 [ k = i ] , and

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then equ\_Li According to [3, Corollary 2.3], µ i has a density ˆ ρ i ∈ L d ∗ loc ( R d ) and || ρ i || L d ∗ ( O ) is bounded by a constant depending on || Z i || L ( O , d µ i ) . Then

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For all f ∈ C 2 c ( R d × S ). By µ ( Lf ) = 0 and the definition of ˆ ρ k , we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fix r ∈ ( p ∗ , d ∗ ]. For all q ≥ r ∗ p p -r ∗ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that ( | ˜ Z k | + 1)ˆ ρ k ∈ L q ∗ loc ( R d ) for all k if ˆ ρ k ∈ L r loc ( R d ). Since f ∈ C c ( R d × S ), there are m ∈ N such that f k = 0, k &gt; m and a bounded domain O ⊂ R d such that ⋃ k ≤ m supp f k ⊂ O . Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then (2.5) implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let grad\_Sum\_N

where the last inequality we have used the Poincar´ e inequality(see [1, Theorem 6.30]), and the constant C depends on O , β m , M , || ˜ Z k || L p ( O ) , || ˆ ρ k || L r ( O ) , λ k , k = 1 , · · · , M . Fix some k 0 . Let f k = f k 0 if k = k 0 and f k = 0 otherwise. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ Next we can adapt a procedure introduced in [3]. Let x 0 ∈ R d , R &gt; 0, and B R ( x 0 ) be the open ball with center x 0 and radius R . Let η ∈ C ∞ c ( B R ( x 0 )). Then

the constant C depends on B R , β m , M , η , || ˜ Z k || L p ( B R ) , || ˆ ρ k || L r ( B R ) , λ k , k = 1 , · · · , M . By (2.8) and [3, Theorem 2.7], for R small enough(independent of x 0 ), η ˆ ρ k 0 ∈ W 1 ,q ∗ 0 ( B R ) with 1 ≤ q ∗ ≤ pr p + r . The point x 0 is arbitrary. According to Sobolev embedding theorem, if pr p + r ≥ d , then ˆ ρ k 0 is local bounded, and if pr p + r &lt; d , then ˆ ρ k 0 ∈ L r 1 loc ( R d ) with

which implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since p &gt; d yields that p ∗ &lt; d ∗ , starting from r ∈ ( p ∗ , d ∗ ], we can get a sequence { r n } by this procedure such that ˆ ρ k 0 ∈ W 1 , prn p + rn loc ( R d ) until pr n p + r n ≥ d . Indeed, we can obtain that ˆ ρ k 0 ∈ W 1 ,l loc ( R d ) with some l &gt; d . Then ˆ ρ k 0 is continuous and local bounded due to Sobolev embedding theorem. From (2.6), (2.7), | ˜ Z k | ∈ L p loc ( R d ) and that k 0 is arbitrary, we obtain for f ∈ C c ( R d × S )

wHar with constant C depends on O , β m , M , || ˜ Z k || L p ( O ) , || ˆ ρ k || L r ( O ) , λ k , k = 1 , · · · , M . According to [3, Theorem 2.7], we also obtain that ˆ ρ k ∈ W 1 ,p loc ( R d ), and || ˆ ρ k || H 1 , 2 ( O ) bounded by a constant depends on p , d , O , || ˜ Z k || L p ( O ) , || ˆ ρ k || L d ∗ ( O ) , λ k , a k , M , β m .

Next, we shall prove the following weak Harnack inequality, which is crucial to prove that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is positive. The proof mainly follows the line of [13, Theorem 4.15] indeed.

Lemma 2.2. Under the assumption of Lemma 2.1, fixing k ∈ S , for all 0 &lt; r &lt; R &lt; ∞ , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C depends on σ k , e V , || q k || L p 2 ( B R ) , || Z k || L p ( B R ) , d , p , r , R .

Proof. By Lemma 2.1, ρ k ∈ W 1 ,p loc ( R d ) is locally bounded. (2.4) and ˆ ρ k = π k ρ k e V imply that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then by the integration by part formula, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

The remainder of the proof will start from this inequality.

Let δ &gt; 0 , β &gt; 0 and f = ψ 2 ( ρ k + δ ) -( β +1) with ψ ∈ C c ( R d ). Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let w = ( ρ k + δ ) -β 2 . Then from the inequality above, we can obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose supp ψ ⊂ O . Letting osc O e V = sup O e V inf O e V and Λ O = sup O || σ ∗ k || 2 , we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By H¨ older inequality,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since p &gt; d , H¨ older inequality and Sobolev inequality imply that for all ǫ &gt; 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting this into (2.10) and choosing some small ǫ , we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with some α &gt; 0 and C depending on λ k , osc O e V , Λ O , || q k || L p 2 ( O ) , || Z k || L p ( O ) , p, d . By the Sobolev embedding theorem,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ = d d -2 for d ≥ 3 and γ &gt; 2 for d = 2 , 1. Choosing ψ such that 1 B r 1 ≤ ψ ≤ 1 B r 2 and |∇ ψ | ≤ 2 r 2 -r 1 , where B r 1 and B r 2 are some balls with radius r 1 and r 2 , which are subsets of O . We arrive at

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, we can get the inverse H¨ older inequality for ( ρ k + δ ) -1 by iteration(see [13] for instance)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with any p 1 &gt; p 2 &gt; 0 and B r ⊂ B R , where the constant C depends on λ k , osc B r 2 e V , Λ B r 2 , || q k || L p 2 ( B r 2 ) , || Z k || L p ( B r 2 ) , d, p, r 1 , r 2 . Moreover, letting p 1 →∞ , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we shall prove that for all 0 &lt; q &lt; d d -2 and R &gt; 0, there is C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let f = ( ρ k + δ ) -1 ψ 2 in (2.9) and w = log( rh k + δ ). Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Choosing ψ such that 1 B r ≤ ψ ≤ 1 B 2 r ≤ 1 O and |∇ ψ | ≤ 2 r , we obtain that there is a constant C &gt; 0 depending on λ k , Λ O , O such that

Since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

rem-add We have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with C depends on λ k , Λ O , O , || q k || L d 2 ( B 2 r ) , || Z k || L d ( B 2 r ) , d . As in [13, Theorem 4.14], the Poincar´ e inequality on B 2 r and John-Nirenberg Lemma imply that there exist p 0 &gt; 0 and C &gt; 0 depending on d , r such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ¯ w = 1 | B r | ∫ B r w d x . Hence

To prove (2.15), let f = ψ 2 ( ρ k + δ ) -β , β ∈ (0 , 1). Then, as above, we can prove the following inverse H¨ older inequality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the constant C depends on λ k , osc B r 2 e V , Λ B r 2 , || q k || L p 2 ( B r 2 ) , || Z k || L p ( B r 2 ) , d , p , r 1 , r 2 . Combing this with (2.16) and (2.13), (2.15) is proved.

Lastly, (2.14) and (2.15) yield that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Letting δ → 0 + , we obtain the weak Harnack inequality.

Remark 2.1. If Q is fully coupled and µ is a probability measure, then it follows from the weakly Harnack inequality that ρ k &gt; 0 for all k ∈ S . Indeed, the weakly Harnack inequality implies that if µ k is a positive measure, then ρ k is positive on R d . Since µ is a probability measure, there exist k ∈ S such that ρ k π k e V ( x ) d x is a positive measure. Let S 1 be the set of all µ j such that µ j is zero, and S 2 = S -S 1 . If S 1 is non-empty, then it follows from (2.4) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It contradicts that Q is fully coupled on R d .

GirTh

## 3 Entropy estimates of ρ

In this section, we shall study the the entropy estimate of the density ρ . Firstly, we shall prove a Girsanov's theorem, which will be used to prove the existence of the invariant measure. Let ( X t , Λ t ) be the solution of the following equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let { p t } t ≥ 0 be the Poisson point process corresponding to the random measure N (d z, d t ), i.e. p is a Poisson point process which takes value in (0 , ∞ ) and is independent of the Brownian motion { W t } t ≥ 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where D p ( ω ) is the domain of the point function p ( ω ).

Lemma 3.1. Suppose that (3.1) -(3.2) has a pathwise unique non-explosive solution, and { R t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] is a martingale and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, under R T P , { ˜ W t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] is a Brownian process and { p t } t ≥ 0 is a Poisson point process such that they are mutually independent. Consequently, the following equation has a weak solution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. { R t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] is a martingale, ˜ W t is a Brownian motion due to Girsanov's theorem. According to [14, Theorem I.6.3], we only need to prove that the compensator of N (d z, d t ) under R T P is d z d t .

Let K be a measurable subset of R + with its Lebesgue measure | K | &lt; ∞ , N ( K,t ) := N ( K, (0 , t ]) , t ∈ [0 , T ]. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

BasicEqu1

BasicEqu2

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let G = F s ∨ σ ( N ( U, r ) ∣ ∣ r ≤ t, U ∈ B ( R + ) ) . Then

∣ Let Π [ s,t ] be the totality of point functions on [ s, t [ for s ≤ t , and let D s,t ( S ) be all the cadlag function on [ s, t ] with value in S . Since the equation has a unique non-explosive strong solution, there exists F : R d × S × C ([ s, t ] , R d ) × Π [ s,t ] → C ([ s, t ] , R d ) × D s,t ( S ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining with E R s,t = E ( E [ R s,t ∣ ∣ G ]) = 1, we have that

Since F s ⊂ G , we obtain that

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus for A ∈ F s

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore

∣ which implies that the compensator of N (d z, d t ) under R T P is d z d t .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let P 0 t be the Markov semigroup generated by the Dirichlet form E 0 . Then L 0 is the generator of P 0 t , and µ π,V is the invariant probability measure of P 0 t . Moreover, for f ∈ L 2 ( R d × S , µ π,V ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P i t is the semigroup generated by L 0 i , and P 0 t can be extended to a contrastive C 0 -semigroup in L p ( R d × S , µ π,V ), p ∈ [1 , ∞ ]. By (H2),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus Q is a bounded operator in L p ( R d × S , µ π,V ) for all p ∈ [1 , ∞ ]. Let L Q be defined as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then L Q generates a unique contractive C 0 -semigroup in L p ( R d × S , µ π,V ), say P Q t . By (H1), (H2), and for all f ∈ C 1 c ( R d × S ) we have

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

According to the proof of [7, Theorem 3.1], P Q t is also a Markov semigroup. Moreover, we have

̸

̸

hyper Lemma 3.2. For t &gt; 0 , P Q t is hyperbounded, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

recalling that γ = max 1 ≤ i ≤ N γ i .

Proof. By [15, Theorem 3.1.1], we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then for all p ≥ 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where b p = || Q || p L p . Gronwall's inequality yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

According to [20, Theorem 5.1.4], (H3) and Remark 1.1 imply that P 0 t is hyperbounded:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where q ( t ) := 1 + ( q -1) e 4 t γ and β = max k ( β k -log π k ). Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the proof of the lemma is completed.

Let ( X t , Λ t ) be the process generated by L Q , which satisfies the stochastic differential (1.3) with b k ( x ) = Z 0 k ( x ), k ∈ S , x ∈ R d . The following lemma is a similar result of [22, Theorem 4.1] for (1.3).

lem\_mu Lemma 3.3. Assume (H1)-(H3). Let p 1 = 1 2 (1 + e 4 γ ) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where b 1 = || Q || L 1 ( µ π,V ) . There is w &gt; 3 p 1 -1 2( p 1 -1) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then P t has an invariant measure µ = ρµ π,V such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We first consider the Feynman-Kac semigroup for any F ∈ B b ( R d × S ):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where c 1 = ( e b 1 -1 b 1 ) 1 2 || P Q 1 || L 2 ( µ π,V ) → L 2 p 1 ( µ π,V ) . By the Markov property, we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, similar to [22, Theorem 4.1],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

ineq\_nn\_en Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Lemma 3.1,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By these estimates above, following the proof of [22, Theorem 4.1], we can prove the theorem.

Remark 3.1. The inequality (3.6) implies that for each i ∈ S , Z i has nice integrability w.r.t µ V indeed. It does not work well for (1.3) . In the rest part of this section, we shall give a weaker condition to get a priori estimate to the entropy of the density of invariant probability measures.

We define x log x = 0 if x = 0. Then we have

Lemma 3.4. Assume (H1)-(H3) and that for all i ∈ S , Z i is bounded with compact support. Then there is positive ρ ∈ L 1 ( R d × S , u π,V ) such that √ ρ i ∈ H 1 , 2 σ i ( R d ) with

̸

Proof. Let q ( n ) ki = q ki 1 [ | x |≤ n ] , Q ( n ) = ( q ( n ) ki ) 1 ≤ k,i ≤ N and L [ n ] = L Z + Q ( n ) . Then Lemma 3.3 and Lemma 2.2 imply that the semigroup generated by L [ n ] has an invariant measure with positive density ρ [ n ] w.r.t µ π,V such that sup n ≥ 1 µ π,V ( ρ [ n ] log ρ [ n ] ) &lt; ∞ , which implies that ρ [ n ] i → ρ i weakly in L 1 ( µ V ). Moreover, ρ is a probability density and also satisfies µ V ( ρLg ) = 0, g ∈ C 2 c ( R d × S ). Hence, Lemma 2.2 implies that ρ is positive.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The equation µ π,V ( ρ [ n ] L [ n ] g ) = 0, g ∈ C c ( R d × S ) yields, for all i ∈ S ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then there is C n &gt; 0 which is independent of f such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ The defective log-Sobolev inequality yields the Poincar´ e inequality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So the norm of f , √ µ V ( | σ ∗ i ∇ f | 2 ) + µ V ( f ) 2 , which is induced by the following inner product of g 1 , g 2 on H 1 , 2 σ i ( R d ):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is equivalent to the Sobolev norm on H 1 , 2 σ i ( R d ). Hence (3.8) implies that ρ [ n ] i ∈ H 1 , 2 σ i ( R d ). Moreover, (3.7) holds for all f ∈ H 1 , 2 σ i ( R d ).

Next, we shall prove that sup n ≥ 1 µ V ( | σ ∗ i ∇ √ ρ [ n ] i | 2 ) &lt; ∞ . Let f = log( ρ [ n ] i + ǫ ) with ǫ ∈ (0 , 1). Then (3.7) and ∑ N j =1 π j µ V ( ρ [ n ] j ) = 1 imply that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, the monotone convergence theorem implies that there is C &gt; 0 which is independent of i and n such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ Since the defective log-Sobolev inequality implies the existence of a super Poincar´ e inequality, the essential spectrum of L 0 i is empty, which implies that H 1 , 2 σ i ( R d ) is

̸

̸

compactly embedded into L 2 ( µ V ). Thus, √ ρ i ∈ H 1 , 2 σ i ( R d ), and by a subsequence, ρ [ n ] i converges to ρ i in L 1 ( µ V ) and √ ρ [ n ] i convergences to √ ρ i weakly in H 1 , 2 σ i ( R d ). For m&gt; 0, let f = log ( ρ [ n ] i m ) 1 m . Then (3.7) yields that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since ρ [ n ] i → ρ i in L 1 ( µ V ), √ ρ [ n ] i convergences to √ ρ i weakly in H 1 , 2 σ i ( R d ) and

we have lim n →∞ µ V ( | Z i | 2 ρ [ n ] i ) = µ V ( | Z i | 2 ρ i ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

Hence, combining these with (3.9), we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

( ∨ ∧ )

entropy

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since ρ i &gt; 0 and

by monotone convergence theorem, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining this with (3.10) and Fatou's Lemma, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The last result of this section is the following lemma on a priori estimate of entropy of ρ i for Z i satisfies the integrability condition (1.10), which is crucial to the proof of Theorem 1.1.

Lemma 3.5. Let π min = min 1 ≤ k ≤ N π k . Then, under the conditions of Lemma 3.4 and

Theorem 1.1, we have the following an a priori estimate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

inequ\_muQ

Let

Then (1.11) and (3.14) yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ C Q = C Q log + C Q +2( C Q +1) e -1 -2 C Q log π min . Moreover, there is a constant C depending on π k , C Q , w k , v k and µ V ( e w k | Z k | 2 ) , k ∈ S such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let ˆ q ij = inf x ∈ R d q ij ( x ). Then by Lemma 3.4,

̸

Combining with (H3), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 〈 v, u 〉 π = ∑ N i =1 π i v i u i , u, v ∈ R N . Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the last inequality, we use ∑ N k =1 π k µ V ( ρ k ) = 1. Then it is easy to see that the inequality (3.11) holds. Consequently, (3.12) holds by (3.13).

## 4 Proofs of main results

## 4.1 Th proof of Theorem 1.1

Let Z ( n ) i = Z i 1 [ | Z i |≤ n ] , lim n →∞ Z ( n ) i = Z i . Then, according to Lemma 3.3, the Markov semigroup P ( n ) t generated by L ( n ) has an invariant probability measure, denoted by ρ ( n ) µ π,V . Moreover, Lemma 3.5 yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies there exists a ρ ∈ L 1 ( R d × S , µ π,V ) such that, by a subsequence, ρ ( n ) i → ρ i in L 1 ( µ V ) and √ ρ ( n ) i → √ ρ i weakly in H 1 , 2 σ i ( R d ). Next, we shall prove that ρµ π,V is an invariant probability measure of P t . Indeed, noticing that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and for f ∈ B b ( R d × S )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in order to prove µ π,V ( ρf ) = µ π,V ( ρP t f ), we only need to prove that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ( X t , Λ t ) be the process generated by L Q . Then, by Lemma 3.1,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ For all η &gt; 0 and all measurable function h from R d × S to R d with | h ( x, i ) | ≤ | Z i ( x ) | , ( x, i ) ∈ R d × S , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So, for t small enough,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, since { ρ ( n ) } n ≥ 1 is uniformly integrable, for ǫ &gt; 0, there is m &gt; 0 such that sup n ≥ 1 µ π,V ( ρ ( n ) 1 [ ρ ( n ) ≥ m ] ) ≤ ǫ . Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which combining with (4.1) yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lastly, we shall prove our claim on the uniqueness. Since || σ i || is local bounded, it is easy to see from (4.7) that µ V ( ρ i | σ i Z i | 1 O ) &lt; ∞ for all bounded domain O ⊂ R d . Then Lemma 2.2 and Remark 2.1 yield that ρ i &gt; 0, i ∈ S . By [9, Proposition 3.2.7, Proposition 3.2.5], there is only one invariant probability measure µ such that µ ≪ µ π,V .

## 4.2 The proof of Theorem 1.3

Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then L 0 i = ˆ L 0 i -a i ( ∇ log ρ i ) · ∇ and L Z i = ˆ L 0 i + σ i ˆ Z i · ∇ . We shall prove first that for g i ∈ L ∞ , i ∈ S so that the following equality holds for all f i ∈ C 2 c ( R d ) , i ∈ S

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

then g i ∈ H 1 , 2 loc ( ρ i d µ V ). Indeed, fixing some i ∈ S , and letting f k = 0, if k = i and f i ∈ C 2 c ( R d ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ζ ∈ C ∞ c ( R d ). Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since Lemma 2.1, µ V ( e w i | Z i | 2 ) &lt; ∞ and that || σ i || is local bounded, there is a constant C which is independent on f i such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Lemma 2.2, we also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some positive constant C which is independent of f i . Similarly,

Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that

where H 1 , 2 σ i , 0 ( ρ i d µ V ) is the complete of C 2 c ( R d ) under the following norm of f

Thus g i ∈ H 1 , 2 loc ( ρ i d µ V ).

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we shall prove that there is only one extension of ( L, C 2 c ( R d × S )) that generates a C 0 -semigroup in L 1 ( R d × S , µ ). To this end, we only have to prove that (1 -L )( C 2 c ( R d × S )) is dense in L 1 ( R d × S , µ ). Let ζ n ∈ C ∞ c ( R d ) with 1 B n (0) ≤ ζ n ≤ 1 B 2 n (0) and |||∇ ζ n ||| ∞ ≤ 1 n . Let g i ∈ L ∞ , i ∈ S such that (4.2) hold. Fixing i ∈ S , and letting f k = 0 if k = i ; f i = ζ 2 n g i , we have, following from (4.2),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Letting

since ( ζ n g i ) 2 ∈ H 1 , 2 σ i ( ρ i d µ V ), we have µ ( ˆ L 0 f ) = 0 and µ ( Lf ) = 0. Then the equality µ ( ˆ L 0 f ) = µ ( Lf ) yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining with (4.4), we arrive at

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since

we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Hence, (4.5), (4.6) and the definition of ζ n yield that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

For r small enough, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore

which implies that g i = 0, i ∈ S .

## References

- [1] R, A. Adams and J. J.F. Fournier, Sobolev Spaces, second edition, Academic Press , (2009).
- [2] A, Berman and R. J. Plemmons, Nonnegative matrices in the mathematical sciences. SIAM Press classics Series , Philadelphia, (1994).
- [3] V. I. Bogachev, N. V. Krylov, M. R¨ ockner, On regularity of transition probabilities and invariant measures of singular diffusions under minimal conditions. Comm. Partial Differential Equations 26 (2001), 2037-2080.
- [4] V. I. Bogachev, N. V. Krylov, M. R¨ ockner, Elliptic and parabolic equations for measures. Russian Mathematical Surveys , 64 (2002), 5-116.
- [5] Cloez, B. and Hairer, M. . Exponential ergodicity for Markov processes with random switching. to appear in Bernoulli, (2013) or arXiv: 1303.6999.
- [6] M.-F. Chen, From Markov chains to non-equilibrium particle systems, second edition, Singapore: World Scientific , (2004).
- [7] Z. Q. Chen and Z. Zhao, Switched diffusion processes and systems of elliptic equations: a Dirichlet space approach. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh , 124A , (1994), 673-701.
- [8] Z. Q. Chen and Z. Zhao, Potential theory for elliptic systems. Ann. Probab. , 24 (1996), 293-319.
- [9] Da Prato, G and Zabczyk J, Ergodicity for Infinite Dimensional Systems, London Mathematical Society Lecture Note , (1996).
- [10] De Saporta, B. and Yao, J.-F. Tail of linear diffusion with Markov switching. Ann. Appl. Probab. 15, (2005), 992-1018.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- [11] M. K. Ghosh, A. Arapostathis and S. I. Marcus, Optimal control of switching diffusions with application to flexible manufacturing systems, SIAM J. Control Optim., 31 (1993), 1183-1204.
- [12] D. Gilbarg and N. S. Trudinger, Elliptic Partial Differential Equations of Second Order, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg , (2001).
- [13] Q. Han and F. Lin, Elliptic Partial Differential Equations, Second Edition, American Mathematical Society , (2011).
- [14] N. Ikeda and S. Watanabe, Stochastic differential equations and diffusion processes, Second Edition, North-Holland Mathcmnticnl Library, Amsterdam , (1989).
- [15] A. Pazy, Semigroups of Linear Operators and Applications to Partial Differential Equations, Springer , (1983).
- [16] G. SWEERS, Strong positivity in C ( ¯ Ω) for elliptic systems. Math. Z. 209 (1992), 251-271.
- [17] J. Shao, Criteria for transience and recurrence of regime-switching diffusion processes. Electron. J. Probab. 20 (2015), 1-15.
- [18] J. Shao, Strong solutions and strong Feller properties for regime-switching diffusion processes in an infinite state space. SIAM J. Control Optim. 53 (2015), 2462-2479.
- [19] A. V. Skorokhod, Asymptotic methods in the theory of stochastic differential equations, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI. (1989)
- [20] F.-Y. Wang, Functional Inequalities, Markov Semigroups and Spectral Theory. Science Press , (2004).
- [21] F.-Y. Wang, Integrability conditions for SDEs and semilinear SPDEs. Ann. Proba. 45 (2017), 3223-3265.
- [22] F.-Y. Wang, Estimates for invariant probability measures of degenerate SPDEs with singular and path-dependent drifts. Proba. Theory &amp; Related Fields (2018), 1-34.
- [23] C. Zhu and G. Yin, On strong Feller, recurrence, and weak stabilization of regime-switching diffusions, SIAM J. Control Optim. 48 (2009), 2003-2031.
- [24] G. Yin and C. Zhu, Hybrid switching diffusions: properties and applications, Vol. 63, Stochastic Modeling and Applied Probability, Springer, New York. (2010)
- [25] S.-Q. Zhang, Regime-switching diffusion processes: strong solutions and strong Feller property. arXiv:1603.03619