## RISK-BASED OPTIMAL PORTFOLIO OF AN INSURER WITH REGIME SWITCHING AND NOISY MEMORY

RODWELL KUFAKUNESU, CALISTO GUAMBE, AND LESEDI MABITSELA

Abstract. In this paper, we consider a risk-based optimal investment problem of an insurer in a regime-switching jump-diffusion model with noisy memory. Using the model uncertainty modeling, we formulate the investment problem as a zero-sum, stochastic differential delay game between the insurer and the market, with a convex risk measure of the terminal surplus and the Brownian delay surplus over a period [ T -̺, T ]. Then, by the BSDE approach, the game problem is solved. Finally, we derive analytical solutions of the game problem, for a particular case of a quadratic penalty function and a numerical example is considered.

## 1. Introduction

Stochastic delay equations are equations whose coefficients depend also on past history of the solution. They appear naturally in economics, life science, finance, engineering, biology, etc. In Mathematics of Finance, the basic assumption of the evolution price processes is that they are Markovian. In reality, these processes possess some memory which cannot be neglected. Stochastic delay control problems have received much interest in recent times and these are solved by different methods. For instance, when the state process depends on the discrete and average delay, Elsanoni et. al. [18] studied an optimal harvesting problem using the dynamic programming approach. On the other hand, a maximum principle approach was used to solve optimal stochastic control systems with delay. See e.g., Oksendal and Sulem [28], Pamen [27]. When the problem allows a noisy memory, i.e., a delay modeled by a Brownian motion, Dahl et. al [8] proposed a maximum principle approach with Malliavin derivatives to solve their problem. For detailed information on the theory of stochastic delay differential equations (SDDE) and their applications to stochastic control problems, see, e.g., B˜ anos et. al. [2], Kuang [23], Mohammed [26] and references therein.

In this paper, we consider an insurer's risk-based optimal investment problem with noisy memory. The financial market model set-up is composed by one risk-free asset and one risky asset described by a hidden Markov regime-switching jump diffusion process. The jump-diffusion models represent a valuable extension of the diffusion models for modeling the asset prices [28]. They capture some sudden changes in the market such as the existence of high-frequency data, volatility clusters and regime switching. It is important to note that in the Markov regime-switching diffusion models, we can have random coefficients possibly with jumps, even if the return process is a diffusion one. In this paper, we consider a jump diffusion model, which incorporates jumps in the asset price as well as in the model coefficients, i.e., a Markov regime-switching jump-diffusion model. Furthermore, we consider the Markov chain to represent different modes of the economic environment such as, political situations, natural catastrophes, etc. Such kind of models have been considered for option pricing of the contingent claim, see for example, Elliott et. al [14], Siu [35] and references therein. For stochastic optimal control problems, we mention the works by B¨ auerle and Rieder [3], Meng and Siu [25]. In these works a portfolio asset allocation and a risk-based asset allocation of a Markov-modulated jump process model has been considered and solved via the dynamic programming approach. We also mention a recent work by Pamen and Momeya [29], where a maximum principle approach has been applied to an optimization problem described by a Markov-modulated regime switching jump-diffusion model.

Date : March 25, 2019.

Key words and phrases. Optimal investment, Jump-diffusion, Regime-Switching, Noisy memory, BSDE, convex risk measures.

In this paper, we assume that the company receives premiums at the constant rate and pays the aggregate claims modeled by a hidden Markov-modulated pure jump process. We assume the existence of capital inflow or outflow from the insurer's current wealth, where the amount of the capital is proportional to the past performance of the insurer's wealth. Then, the surplus process is governed by a stochastic delay differential equation with the delay, which may be random. Therefore we find it reasonable to consider also a delay modeled by Brownian motion. In literature, a mean-variance problem of an insurer was considered, but the wealth process is given by a diffusion model with distributed delay, solved via the maximum principle approach (Shen and Zeng [32]). Chunxiang and Li [5] extended this mean-variance problem of an insurer to the Heston stochastic volatility case and solved using dynamic programming approach. For thorough discussion on different types of delay, we refer to Ba˜ nos et. al. [2], Section 2.2.

We adopt a convex risk measure first introduced by Frittelli and Gianin [20] and F¨ ollmer and Schied [19]. This generalizes the concept of coherent risk measure first introduced by Artzner et. al. [1], since it includes the nonlinear dependence of the risk of the portfolio due to the liquidity risks. Moreover, it relaxes a sub-additive and positive homogeneous properties of the coherent risk measures and substitute these by a convex property.

When the risky share price is described by a diffusion process and without delay, such kind of risk-based optimization problems of an insurer have been widely studied and reported in literature, see e.g., Elliott and Siu [16, 17], Siu [33, 34, 35], Peng and Hu [30]. For a jump-diffusion case, we refer to Mataramvura and Øksendal [24].

To solve our optimization problem, we first transform the unobservable Markov regimeswitching problem into one with complete observation by using the so-called filtering theory, where the optimal Markov chain is also derived. For interested readers, we refer to Elliott et. al. [15], Elliott and Siu [17], Cohen and Elliott [6] and Kallianpur [21]. Then we formulate a convex risk measure described by a terminal surplus process as well as the dynamics of the noisy memory surplus over a period [ T -̺, T ] of the insurer to measure the risks. The main objective of the insurer is to select the optimal investment strategy so as to minimize the risk. This is a two-player zero-sum stochastic delayed differential game problem. Using delayed backward stochastic differential equations (BSDE) with a jump approach, we solve this game problem by an application of a comparison principle for BSDE with jumps. Our modeling framework follows that in Elliott and Siu [16].

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we introduce the dynamic of state process described by SDDE in the Hidden Markov regime switching jump-diffusion market. In Section 3, we use the filtering theory to turn the model into one with complete observation. We also derive the optimal Markov chain. Section 4, is devoted to the formulation of our risk-base optimization problem as a zero-sum stochastic delayed differential game problem, which is then solved in Section 5. Finally, in Section 6, we derive the explicit solutions for a particular case of a quadratic penalty function and we give an example to show how one can apply these results in a concrete situation.

## 2. Model formulation

Suppose we have an insurer investing in a finite investment period T &lt; ∞ . Consider a complete filtered probability space (Ω , F , {F t } 0 ≤ t ≤ T , P ), where {F t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] is a filtration satisfying the usual conditions (Protter [31]). Let Λ( t ) be a continuous time finite state hidden Markov chain defined on (Ω , F , P ), with a finite state space S = { e 1 , e 2 , . . . , e D } ⊂ R D , e j = (0 , . . . , 1 , 0 , . . . , 0) ∈ R D , where D ∈ N is the number of states of the chain, and the j th component of e n is the Kronecker delta δ nj , for each n, j = 1 , 2 , . . . , D . Λ( t ) describes the evolution of the unobserved state of the model parameters in the financial market over time, i.e., a process which collects factors that are relevant for the model, such as, political situations, laws or natural catastrophes (see, e.g. Bauerle and Rieder [3], Elliott and Siu [17]). The main property of the Markov chain Λ with the canonical state space S is that, any nonlinear function of Λ, is linear in Λ, i.e., ϕ (Λ) = 〈 ϕ, Λ 〉 , where 〈· , ·〉 denotes the inner product in R D . For detailed information, see, for instance, Elliott et. al. [15].

To describe the probability law of the chain Λ, we define a family of intensity matrix A ( t ) := { a ji ( t ); t ∈ [0 , T ] } , where a ji ( t ) is the instantaneous transition intensity of the chain Λ from state e i to state e j at time t ∈ [0 , T ]. Then it was proved in Elliott et. al. [15], that Λ admits the following semi-martingale dynamics:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Φ is an R D -valued martingale with respect to the natural filtration generated by Λ. To describe the dynamics of the financial market, we consider a Brownian motion W ( t ) and a compensated Markov regime-switching Poisson random measure ˜ N Λ ( dt, dz ) := N ( dt, dz ) -ν Λ ( dz ) dt , with the dual predictable projection ν Λ defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ν j is the conditional Levy measure of the random jump size and ε j is the intensity rate when the Markov chain Λ is in state e j . We suppose that the processes W and N are independent.

We consider a financial market consisting of one risk-free asset ( B ( t )) 0 ≤ t ≤ T and one risky asset ( S ( t )) 0 ≤ t ≤ T . Their respective prices are given by the following regime-switching stochastic differential equations (SDE):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with initial value S (0) = s &gt; 0. We suppose that the instantaneous interest rate r ( t ) and the appreciation rate α ( t ) are modulated by the Markov chain Λ, as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r j and α j represent the interest and appreciation rates respectively, when the Markov chain is in state e j of the economy. We suppose that r ( t ) and α ( t ) are R D -valued F t -predictable and uniformly bounded processes on the probability space (Ω , F , P ). Otherwise, the volatility rate β ( t ) is an F t -adapted uniformly bounded process. Note that we may consider a Markov modulated volatility process, however it would lead in a complicated, if not possible filtering issue in the following section. As was pointed out by Siu [35] and references therein, the other reason is that, the volatility can be determined from a price path of the risky share, i.e., the volatility is observable.

We now model the insurance risk by a Markov regime-switching pure jump process on the probability space (Ω , F , P ). We follow the modeling framework of Elliott and Siu [17], Siu [34], Pamen and Momeya [29].

Consider a real valued pure jump process Z := { Z ( t ); t ∈ [0 , T ] } defined on a probability space (Ω , F , P ), where Z denotes the aggregate amount of the claims up to time t . Then, we can write Z as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ Z ( s ) := Z ( s ) -Z ( s -), for each s ∈ [0 , T ], represents the jump size of Z at time s . Suppose that the state space of the claim size Z is (0 , ∞ ). Consider a random measure N 0 ( · , · ) defined on a product space [0 , T ] ×Z , which selects the random claim arrivals at time s . The aggregate insurance claim process Z can be written as Define, for each t ∈ [0 , T ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

M ( t ) counts the number of claim arrivals up to time t . Suppose that under P , M := { M ( t ) , t ∈ [0 , T ] } is a conditional Poisson process on (Ω , F , P ), given the information about the realized path of the chain, with intensity λ Λ ( t ) modulated by the Markov chain given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where λ j is the j th entry of the vector λ and represents the intensity rate of M when the Markov chain is in the state space e j .

Let f j ( z ), j = 1 , . . . , D be the probability density function of the chain size z = Z ( s ) -Z ( s -), when Λ( t -) = e j . Then the Markov regime-switching compensator of the random measure N 0 ( · , · ) under P , is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, a compensated version of the random measure is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We suppose that ˜ N 0 Λ is independent of W and ˜ N Λ .

Let p ( t ) be the premium rate at time t . We suppose that the premium rate process { p ( t ) , t ∈ [0 , T ] } is F t -progressively measurable and uniformly bounded process on (Ω , F , P ), taking values on (0 , ∞ ). Let R := { R ( t ) , t ∈ [0 , T ] } be the insurance risk process of the insurance company without investment. Then, R ( t ) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let π ( t ) be the amount of the money invested in the risky asset at time t . We denote the surplus process by X ( t ), then we formulate the surplus process with delay, which is caused by the capital inflow/outflow function from the insurer's current wealth. We suppose that the capital inflow/outflow function is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ϑ ( t ) ≥ 0 is uniformly bounded function of t , ξ ≥ 0 is a constant and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, Y, ¯ Y , U represents respectively the integrated, average and pointwise delayed information of the wealth process in the interval [ t -̺, t ]. ζ ≥ 0 is the average parameter and ̺ ≥ 0 the delay parameter. W 1 is an independent Brownian motion.

The parameters ϑ and ξ represent the weights proportional to the past performance of X -¯ Y and X -U , respectively. A good performance ( ϕ &gt; 0), may bring to the insurer more wealth, so that he can pay part of the wealth to the policyholders. Otherwise, a bad performance ( ϕ &lt; 0) may forces the insurer to use the reserve or look for further capital in the market to cover the losses in order to achieve the final performance.

Remark. According to the definition of our capital inflow/outflow function, we take a noisy memory into account, thus generalizing the inflow/outflow function considered in Shen and Zeng [32]. To the best of our knowledge, this kind of noisy delay has just been applied in a stochastic control problem recently by Dahl et. al. [8] using a maximum principle techniques with Malliavin derivatives. Unlike in Dahl et. al. [8], we suppose that the noisy delay is derived by an independent Brownian motion. We believe that this assumption is more realistic since the delay of the information may not be caused by the same source of randomness as the one driving the stock price. Furthermore, when the delay is driven by the same noisy with the asset price, the filtering theory we apply in the next section, fails to turn the model into one with complete observations, as the dynamics of Y ( t ) would still be dependent on some hidden parameters. Under derivative pricing, such kind of delays have been applied to consider some stochastic volatility models, but with the delay driven by independent Poisson process, see, e.g., Swishchuk [36].

Note that we can write the noisy memory information Y in a differential form by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where χ A denotes the characteristic function defined in a set A .

Then, the surplus process of the insurer is given by the following stochastic delay differential equation (SDDE) with regime-switching

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The portfolio process π ( t ) is said to be admissible if it satisfies the following:

(3)

- (1) π ( t ) is F t -progressively measurable and ∫ T 0 | π ( t ) | 2 dt &lt; ∞ , P -a.s. (2) The SDDE (2.3) admits a unique strong solution;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote the space of admissible investment strategy by A .

## 3. Reduction by the filtering theory

As we are working with an unobservable Markov regime-switching model, one needs to reduce the model into one with complete observations. We adopt the filtering theory for this reduction. This is a classical approach and it has been widely applied in stochastic control problems. See, for example, B¨ auerle and Rieder [3], Elliott et. al. [15], Elliott and Siu [17], Siu [33], and references therein. We proceed as in Siu [35].

Consider the following F t -adapted process W := { W ( t ) , t ∈ [0 , T ] } defined by

where ˆ α is the optional projection of α under P , with respect to the filtration F t , i.e., ˆ α Λ ( t ) = E [ α Λ ( t ) | F t ], P -a.s.. Then it was shown that ̂ W is a Brownian motion. See e.g., Elliott and Siu [17] or Kallianpur [21], Lemma 11.3.1.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ˆ Λ be the optional projection of the Markov chain Λ. For the jump part of the risk share N and the insurance risk N 0 , we consider the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define the compensated random measures N ( dt, dz ) and N 0 ( dt, dz ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, it can be shown that the following processes are martingales. (See Elliott [13]):

Therefore, the surplus process X ( t ) can be written, under P , as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We then use the reference probability approach to derive a filtered estimate ˆ Λ of the Markov chain Λ following the discussions in Siu [35].

Let ϕ ( t ) ∈ R D , such that ϕ j ( t ) = α j ( t ) -1 2 β 2 ( t ), j = 1 , 2 , . . . , D . Define, for any t ∈ [0 , T ], the following functions

Write P ∗ , for a probability measure on (Ω , F ), on which the observation process does not depend on the Markov chain Λ. Define, for each j = 1 , 2 , . . . , D ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider the following F t -adapted processes Γ 1 , Γ 2 and Γ 3 defined by putting

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider the F t -adapted process Γ := { Γ( t ) , t ∈ [0 , T ] } defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the process Γ is a local martingale and E [Γ( T )] = 1. Under some strong assumptions, It can be shown that Γ is a true martingale. See, for instance, Proposition 2.5.1 in Delong [11].

The main goal of the filtering process is to evaluate the F t -optional projection of the Markov chain Λ under P . To that end, let, for each t ∈ [0 , T ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where E ∗ is an expectation under the reference probability measure P ∗ . The process q ( t ) is called an unnormalized filter of Λ( t ).

Define, for each j = 1 , 2 , . . . , D the scalar valued process γ j := { γ j ( t ) , t ∈ [0 , T ] by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider a diagonal matrix L ( t ) := diag ( γ 1 (t) , γ 2 (t) , . . . , γ D (t)), for each t ∈ [0 , T ]. Define the transformed unnormalized filter { ¯ q ( t ) , t ∈ [0 , T ] } by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the existence of the inverse L -1 ( t ) is guaranteed by the definition of L ( t ) and the positivity of γ j ( t ), j = 1 , 2 , . . . , D .

Then, it has been shown (see Elliott and Siu [17]), that the transformed unnormalized filter ¯ q satisfies the following linear order differential equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, by a version of the Bayes rule, the optimal estimate ˆ Λ( t ) of the Markov chain Λ( t ) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4. Risk-based optimal investment problem

In this section, we introduce the optimal investment problem of an insurer with regimeswitching and delay. We consider a problem where the objective is to minimize the risk described by the convex risk measure, with the insurer not only concerned with the terminal wealth, but also with the integrated noisy memory surplus over the period [ T -̺, T ]. This problem is then described as follows: Find the investment strategy π ( t ) ∈ A which minimizes the risks of the terminal surplus and the integrated surplus, i.e., X ( T ) + κY ( T ), where κ ≥ 0 denotes the weight between X ( T ) and Y ( T ). This allows us to incorporate the terminal wealth as well as the delayed wealth at the terminal time T in the performance functional.

Since we are dealing with a measure of risk, we will use the concept of convex risk measures introduced in F¨ ollmer and Schied [19] and Frittelli and Rosazza [20]. Which is the generalization of the concept of coherent risk measures proposed by Artzner et. al. [1].

Definition 4.1. Let S be a space of all lower bounded {G t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] -measurable random variables. A convex risk measure on S is a map ρ : S → R such that:

- (1) ( translation ) If ǫ ∈ R and χ ∈ S , then ρ ( χ + ǫ ) = ρ ( χ ) -ǫ ;
- (2) ( monotonicity ) For any χ 1 , χ 2 ∈ S , if χ 1 ( ω ) ≤ χ 2 ( ω ); ω ∈ Ω, then ρ ( χ 1 ) ≥ ρ ( χ 2 );
- (3) ( convexity ) For any χ 1 , χ 2 ∈ S and ς ∈ (0 , 1),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Following the general representation of the convex risk measures (see e.g., Theorem 3, Frittelli and Rasozza [20]), also applied by Mataramvura and Øksendal [24], Elliott and Siu [16], Meng and Siu [25], among others, we assume that the risk measure ρ under consideration in this paper, is as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where E Q is the expectation under Q , for the family M a of probability measures and for some penalty function η : M a → R .

In order to specify the penalty function, we first describe a family M a of all measures Q of Girsanov type. We consider a robust modeling setup, given by a probability measure Q := Q θ 0 ,θ 1 ,θ 2 , with the Radon-Nikodym derivative given by

The Radon-Nikodym G θ 0 ,θ 1 ,θ 2 ( t ) , t ∈ [0 , T + ̺ ] , is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The set Θ := { θ 0 , θ 1 , θ 2 } is considered as a set of scenario control. We say that Θ is admissible if θ 2 ( t, z ) &gt; -1 and

Then, the family M a of probability measures is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us now specify the penalty function η . Suppose that for each ( π, θ 0 , θ 1 , θ 2 ) ∈ A × Θ and t ∈ [0 , T ], π ( t ) ∈ U 1 and θ ( t ) = ( θ 0 ( t ) , θ 1 ( t ) , θ 2 ( t, · )) ∈ U 2 , where U 1 and U 2 are compact metric spaces in R and R 3 .

Let ℓ : [0 , T ] × R × R × R × U 1 × U 2 → R and h : R × R → R be two bounded measurable convex functions in θ ( t ) ∈ U 2 and ( X ( T ) , Y ( T )) ∈ R × R , respectively. Then, for each ( π, θ ) ∈ A × Θ,

As in Mataramvura and Øksendal [24], we consider, for each ( π, θ ) ∈ A × Θ, a penalty function η of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, we define a convex risk measure for the terminal wealth and the integrated wealth of an insurer, i.e., X ( T ) + κY ( T ), for κ ≥ 0, given the information F t associated with the family of probability measures M a and the penalty function η , as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As in Elliott and Siu [16], the main objective of the insurer is to select the optimal investment process π ( t ) ∈ A so as to minimizes the risks described by ρ ( X ( T ) , Y ( T )). That is, the optimal problem of an insurer is:

Note that E Q [ -( X π ( T ) + κY π ( T ))] = E [ -( X π ( T ) + κY π ( T )) G θ 0 ,θ 1 ( T )] (See Cuoco [7] or Karatzas and Shreve [22] for more details). Then from the form of the penalty function,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For each ( π, θ ) ∈ A × Θ, suppose that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that is, the insurer selects an optimal investment strategy π so as to minimize the maximal risks, whilst the market reacts by selecting a probability measure indexed by (( θ 0 , θ 1 , θ 2 )) ∈ Θ corresponding to the worst-case scenario, where the risk is maximized. To solve this game problem, one must select the optimal strategy ( π ∗ , θ ∗ 0 , θ ∗ 1 , θ ∗ 2 ) from the insurer and the market, respectively, as well as the optimal value function J ( x ).

## 5. The BSDE approach to a game problem

In this section, we solve the risk-based optimal investment problem of an insurer using delayed BSDE with jumps. Delayed BSDEs may arise in insurance and finance, when one wants to find an investment strategy which should replicate a liability or meet a purpose depending on the past values of the portfolio. For instance, under participating contracts in life insurance endowment contracts, we have a so called performance-linked payoff , that is, the payoff from the policy is related to the performance of the portfolio held by the insurer. Thus, the current portfolio and the past values of the portfolio have an impact on the final value of the liability. For more discussions on this and more applications of delayed BSDEs see Delong [10].

We first consider the following notation in order to establish the existence and uniqueness result of a delayed BSDE with jumps.

- S 2 -̺ ( R )- the space of bounded measurable functions y : [ ̺, 0] ↦→ R such that
- L 2 -̺ ( R )- the space of measurable functions k : [ -̺, 0] ↦→ R , such that ∫ 0 -̺ | k ( t ) | 2 dt &lt; ∞ ;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- H 2 -̺,ν - the space of product measurable functions υ : [ -̺, 0] × R , such that
- L 2 ( R )- the space of random variables ξ : Ω ↦→ R , such that E [ | ξ | 2 ] &lt; ∞ ;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- H 2 ( R )- the space of measurable functions K : R ↦→ R such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

- S 2 ( R )- the space of adapted c` adl` ag processes Y : Ω × [0 , T ] ↦→ R such that
- 2 ∞

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

- H 2 ν - the space of predictable processes Υ : Ω × [0 , T ] × R ↦→ R , such that

Define the following delayed BSDE with jumps:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume that the generator W : Ω × [0 , T ] × S 2 ( R ) × S 2 -̺ ( R ) × H 2 ( R ) × H 2 -̺ ( R ) × H 2 ν ( R ) × H 2 -̺,ν ( R ) ↦→ R satisfy the following Lipschtz continuous condition, i.e., there exists a constant C &gt; 0 and a probability measure η on ([ -̺, 0] , B ([ -̺, 0])) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, if h ∈ L 2 and the above Lipschitz condition is satisfied, one can prove the existence and uniqueness solution ( Y , K 1 , K 2 , Υ 1 , Υ 2 ) ∈ S 2 ( R ) × H 2 ( R ) × H 2 ( R ) × H 2 ν ( R ) × H 2 ν ( R ) of a delayed BSDE with jumps (5.1). See Delong and Imkeller [12] and Delong [11] for more details. In practice, Y denotes a replicating portfolio, K 1 , K 2 , Υ 1 , Υ 2 represent the replicating strategy, h ( X ( T ) , Y ( T )) is a terminal liability and G models the stream liability during the contract life-time.

The key result for solving our delayed stochastic differential game problem is based on the following theorem.

Theorem 5.1. Suppose that there exists a strategy (ˆ π ( t ) , ˆ θ ( t )) ∈ U 1 × U 2 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that is, W satisfy the Isaac's condition. Furthermore, suppose that there exists a unique solution ( Y π,θ ( t ) , K π,θ 1 ( t ) , K π,θ 2 ( t ) , Υ π,θ 1 ( t, · ) , Υ π,θ 2 ( t, · )) ∈ S 2 ( R ) × H 2 ( R ) × H 2 ( R ) × H 2 ν ( R ) × H 2 ν ( R ) of the BSDE (5.1) , for all ( π, θ ) ∈ A × Θ .

Then, the value function J ( x ) is given by Y ˆ π, ˆ θ ( t ) . Moreover, the optimal strategy of the problem (4.2) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The proof is based on the comparison principle for BSDEs with jumps as follows, (see Theorem 3.2.1 in Delong [11]). Define three generators φ 1 , φ 2 and φ 3 by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the corresponding BSDEs

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (5.2), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by comparison principle, Y 1 ( t ) ≤ Y 2 ( t ) = J ( x ) ≤ Y 3 ( t ), for all t ∈ [0 , T ]. By uniqueness, we get Y 2 ( t ) = V π ∗ ,θ ∗ . Hence, the optimal strategy is given by (5.3). □

In order to solve our main problem, note that from the dynamics of the processes X ( t ) , Y ( t ) and G θ 0 ,θ 1 ,θ 2 in (2.3), (2.2) and (4.1), respectively and applying the Itˆ o's differentiation rule for delayed SDEs with jumps (See Ba˜ nos et. al. [2], Theorem 3.8), we have formula, we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now define, for each ( t, X, Y, U, π, θ 0 , θ 1 , θ 2 ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R × R × R × U 1 × U 2 , a function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

J ( x )

Define, for each ( π, θ ) ∈ A × Θ, a functional

Then, the stochastic differential delay game problem discussed in the previous section is equivalent to the following problem:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now define the Hamiltonian of the aforementioned game problem H : [0 , T ] × R × R × R × R × R × R × U 1 × U 2 → R as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In order for the Hamiltonian H to satisfy the Issac's condition, we require that H is convex in π and concave in ( θ 0 , θ 1 , θ 2 ). Moreover, for the existence and uniqueness solution of the corresponding delayed BSDE with jumps, the Hamiltonian should satisfy the Lipschitz condition. From the boundedness of the associate parameters, we prove that H is indeed Lipschitz.

## Lemma 5.2. The Hamiltonian H is Lipschitz continuous in X , Y and U .

Proof. Since ( π, ( θ 0 , θ 1 , θ 2 )) ∈ U 1 × U 2 and ℓ is bounded, ˜ ℓ is bounded. Then H is uniformly bounded with respect to ( t, X ( t ) , Y ( t ) , U ( t ) , π ( t ) , θ 0 ( t ) , θ 1 ( t ) , θ 2 ( t, · )). To prove the Lipschitz condition, we suppose that H is not Lipschitz continuous in ( K 1 ( t ) , K 2 ( t ) , Υ 1 ( t, · ) , Υ 2 ( t, · )), uniformly in ( t, X ( t ) , Y ( t ) , U ( t )). Then, there exist two points ( K 1 ( t ) , K 2 ( t ) , Υ 1 ( t, · ) , Υ 2 ( t, · )), ( ˜ K 1 ( t ) , ˜ K 2 ( t ) , ˜ Υ 1 ( t, · ) , ˜ Υ 2 ( t, · )) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is unbounded. However, since H is uniformly bounded with respect to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which contradicts the assumption. Then H is Lipschitz continuous.

□

Then, following Theorem 5.1 above, we establish the relationship between the value function of the game problem and the solution of a delayed BSDE with jumps. Thus, the value function ˜ J ( t, x ) is given by the following noisy memory BSDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In fact, the existence and uniqueness of the solution to the above delayed BSDE with jumps is guaranteed from the Lipschitz condition proved in Lemma 5.2. Then the solution of the delayed BSDE is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is the optimal value function from Theorem 5.1.

## 6. A quadratic penalty function case

In this section, we consider a convex risk measure with quadratic penalty. We derive explicit solutions when ℓ is quadratic in θ 0 , θ 1 , θ 2 and identical zero in h . The penalty function under consideration here, may be related to the entropic penalty function considered, for instance, by Delbaen et. al. [9]. It has also been adopted by Elliott and Siu [16], Siu [33] and Meng and Siu [25]. We obtain the explicit optimal investment strategy and the optimal risks for this case of a risk-based optimization problem with jumps, regime switching and noisy delay. Finally, we consider some particular cases and we see using some numerical parameters, how an insurer can allocate his portfolio.

Suppose that the penalty function is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 1 -δ is a measure of an insurer's relative risk aversion and δ &lt; 1. Then, the Hamiltonian H becomes:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying the first order condition for maximizing the Hamiltonian with respect to θ 0 , θ 1 and θ 2 , and minimizing with respect to π , we obtain the following

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

Then, the value function of the game problem is given by the following BSDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Example 6.1. Suppose that the the driving processes ˜ N and ˜ N 0 are Poisson processes N and N 0 , with the jump intensities λ and λ 0 . We consider the following cases:

Case 1. We suppose that there is no regime switching in the model, then the optimal investment strategy is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume the following hypothetical parameters: interest rate r = 4 . 5%, the appreciation rate α = 11%, the volatility β = 20%, the insurer's relative risk aversion δ = 0 . 5 and the jump intensity given by λ = 0 . 5. Then the optimal portfolio invested in the risky asset is given by π ∗ = 0 . 24074, i.e., 24 . 074% of the wealth should be invested in the risky share.

- Case 2. We suppose existence of two state Markov chain S = { e 1 , e 2 } , where the states e 1 and e 2 represent the expansion and recession of the economy respectively. By definition, 〈 ˆ Λ( t ) , e 1 〉 = P ( X ( t ) = e 1 | G t ) and 〈 ˆ Λ( t ) , e 2 〉 = 1 -P ( X ( t ) = e 1 | G t ). Let α i , r i , λ i , λ 0 i be the associate parameters when the economy is in state e i , i = 1 , 2. Then the optimal portfolio is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this case, we consider the following parameters: α 1 = 13% , α 2 = 9% , r 1 = 4 . 5% , r 2 = 9% , β = 20% , λ 0 1 = λ 1 = 0 . 5 , λ 2 = λ 0 2 = 0 . 7 , δ = 0 . 5 and P ( X = e 1 ) = 70%. Then π ∗ = 0 . 28, i.e., 28% of the wealth should be invested in the risky share.

Acknowledgment. We would like to express our deep gratitude to the University of Pretoria and the MCTESTP Mozambique for their support.

## References

- [1] Artzner, P., Delbaen, F., Eber, J.M. and Heath, D., 1999. Coherent measures of risk. Mathematical finance , 9(3), pp.203-228.
- [2] Ba˜ nos, D.R., Cordoni, F., Di Nunno, G., Di Persio, L. and Røse, E.E., 2016. Stochastic systems with memory and jumps. arXiv preprint arXiv :1603.00272.
- [3] B¨ auerle, N., Rieder, U. 2007. Portfolio optimization with jumps and unobservable intensity process. Mathematical Finance , 17(2), pp.205-224.
- [4] Briand, P. and Hu, Y., 2008. Quadratic BSDEs with convex generators and unbounded terminal conditions. Probability Theory and Related Fields , 141(3), pp.543-567.
- [5] Chunxiang, A., Li, Z. 2015. Optimal investment and excess-of-loss reinsurance problem with delay for an insurer under Hestons SV model. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics , 61, 181-196.
- [6] Cohen, S. and Elliott, R.J., 2015. Stochastic calculus and applications . Birkhuser.
- [7] Cuoco, D., 1997. Optimal consumption and equilibrium prices with portfolio constraints and stochastic income. Journal of Economic Theory , 72(1), pp.33-73.
- [8] Dahl, K., Mohammed, S.E., Øksendal, B. and Røse, E.E., 2016. Optimal control of systems with noisy memory and BSDEs with Malliavin derivatives. Journal of Functional Analysis , 271(2), pp.289-329.
- [9] Delbaen, F., Peng, S. and Gianin, E.R., 2010. Representation of the penalty term of dynamic concave utilities. Finance and Stochastics , 14(3), pp.449-472.
- [10] Delong, L. 2010. Applications of time-delayed backward stochastic differential equations to pricing, hedging and portfolio management. arXiv preprint arXiv :1005.4417.
- [11] Delong, L., 2013. Backward stochastic differential equations with jumps and their actuarial and financial applications. BSDEs with jumps . Springer-Verlag, London.

- [12] Delong, L., Imkeller, P. 2010. On Malliavins differentiability of BSDEs with time delayed generators driven by Brownian motions and Poisson random measures. Stochastic Processes and their Applications , 120(9), 1748-1775.
- [13] Elliott, R.J., 1990. Filtering and control for point process observations. Recent Advances in Stochastic Calculus , pp.1-27.
- [14] Elliott, R.J., Siu, T.K., Chan, L. and Lau, J.W., 2007. Pricing options under a generalized Markovmodulated jump-diffusion model. Stochastic Analysis and Applications , 25(4), pp.821-843.
- [15] Elliott, R.J., Aggoun, L. and Moore, J.B., 2008. Hidden Markov models: estimation and control (Vol. 29). Springer Science &amp; Business Media.
- [16] Elliott, R.J. and Siu, T.K., 2011. A BSDE approach to a risk-based optimal investment of an insurer. Automatica , 47(2), pp.253-261.
- [17] Elliott, R. J., Siu, T. K. 2012. An HMM approach for optimal investment of an insurer. International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control , 22(7), pp.778-807.
- [18] Elsanosi, I., Øksendal, B. and Sulem, A., 2000. Some solvable stochastic control problems with delay. Stochastics: An International Journal of Probability and Stochastic Processes , 71(1-2), pp.69-89.
- [19] F¨ ollmer, H. and Schied, A., 2002. Robust preferences and convex measures of risk. In Advances in finance and stochastics (pp. 39-56). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
- [20] Frittelli, M. and Gianin, E.R., 2002. Putting order in risk measures. Journal of Banking &amp; Finance , 26(7), pp.1473-1486.
- [21] Kallianpur, G., 2013. Stochastic filtering theory (Vol. 13). Springer Science &amp; Business Media.
- [22] Karatzas, I., Shreve, S.E., 1998. Methods of mathematical finance (Vol. 1). New York: Springer.
- [23] Kuang, Y. ed., 1993. Delay differential equations: with applications in population dynamics (Vol. 191). Academic Press.
- [24] Mataramvura, S. and Øksendal, B., 2008. Risk minimizing portfolios and HJBI equations for stochastic differential games. Stochastics: An International Journal of Probability and Stochastic Processes , 80(4), pp.317-337.
- [25] Meng, H. and Siu, T.K., 2014. Risk-Based Asset Allocation Under Markov-Modulated Pure Jump Processes. Stochastic Analysis and Applications , 32(2), pp.191-206.
- [26] Mohammed, S.E.A., 1998. Stochastic differential systems with memory: theory, examples and applications. In Stochastic analysis and related topics VI (pp. 1-77). Birkh¨ user Boston.
- [27] Pamen, O.M., 2015. Optimal control for stochastic delay systems under model uncertainty: A stochastic differential game approach. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications , 167(3), pp.998-1031.
- [28] Øksendal, B. and Sulem, A., 2000. A maximum principle for optimal control of stochastic systems with delay, with applications to finance. Optimal Control and PDE, Essays in Honour of Alain Bensoussan , pp.6479, 2001.
- [29] Pamen, O.M., Momeya, R.H., 2017. A maximum principle for Markov regime-switching forwardbackward stochastic differential games and applications. Mathematical Methods of Operations Research , pp.1-40.
- [30] Peng, X.C. and Hu, Y.J., 2016. Risk-based optimal investment and proportional reinsurance of an insurer with hidden regime switching. Acta Mathematicae Applicatae Sinica , English Series, 32(3), pp.755-770.
- [31] Protter, F., 2000. Stochastic Integration and Differential Equations: A new Approach . Springer-Verlag, New York.
- [32] Shen, Y. and Zeng, Y., 2014. Optimal investment-reinsurance with delay for mean-variance insurers: A maximum principle approach. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics , 57, pp.1-12.
- [33] Siu, T.K., 2012. A BSDE approach to risk-based asset allocation of pension funds with regime switching. Annals of Operations Research , 201(1), pp.449-473.
- [34] Siu, T.K., 2013. A BSDE approach to optimal investment of an insurer with hidden regime switching. Stochastic Analysis and Applications , 31(1), pp.1-18.

- [35] Siu, T.K., 2014. A hidden markov-modulated jump diffusion model for european option pricing. In Hidden markov models in finance (pp. 185-209). Springer US.
- [36] Swishchuk, A. 2013. Modeling and Pricing of Swaps for Financial and Energy Markets with Stochastic Volatilities . World Scientific.
- [37] Xing, H., 2017. Consumption-investment optimization with Epstein-Zin utility in incomplete markets. Finance and Stochastics , 21(1), pp.227-262.

Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, University of Pretoria, 0002, South Africa

E-mail address :

rodwell.kufakunesu@up.ac.za

Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, University of Pretoria, 0002, South Africa

Department of Mathematics and Informatics, Eduardo Mondlane University, 257, Mozambique

E-mail address :

calistoguambe@yahoo.com.br

Department of Mathematics and Applied Mathematics, University of Pretoria, 0002, South Africa

E-mail address :

rodwell.kufakunesu@up.ac.za