## Thermal Switching of Lasing Regimes in Heavily Doped Er 3+ Fiber Lasers

Alexander M. Smirnov,* ,†  Alexey P. Bazakutsa, †  Yuri K. Chamorovskiy, †  Igor A. Nechepurenko, ‡,§ Alexander V. Dorofeenko, ‡, ∥,⊥ Oleg V. Butov †

† Kotel'nikov Institute of Radioengineering and Electronics of RAS, Mokhovaya 11-7, Moscow 125009, Russia

- ‡ Dukhov Research Institute of Automatics, 22 Suschevskaya, Moscow 127055, Russia

§ National Research University Higher School of Economics, 20 Myasnitskaya, Moscow 101000, Russia

- ∥ Institute for Theoretical and Applied Electromagnetics RAS, 13 Izhorskaya, Moscow 125412, Russia
- ⊥ Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, 19 Institutskiy pereulok, Dolgoprudny 141700, Russia KEYWORDS: erbium lasers, fiber DFB lasers, pulsed generation, thermal dependence

ABSTRACT: A pulsed regime of short-cavity, heavily erbium-doped fiber lasers is of high interest for its possible applications in telecommunications and sensorics. Here, we demonstrate these lasers in two configurations, distributed feedback laser and compare it with a classic Fabry-Perot type laser. We have managed to create lasers that function stably with cavities as small as 50 mm. Pulse properties such as amplitude, frequency and duration, are in a good agreement with our theoretical analysis, which takes into account spontaneous emission. We report the observation of the thermal switching effect, which consists of the pulsing regime changing to CW upon cooling the laser cavities down to the liquid nitrogen temperature. We theoretically show that this effect may be explained by weakening of the up-conversion process responsible for the pulsed regime. The slowing of the up-conversion processes is due to the energy mismatch in this process, which is  overcome by  interaction  with  phonons.  At  low  temperatures,  the  number  of  phonons  decreases  and  pulsing switches off.

Fiber lasers based on erbium-doped silica glass are actively used in modern fiber optics. 1-5  Erbium lasers operating at  wavelengths  near  1.5  μm  are  widely  used  in  telecommunications, 6-10  optical sensing, 11-13  and radiophotonics. 14

Of particular interest are single-frequency fiber laser systems  with  a  narrow  (about  several  kilohertz)  radiation bandwidth, 15-18   which  can  serve  as  light  sources  for  communication lines with ultra-high compaction of channels and  coherent  communication  lines,  as  well  as  in  sensor systems as a low-noise coherent source. Distributed feedback lasers (DFB lasers) are the most promising lasers in this aspect. A DFB fiber laser is a short (several centimeters) section of an active fiber into which a special Bragg grating with a phase shift is inscribed. 19-21  Due to the additional π phase  shift  introduced by  the  structure  of  the Bragg grating, the priority generation of only one longitudinal mode of the fiber laser is provided. As a result, in such lasers as narrow as 10 kHz bandwidth of the radiation  spectrum  is  achieved  at  a  low  level  of  phase  noise, which is especially important for high-precision sensing.

Miniaturization is one of the main goals of fiber laser development, which greatly expands the lasers' applications.

Furthermore, obtaining a uniform-fiber Bragg structure of high  length  is  quite  a  difficult  technological  challenge. Therefore, the ability to create a laser with a short cavity greatly  simplifies  the  technology  of  its  manufacture  and stabilizes the laser oscillation. However, in order to attain an effective lasing in a short fiber section, the active fiber should  possess  both  high  gain  and  high  absorption  at  a pumping  wavelength.  To  meet  these  demands,  achievement of a heavy-fiber core doping with rare earth metal ions at a minimum level of clustering is required. However,  effective  solubility  of  erbium  ions  in  the  fused  silica glass  has  a  limit,  above  which  an  intensive  formation  of ion clusters occurs. This establishes the maximum levels of  gain  and  absorption  for  the  pump.  One  widespread solution  to  this  problem  is  the  use  of  erbium  fiber  codoped  with  ytterbium  ions.  This  active  fiber  structure makes it possible to increase the pump efficiency at a low level  of  erbium  doping  and  is  currently  actively  used  to create single-frequency lasers with short cavities. 22-25 However, this method has significant disadvantages. The most  critical  one  is  the  high  probability  of  spontaneous luminescence of ytterbium ions, which leads to amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) 26  and causes power drop and overall instability of the laser system.

It has previously been shown that the technology of surface  plasma  chemical  vapor  deposition  of  silica  glass  at reduced  pressure  (SPCVD) 27   for  the  preform's  manufacture allows a significant increase in the level of the fiber core doping with rare-earth elements, while maintaining the minimum level of clustering due to the absence of the glass-melting  stage  during  the  synthesis  process. 28,  29   Of course,  at  the  stage  of  preform  collapse,  the  process  of fiber drawing is inevitably accompanied by a step of melting the formed structure. But investigations have shown that with the help of SPCVD technology, it is possible to increase rare earth ions' concentration in the silica glass of  the  fiber  core  without  the  formation  of  large  cluster areas. 28   Previously,  we  have already demonstrated an ytterbium DFB laser with a cavity length of 12-16 mm, 24, 25 fabricated on the basis of heavily doped fiber synthesized by SPCVD technology. In the case of erbium doping, such a method will provide a sufficient level of pump absorption  in  a  short  cavity  without  co-doping  the  glass  core with ytterbium. On the basis of the waveguide manufactured using this technology, a DFB laser with 24 mm cavity  length  was  created,  from  which  a  stable  laser  oscillation was obtained. 25

Erbium self-pulsed fiber lasers are of particular practical and scientific interest. 30-36 It was shown that 30, 37, 38  pulses occur  due  to  the  presence  of  Er 3+   ion  pairs  in  the  glass structure, and a dynamic laser model describing the selfpulsed and CW regimes in the presence of ion pairs in the system was proposed.

This paper presents the results of experimental and theoretical studies of lasing features using lasers with a 50 mm cavity  length,  whose  structure  was  inscribed  in  heavily erbium-doped fibers. A pulsed generation mode was obtained in such lasers with a short duration (70 ns) and a high  repetition  rate  (730  kHz).  These  are  outstanding parameters, even compared to erbium lasers with saturable absorbers. 39-45  A modification of the theoretical model of Er 3+  laser operation was proposed, and the dependence of laser radiation intensity on time was obtained at different pump intensities. It is shown that these results are in good agreement with our experiment. An improved model  and  explanation  of  pulsed  oscillation  regime  in  Er 3+ lasers  are  proposed.  To  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  the disappearance  of  the  pulsed  regime  at  liquid  nitrogen temperatures  has  been  demonstrated  for  the  first  time. An explanation of the observed effect is given herein.

On the basis a fiber made by us (see Materials and Methods,  and  absorption  spectra  of  this  fiber  in  Fig.  1),  two erbium lasers with 50-mm-long cavities each were fabricated-namely, a  distributed  feedback  erbium  doped  fiber  laser  (DFB)  and  a  laser  assembled  according  to  the classical  Fabry-Perot  scheme  with  two  Bragg  mirrors  at the  cavity  boundaries  (FP-EDFL) (Fig. 2).  The  DFB laser has  an  infiber  Bragg  grating  inscribed  along  the  entire length  of  the  cavity,  having  a  phase  shift  (π-shift)  in  its structure displaced from the cavity center by about 10%. This displacement amount is optimal for obtaining unidirectional  radiation  generation  of  a  DFB  laser  in  single- mode  regime  with  maximum  power. 46   The  measured transmission  reduction  at  the  Bragg  wavelength  ('spectrum depth') was approximately 21 dB. For the FP-EDFL laser, two Bragg gratings with lengths of 5 mm and 8 mm, respectively, were inscribed. The reflection coefficients of the  output  and  high-reflection  mirrors  were  0.55  and 0.95, respectively. The identical cavity lengths of the two lasers allowed us to compare the operation of two different schemes.

Fig.1. Absorption spectrum of erbium-doped fiber

<!-- image -->

Fig.2. Scheme of investigated erbium fiber laser cavities.

<!-- image -->

Generation regimes of the investigated lasers were studied under the CW pump at a wavelength of 976 nm with the help of a Gooch &amp; House semiconductor laser diode. The experimentally measured maximum output power of the pump laser radiation in fiber was 620 mW. To measure the spectra and time characteristics of the fiber laser's radiation, the experimental schemes shown in Fig. 3a and Fig.  3b  were  used.  Laser  cavities  were  installed  in  a  cuvette  with  water  or  liquid  nitrogen  to  stabilize  the  temperature.

The Bragg gratings of both lasers were inscribed directly into the active fiber cores by radiation of an ArF excimer laser (Coherent COMPex Pro) using a special 50-mm-long phase mask of 1075 nm period, which has the necessary phase shift in its structure. Let us note that in a number of papers, in order to provide photosensitivity, the erbium fiber was additionally co-doped with germanium. However, the presence of germanium in the erbium-doped fiber can lead to a decrease in gain, 28, 47, 48  which also has a detrimental  effect  on  laser  generation.  In  our  samples,  we did not use germanium. To inscribe the Bragg structures, we used a hydrogen-loaded fiber saturated with molecular  hydrogen.  It  was  shown  earlier  that  erbium-doped fiber loaded via hydrogen allows us to inscribe the Bragg gratings  in  it  with  a  sufficient  efficiency  even  without germanium and phosphorus in the glass structure  25 . Hydrogen loading was carried out in a special chamber at a temperature  of  70  °C  and  a  pressure  of  15  MPa  for  48 hours.

The features of DFB laser operation have been investigated  for  various  pumping  schemes  with  different  π-shift orientations relative to the pumping and radiation direction (see Results and Discussion for details), and also by using an additional fiber Bragg grating (FBG) with a Bragg wavelength  of  976  nm.  This  grating  returns  the  unabsorbed part of the pump radiation back to the cavity, thus increasing  the  efficiency  of  radiation  absorption  by  the short  laser  cavity  (Fig.  3a).  In  addition,  a  scheme  using such  a  mirror  makes  it  possible  to  distribute  the  pump energy  more  uniformly  along  the  laser  cavity,  which  is especially  important  in  the  case  of  the  DFB  laser,  as  it provides  a  more  uniform  heating  of  the  laser  cavity.  A similar scheme with the additional reflecting Bragg grating at the pump wavelength was used in the case of FPEDFL  (Fig.  3b).  A  fiber  coupler  (50/50)  was  installed  at the laser output for simultaneous measuring of the spectral  and  temporal  characteristics  of  the  laser  radiation. Spectrum analysis was carried out using an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA) Agilent 86140B with a resolution of 0.06  nm.  The  Tektronix  DPO4102B  oscilloscope  with  a bandwidth of up to 1 GHz was used to measure the time characteristics.

Fig.3.  Experimental setups of the DFB (a) and the FP-EDFL (b) lasers. Here, OSA stands for the optical spectrum analyzer Agilent 86140B, WDM for the wavelength division multiplexer, and FBG for the fiber Bragg grating.

<!-- image -->

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

This section presents the results of an experimental study of  the  pulsed  generation  regimes  of  DFB  and  FP-EDFL lasers  and  the  results  of  model  calculations,  as  well  as revealing and explaining the switching between  the pulsed and CW regimes of laser operation when cooling lasers to the liquid nitrogen temperature.

Pulsed  generation  regime:  experiment .  The  wavelength of the laser radiation was 1560 nm, as determined by the Bragg grating period. Both kinds of lasers operated in the self-pulsed regime, and their cavities were installed in  a  cuvette  with water at  room temperature. The duration and frequency of the pulses, as well as their intensity, depended on the scheme and on the pump power. A puls- ing frequency of up to 730 kHz and peak power up to 0.7 W  were  achieved  at  maximum  pumping  power  of  620 mW using the additional fiber Bragg grating.

When varying the  pump  power,  the  pulse  duration  was reduced  from  2-3  µs  observed  at  the  lasing  threshold  to 69-71 ns at the maximum pump power. The dependence of the peak output power, pulse repetition rate and duration  on  the  pump  power  are  shown  in  Figs.  4,  5  and  6, respectively. As can be seen from these figures, both the DFB laser and classic FP-EDFL show quite similar behavior. When the DFB laser cavity was set in the inverse direction,  we  obtained  a  lower  peak  power,  which  is  fully consistent  with  the  concepts  developed  earlier. 34   These are associated with the phase shift position in the Bragg grating relative to the cavity center.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 4. The dependence of peak output power on pump power.

Fig. 5. The dependence of the pulse repetition frequency on pump power.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6. The dependence of pulse duration on pump power.

<!-- image -->

It  should  be  noted  that,  in  general,  the  laser  assembled according to the classical scheme (FP-EDFL) demonstrated a slightly better stability of the oscillation parameters than the DFB laser, which also manifested in a lower lasing  threshold.  A  relatively  high  absorption  level  in  the fiber leads to a significant and nonuniform heating of the laser  cavity.  This  effect  can  be  observed  even  when  the fiber  is  placed  in  water,  when  the  increase  in  the  lasing wavelength associated with the heating of the Bragg grating  is  observed  at  the  increase  in  pump  power  (Fig.  7). Since the absorbed power along the laser cavity is distributed  inhomogeneously,  this  causes  a  chirp  formation  in the structure of the Bragg grating, which can have a negative effect on the parameters of the DFB cavity. As a result, the lasing threshold increases, and the reproducibility of pulse generation parameters deteriorates.

Fig. 7. The dependence of the lasing wavelength on the pump power of a DFB laser set in a cuvette with water.

<!-- image -->

Pulsed generation regime: theoretical model .  Let  us discuss the mechanism of pulse generation. A pulsed generation  regime  is  typical  of  lasers  in  which  erbium  ions are  used  as  an  activator,  especially  at  high  erbium  concentrations. 32, 33  A model explaining pulsed regime in such lasers  was proposed elsewhere. 30, 37, 38   The  reason for the appearance of pulses is the existence of ion pairs at high erbium  concentrations.  This  creates  an  effective  absorption  dependent  on  levels'  populations  of  ion  pairs.  This effect is interpreted as a saturable absorption. 30, 37, 38  It is well-known  in  laser  physics  that  a  saturable  absorption causes passive Q -switching and a pulsed regime. 49, 50  From our  point  of  view,  passive Q -switching  in  highly  doped Er 3+  lasers is realized due to this effect, which is opposite to  the  saturable  absorption.  The  absorption  grows  with the  field  intensity  instead  of  being  saturated.  To  show this, let us consider the system in more detail.

Energy levels of Er 3+  are shown in Fig. 8. The main transition, at which 1.53 μm lasing occurs, is  4 I13/2 → 4 I15/2 (see left part of Fig. 8). The pumping wavelength is in the range of 976-980 nm, which corresponds to the  4 I15/2 → 4 I11/2  transition. The electron nonradiatively relaxes from  4 I11/2 to  4 I13/2 level, where the population inversion with respect to the 4 I15/2 level is created, resulting in the lasing.

Fig.  8.  Energy  level  structure  of  a  single  Er 3+   ion  in  silica glass. In the left part of the figure, transitions of the Er 3+  ion in the lasing process are shown. In the right part of the figure,  the  up-conversion  in  ionic  pair  is  shown.  The  straight and wavy solid lines show radiative and non-radiative relaxation  processes,  respectively.  The  dashed  line  shows  a  nonradiative energy transfer process between the ions in pair.

<!-- image -->

As  noted  above,  pulse  generation  is  related  to  the  formation of Er 3+   ion  pairs  (miniclusters), 30,  31   in  which  upconversion  appears.  The  latter  process  can  start  when both ions occur in the first excited state,  4 I13/2. Then, one of the ions proceeds to the ground state,  4 I13/2 → 4 I15/2, with the  non-radiative  energy  transfer  to  the  second  ion, 4 I13/2 → 4 I9/2. This process is possible due to the proximity of energies of the two Er 3+  ions in the  4 I13/2 state to energies of the two ions in  4 I15/2 and 4 I9/2 states, respectively (right part of Fig. 8). The excited ion non-radiatively relaxes to the  4 I13/2 level. The up-conversion rate is quite high-that is,  3  orders  of  magnitude  higher  than  that  of  radiative transition 4 I13/2 → 4 I15/2 . 30,  51   The  system  of  rate  equations used,  which  takes  into  account  the  up-conversion  process,  is  derived  from  the  one  proposed  earlier. 30   We  use this  system  appended  with  a  term  responsible  for  the spontaneous emission process: 49

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, 2 1 d n n   is  an  average  population  inversion  between the 4 I13/2 and 4 I15/2 states of a single ion; 22 11 d n n    is  a  sum  and  difference  of  populations  of the 22 ion  pair  state,  with  both  ions  being  in  the 4 I13/2 state, and of the 11 ion pair state, with both ions being in the  4 I15/2 state. The lasing intensity is described by variable I ,  the  pumping  rate  by  Λ,  relaxation  rates  by 2 2 / l a    and 22 22 / l a    ,  which are the ratios of the electromagnetic mode relaxation time, l  ,  to  the  relaxation time of single ion 2 state, 2  ,  and of the ion pair 22 state, 22  , respectively. The ratio of concentration of ion pairs to that of single ions is denoted by x ; the ratio of the cavity field absorption cross-section by ion pair l   and by single ion l  is denoted by / l l y     . Parameter 0 l l A N    describes the strength of the field interaction with the gain medium. We have included a parameter  , which describes the  spontaneous  emission  process.  This parameter, which is used as a free parameter, substantially alters the shape of pulses near the lasing threshold, the latter being equal to: 37

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig  9a  shows  oscillograms  of  pulsed  oscillation  for  the example of DFB laser that were experimentally obtained at different pumping rates. Fig. 9b shows the corresponding  curves   I t obtained  by  numerical  solution  of  the system (1). Theoretical results are quite similar to the experimental ones. Differences between Figs. 9a and 9b are due to the simplicity of the model, which neglects a lot of effects,  such  as  gain  medium  pumping  inhomogeneity along  the  cavity,  multimode  effects  in  the  long  cavity, Stark  splitting  of  levels,  etc.  We  consider  the  obtained correspondence as highly acceptable with the account of all these idealizations.

The  role  of  up-conversion  processes  is  reduced  to  the appearance  of  losses,  which  abruptly  increase  when  the ion  pairs  appear  in  the 22 state.  To  show  this,  let  us write the equation for energy that follows from system (1):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The left-hand side of Eq. (3) is the rate of the total energy change of the 'field + gain medium' system, whereas the right-hand side includes different channels of energy income and outcome. Particularly, the last term, 22 22 a Axn  , is the rate of the energy dissipation due to the up-conversion  process.  This  value  is  proportional  to  the small ion pair concentration x , and to the small population of the 22 state, 22 n . On the other hand, the value of 22 a is  much  larger  than 2 a , 3 22 2 2 22 / / ~10 a a    . This means that even a small 22 population leads to the appearance of large losses, which force the fast transition of  the  system  to  the 12 state  during  a  period  of  some microseconds,  whereas  the  duration of the radiative 12 →11 relaxation is more of the order of 10 milliseconds. This means that instead of the saturable absorption, we deal with abrupt absorption growth with an increase in field intensity, the latter causing the ion pair excitation and  fast  energy  dissipation.  The  pulsing  mechanism  in such a system becomes clear when observing the calculation results, which are shown in Fig. 10. First, let us note that almost all the ion pairs appear in the 11 and 12 states. Only a small fraction of ion pairs is excited to the 22 state,  but  these  ion  pairs  provide  considerable  ab- sorption. When the population of the 22 state is lower than  a  certain  critical  value,  the  lasing  starts.  The  field intensity grows with a characteristic time of nanoseconds, which follows from the assessment of the photon lifetime in  the  cavity,   1 2 / 1 0.3 l L c r r          ns  for  the  FPEDFL laser, where 1 r and 2 r are the reflection coefficients of  the  two  mirrors  and L is  the  cavity  length.  A  lasing pulse develops and leads to the growth of the population of the 22 state of ion pairs, which leads to the increase in  losses  and  breaks  the  lasing.  The  field  decreases  with the  nanosecond  characteristic  time.  In  the  absence  of  a field, the 22 level population drops with the microsecond characteristic time due  to the up-conversion. Then, the  process  repeats.  Therefore,  ion  pairs  serve  as  a  nonlinear, field-dependent dissipation source, which leads to the pulsed behavior.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 9. Time dependence of lasing intensity of the DFB laser at  different  pumping  rates  obtained  in  the  experiment  (a) and in the calculations (b). For the experimental curves corresponding to 0.04 and 0.09 W, the oscillation peak power is shown with 1000x and 20x scaling, respectively. In the calculations,  the  pumping values are taken proportionally to the experimental ones, and the scaling coefficients are 50 and 5 for the black and red curves, respectively.

<!-- image -->

Fig.  10.  Pulsing  of  the  lasing  intensity  (red  curve)  and  the populations of different ion pair states: 11 (both ions in the ground state), 12 (one  of  the  ions  is  excited), 22 (both ions are excited).

Switching to the CW oscillation regime with cooling . It is worth noting that the pulsing frequency has the same order  as  that  of  relaxation  oscillations; 52-56 that  is,  10 5 to 10 6   Hz. 54   This  correspondence  is  not  a  coincidence,  because  the  increase  in  the  pumping  rate  turns  the  laser from pulsed to CW generation. 30-32  This transition is performed through the increase in the pulsing rate, so that the  pulses  merge  into  a  continuously  oscillating  curve. Then,  pulses  transform  to  relaxation  oscillations,  which decay over time, resulting in the CW lasing.

One can suppose that the change in the external conditions such as temperature can change the lasing regime at a  constant  pumping  rate.  We  have  investigated  the  behavior of erbium lasers under cooling by placing the cavities of our lasers into liquid nitrogen at 77 K. As a result, lasers of both types (FP-EDFL and DFB) switched to CW generation. In Fig. 11, lasing intensity as a function of the pumping rate is shown for the FP-EDFL. In the inset, one can  observe  oscillograms  at  different  pumping  rates, which confirms the CW regime.

Fig.  11.  FP-EDFL output power dependence on pump power at 77 K, confirming the CW generation regime.

<!-- image -->

The influence of temperature on the function of erbium lasers  has  been  considered  earlier  in  another  regime, namely,  under  a  coherent  pumping.  It  was  theoretically shown 31,  57   that  the  Stark  sublevels'  populations  are  determined by the Boltzmann distribution and, consequently,  depend on temperature. According to the calculation results given in the cited papers, an increase in temperature should change the lasing regime from pulsing to CW. This effect is opposite from our observations. In  31 , possible  thermal  change  in  the  transitions'  probabilities  was not taken into account, which we consider crucial in our system with incoherent pumping.

Therefore, we built a model that describes the effect observed  in  our  experiments.  It  is  essential  here  that  the frequencies  of 2 →1 and 3 → 2 transitions  are quite  proximate,  but  different.  With  the  use  of  the  data for  the 2 →1 and 3 →1 wavelengths,  λ21=1550  nm and λ31=810 nm, 58  we evaluate the frequency mismatch as   14 1 21 31 2 2 / 1/ ~10 w c s       .  In  spite  of  this  mismatch, the  up-conversion process  is  possible  because  of the finite relaxation time. However, this time is not that of  transition  between  any  states  (so-called  longitudinal relaxation  time,  which  is  often  denoted  as 1 T ).  Indeed, since the rate of the 3 → 2 transition is very high, the time  spent  in  the  intermediary  state 13 is  determined by the slower 22 transition, which has the same characteristic  time  as  the  whole  up-conversion  process,  10 -6   s. This  is  several  orders  higher  than 1 14 10 w s    ,  and therefore  cannot  support  a  process  with  such  high  frequency mismatch. However, the linewidth is known 59  to be determined by another time, which is called a coherence time, or the transverse relaxation time, 2 T . For most optical  transitions,  coherence  time  is  of  the  order  of 13 15 10 10    s  at  room  temperature,  which  corresponds well  to  the  value  of 1 w  .  The  coherence  time  is  mostly determined by the interaction with phonons and strongly depends on temperature. The coherence times of different transitions in Er 3+  and their temperature dependences were studied and measured in many papers; however, we could  not  find  the  coherence  time  of  the  up-conversion process in ion pairs. Therefore, for our estimation we use the coherence time of the 2 →1 transition in a single Er 3+   ion, which has previously been measured. 60  At room temperature, coherence time is evaluated by the extrapolation of the thermal dependence to the value of 13 2 ~ 3 10 T   s,  whereas  at  77  K  the  coherence  time  becomes an order of magnitude larger, 12 2 ~ 3 10 T   s. 61

Let us show that this increase in 2 T under cooling turns off the up-conversion process, which stops the pulse generation.  It  is  shown  in  the  Supplementary  Material  that the  up-conversion  rate, 22  ,  is  related  to 2 T in  the  following way:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Ω is a parameter describing the interaction of ions in the pair (Rabi frequency). Eq. (4) gives a  nonmonotonic dependence of 22  on 2 T (Fig.  12).  At  small (below 1 w  ) values of 2 T , one observes a growth of 22  , which is due to the decrease in the transverse relaxation at  the  growth  of 2 T .  Further  growth  of 2 T above 1 w  leads  to  the  line  narrowing  below  the  frequency  mismatch w , which leads to the decrease in 22  .

It  follows from the numerical values of w and 2 T given above that at the room temperature we obtain the value 2 ~ 30 wT ,  whereas  at  the  liquid  nitrogen  temperature 2 ~ 300 wT .  Both points are located to the right from the point wT 2 ~1 . Thus, growth of 2 T caused by cooling de- creases the up-conversion rate by approximately 10 times according to relation (4).

Switching  between  the  lasing  regimes  caused  by  change in 2 T is illustrated by our 'phase diagram' (Fig. 13), which is  obtained  by  numerical  solution  of  the  system  (1).  At room temperature, pulsing is predicted in a wide range of pumping levels. At the liquid nitrogen temperature, only CW  behavior  should  be  observed.  These  results  correspond exactly to our observations.

Fig. 12. Dependence of the up-conversion rate on coherence time. The points corresponding to the behavior of the system at room and liquid nitrogen temperatures are shown.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 13. The diagram of laser oscillation regimes in the coordinates of pump intensity (Λ) and up-conversion rate ( 22  ). The red region corresponds to the pulsed regime, white region to the CW oscillation. Shown in gray is a sub-threshold region, where no oscillation is observed.

<!-- image -->

To conclude, our model has successfully described all the observed  changes  in  the  lasing  regimes  at  the  temperature change from the room to the liquid nitrogen temperatures. Substantially smaller changes in temperature lead to  notable influence on the laser dynamics, as it follows from our numerical calculations. Therefore, erbium lasers are pulse sources that can be controlled by external conditions.  Achieving  higher  doping  levels  and  decreasing the cavity dimensions will lead to the expansion of application areas of fiber erbium lasers.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

Active fiber was made from a preform with a core of silica glass  doped  with  aluminum  oxide  and  erbium  oxide (SiO2: Al2O3/Er2O3) and with an undoped silica cladding. The core glass was synthesized by means of SPCVD technology. 27, 28   It  is  necessary to note that the fiber core did not  contain  ytterbium  ions.  Vapor  of  anhydrous  metal halides  were  used  as  initial  reagents.  Thanks  to  the SPCVD method, it was possible  to  produce  fiber  with  a high  content  of  erbium  oxide  (about  0.3  mol.%,  which corresponds to 3.7×10 20  cm -3 ) at a relatively low concentration of large cluster elements, which avoids a high level of 'gray' losses in the active fiber. The absorption spectrum of  the  resulting  fiber  is  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The  absorption level  at  the  typical  wavelengths  of  erbium  transitions (1530  and  980  nm)  was  180  dB/m  and  90  dB/m,  respectively.

## CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we report on the observation of a new effect,  namely,  switching  between  pulsed  and  CW  lasing regimes  in  heavily  erbium-doped  fiber  lasers  when  the temperature  decreases  from  the  room  temperature  to liquid nitrogen values. It is theoretically shown that this effect  is  due  to  the  energy  levels'  inexact  match  for  the up-conversion process, which causes a significant role of temperature in its occurrence probability. To substantiate this  assumption,  we  obtained  estimates for the  upconversion rate and showed that this rate falls by about 10 times at the considered cooling of the system. A modified model of Er 3+  laser oscillation predicts the switching from self-pulsed to CW mode with such a decrease of the upconversion process rate.

A detailed theoretical analysis of the nature of self-pulsed regimes in Er 3+  lasers was carried out. The main idea on the  role  of  passive  Q-switching  in  a  self-pulsed  regime was  confirmed.  However,  our  analysis  showed  that  the appearance of pulses is not due to saturated absorption, but  to  the  opposite  effect,  consisting  of  an  increase  in absorption with the growth of the oscillation intensity.

## ASSOCIATED CONTENT

Supporting  Information provides  a  derivation  of  the relation (4) between the up-conversion rate and decoherence time

## AUTHOR INFORMATION

## Corresponding Author

* email: alsmir1988@mail.ru

## Author Contributions

† These authors are responsible for the experiment ‡ These authors are responsible for the theory and numerical

- calculations

## Funding Sources

This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR) (project 17-07-01388).

## ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We thank Prof. K.M. Golant for kindly providing the preform synthesized by SPCVD method.

## REFERENCES

- (1) Bellemare,  A.,  Continuous-wave  silica-based  erbiumdoped fibre lasers. Progress in Quantum Electronics 2003, 27 (4), 211-266.
- (2) Bradley,  J.  D.;  Pollnau,  M.,  Erbium -doped  integrated waveguide amplifiers and lasers. Laser &amp; Photonics Reviews 2011, 5 (3), 368-403.
- (3) Brida,  D.;    Krauss,  G.;    Sell,  A.;  Leitenstorfer,  A., Ultrabroadband Er: fiber lasers. Laser &amp; Photonics Reviews 2014, 8 (3), 409-428.
- (4) Kringlebotn, J.; Archambault, J.-L.; Reekie, L.; Townsend, J.;  Vienne, G.; Payne, D., Highly-efficient, low-noise grating-feedback Er 3+ :Yb 3+ codoped fibre laser. Electronics Letters 1994, 30 (12), 972-973.
- (5) Weber, J. R.;  Felten, J. J.;  Cho, B.; Nordine, P. C., Glass fibres of pure and erbium-or neodymium-doped yttria-alumina compositions. Nature 1998, 393 (6687), 769.
- (6) Keller,  U.,  Recent  developments  in  compact  ultrafast lasers. Nature 2003, 424 (6950), 831.
- (7) Wei,  D.;    Li,  T.;    Zhao,  Y.;  Jian,  S.,  Multiwavelength erbium-doped fiber ring lasers with overlap-written fiber Bragg gratings. Optics letters 2000, 25 (16), 1150-1152.
- (8) Kim,  S.;    Park,  J.;    Han,  S.;    Kim,  Y.-J.;  Kim,  S.-W., Coherent supercontinuum generation using Er-doped fiber laser of hybrid mode-locking. Optics letters 2014, 39 (10), 2986-2989.
- (9) Zhu,  S.;    Shi,  L.;    Xiao,  B.;    Zhang,  X.;  Fan,  X.,  Alloptical  tunable  microlaser  based  on  an  ultrahigh-Q  erbiumdoped hybrid microbottle cavity. ACS Photonics 2018 .
- (10) Rönn, J.;  Karvonen, L.;  Kauppinen, C.;  Perros, A. P.; Peyghambarian,  N.;    Lipsanen,  H.;    Säynätjoki,  A.;  Sun,  Z., Atomic layer engineering of Er-ion distribution in highly doped Er:  Al2O3  for  photoluminescence  enhancement. ACS  Photonics 2016, 3 (11), 2040-2048.
- (11) Kim,  H.;    Kim,  S.;  Kim,  B.,  Polarimetric  fibre  laser sensors  using  Er-doped  fibre. Optical  and  quantum  electronics 1995, 27 (5), 481-485.
- (12) Gong,  Y.;    Rao,  Y.-J.;    Guo,  Y.;    Ran,  Z.-L.;  Wu,  Y., Temperature-insensitive micro Fabry-Perot strain sensor fabricated by chemically etching Er-doped fiber. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 2009, 21 (22), 1725-1727.
- (13) Pérez-Herrera,  R.  A.;    Quintela,  M.  A.;    FernándezVallejo, M.;  Quintela, A.;  López-Amo, M.; López-Higuera, J. M., Stability comparison of two ring resonator structures for multiwavelength fiber lasers using highly doped Er-fibers. Journal of Lightwave Technology 2009, 27 (14), 2563-2569.
- (14) Tan, Y.-N.;  Jin, L.;  Cheng, L.;  Quan, Z.;  Li, M.; Guan, B.-O.,  Multi-octave  tunable  RF  signal  generation  based  on  a dual-polarization fiber grating laser. Optics express 2012, 20 (7), 6961-6967.
- (15) Iwatsuki, K.; Okamura, H.; Saruwatari, M., Wavelength-tunable single-frequency and single-polarisation Erdoped fibre ring-laser with 1.4 kHz linewidth. Electronics Letters 1990, 26 (24), 2033-2035.
- (16) Ball, G.; Morey, W., Compression-tuned singlefrequency Bragg grating fiber laser. Optics letters 1994, 19 (23), 1979-1981.
- (17) Mizrahi, V.;  DiGiovanni, D. J.;  Atkins, R. M.;  Grubb, S.  G.;    Park,  Y.-K.;  Delavaux,  J.-M.,  Stable  single-mode  erbium fiber-grating laser for digital communication. Journal of Lightwave technology 1993, 11 (12), 2021-2025.
- (18) Dong, X.;  Ngo, N. Q.;  Shum, P.;  Tam, H.-Y.; Dong, X., Linear cavity erbium-doped fiber laser with over 100 nm tuning range. Optics express 2003, 11 (14), 1689-1694.
- (19) Groothoff, N.;  Canning, J.;  Ryan, T.;  Lyytikainen, K.; Inglis, H., Distributed feedback photonic crystal fibre (DFB-PCF) laser. Optics Express 2005, 13 (8), 2924-2930.
- (20) Li, Q.;  Yan, F.;  Peng, W.;  Feng, T.;  Feng, S.;  Tan, S.; Liu, P.; Ren, W., DFB laser based on single mode large effective area  heavy  concentration  EDF. Optics  Express 2012, 20 (21), 23684-23689.
- (21) Villanueva, G. E.;  Pérez-Millán, P.;  Palací, J.;  Cruz, J. L.;  Andres, M. V.; Marti, J., Dual-wavelength DFB erbium-doped fiber  laser  with  tunable  wavelength  spacing. IEEE  Photonics Technology Letters 2010, 22 (4), 254-256.
- (22) Kringlebotn, J.;  Archambault, J.-L.;  Reekie, L.; Payne, D.,  Er 3+ :Yb 3+ -codoped  fiber  distributed-feedback  laser. Optics Letters 1994, 19 (24), 2101-2103.
- (23) Sejka,  M.;    Varming,  P.;    Hubner,  J.;  Kristensen,  M., Distributed  feedback  Er 3+ -doped  fibre  laser. Electronics  letters 1995, 31 (17), 1445-1446.
- (24) Butov,  O.  V.;    Rybaltovsky,  A.  A.;    Bazakutsa,  A.  P.; Golant, K. M.;  Vyatkin, M. Y.;  Popov, S. M.; Chamorovskiy, Y. K.,  1030  nm  Yb 3+   distributed  feedback  short  cavity  silica-based fiber laser. JOSA B 2017, 34 (3), A43-A48.
- (25) Butov, O.;  Rybaltovsky, A.;  Vyatkin, M. Y.;  Bazakutsa, A.;    Popov,  S.;    Chamorovskiy,  Y. K.; Golant, K. In Short-cavity DFB fiber lasers , Progress In Electromagnetics Research Symposium-Spring (PIERS), 2017, IEEE: 2017; pp 1594-1597.
- (26) Han, Q.;  Ning, J.; Sheng, Z., Numerical investigation of the ASE and power scaling of cladding-pumped Er-Yb codoped fiber  amplifiers. IEEE  Journal  of  Quantum  Electronics 2010, 46 (11), 1535-1541.
- (27) Golant, K. In Surface plasma chemical vapor deposition: 20  years  of  application  in  glass  synthesis  for  lightguides  (a review) ,  Proceedings  of  XXI  International  Congress  on  Glass, 2007; p L13.
- (28) Kholodkov,  A.;  Golant,  K.,  Er 3+   ions  luminescence  in non-fused silicate glasses fabricated by SPCVD. Optical materials 2005, 27 (6), 1178-1186.
- (29) Kholodkov, A.; Golant, K. In Surface plasma CVD as a new technological platform for Er-doped waveguide amplifiers and lasers  fabrication ,  Optical  Fiber  Communication  Conference, 2004. OFC 2004, IEEE: 2004; p 3 pp. vol. 2.
- (30) Sanchez, F.;   Le Boudec, P.;  François, P.-L.; Stephan, G.,  Effects  of  ion  pairs  on  the  dynamics  of  erbium-doped  fiber lasers. Physical Review A 1993, 48 (3), 2220.
- (31) Loh, W., Suppression of self-pulsing behavior in erbium-doped fiber lasers with resonant pumping. Optics letters 1996, 21 (10), 734-736.
- (32) Li, N.;  Bradley, J. D.;  Singh, G.;  Magden, E. S.;  Sun, J.; Watts, M. R. In Self-pulsing in Erbium-doped fiber laser , Optoelectronics Global Conference (OGC), 2015, IEEE: 2015; pp 1-2.
- (33) Hosseini,  E.  S.;    Bradley,  J.  D.;    Sun,  J.;    Leake,  G.; Adam, T. N.;  Coolbaugh, D. D.; Watts, M. R., CMOS-compatible 75 mW erbium-doped distributed feedback laser. Optics letters 2014, 39 (11), 3106-3109.
- (34) Skvortsov, M.;  Wolf, A.;  Dostovalov, A.;  Vlasov, A.; Akulov, V.; Babin, S., Distributed feedback fiber laser based on a fiber  Bragg  grating  inscribed  using  the  femtosecond  point-bypoint technique. Laser Physics Letters 2018, 15 (3), 035103.
- (35) Fotiadi, A.;  Kiyan, R.; Shakin, O., The effect of passive Q-switching  observed  in  an  erbium-doped  fiber  laser  at  a  low pumping power. Technical Physics Letters 2001, 27 (5), 434-436.
- (36) Fotiadi, A. A.;  Deparis, O.;  Kiyan, R. V.;  Chernikov, S.; Ikiades, A. In Dynamics of passive Q-switching in SBS/Er fiber laser  at  low-pump-power ,  Laser  Optics  2000:  Semiconductor

Lasers  and  Optical  Communication,  International  Society  for Optics and Photonics: 2001; pp 125-135.

(37) Sanchez, F.; Stephan, G., General analysis of instabilities in erbium-doped fiber lasers. Physical Review E 1996, 53 (3), 2110.

(38) Le Boudec, P.;  Francois, P.;  Delevaque, E.;  Bayon, J.F.;    Sanchez,  F.;  Stephan,  G.,  Influence  of  ion  pairs  on  the dynamical  behaviour  of  Er 3+ -doped  fibre  lasers. Optical  and quantum electronics 1993, 25 (8), 501-507.

(39) Kurkov,  A.; Sadovnikova,  Y. E.; Marakulin,  A.; Sholokhov,  E.,  All  fiber  Er-Tm  Q-switched  laser. Laser  Physics Letters 2010, 7 (11), 795.

(40) Tsai,  T.-Y.;    Fang,  Y.-C.;  Hung,  S.-H.,  Passively  Qswitched erbium all-fiber lasers by use of thulium-doped saturable-absorber  fibers. Optics  express 2010, 18 (10),  1004910054.

(41) Luo, Z.;  Huang, Y.;  Zhong, M.;  Li, Y.;  Wu, J.;  Xu, B.; Xu, H.;  Cai, Z.;  Peng, J.; Weng, J., 1-, 1.5-, and 2-μm fiber lasers Q-switched by a broadband few-layer MoS2 saturable absorber. Journal of Lightwave Technology 2014, 32 (24), 4077-4084.

(42) Huang, Y.;  Luo, Z.;  Li, Y.;  Zhong, M.;  Xu, B.;  Che, K.; Xu, H.;  Cai, Z.;  Peng, J.; Weng, J., Widely-tunable, passively Qswitched erbium-doped fiber laser with few-layer MoS2 saturable absorber. Optics Express 2014, 22 (21), 25258-25266.

(43) Ren,  J.;    Wang,  S.;    Cheng,  Z.;    Yu,  H.;    Zhang,  H.; Chen, Y.;   Mei, L.; Wang, P., Passively Q-switched nanosecond erbium-doped fiber  laser  with  MoS2  saturable  absorber. Optics express 2015, 23 (5), 5607-5613.

(44) Kassani, S. H.;  Khazaeinezhad, R.;  Jeong, H.;  Nazari, T.;    Yeom,  D.-I.;  Oh,  K.,  All-fiber  Er-doped  Q-switched  laser based on tungsten disulfide saturable absorber. Optical Materials Express 2015, 5 (2), 373-379.

(45) Zhang,  M.;    Hu,  G.;    Hu,  G.;    Howe,  R.;    Chen,  L.; Zheng,  Z.;  Hasan,  T.,  Yb-and  Er-doped  fiber  laser  Q-switched with  an  optically  uniform,  broadband  WS2  saturable  absorber. Scientific reports 2015, 5 , 17482.

(46) Loranger, S.;  Tehranchi, A.;  Winful, H.; Kashyap, R., Realization and optimization of phase-shifted distributed feedback  fiber  Bragg  grating  Raman  lasers. Optica 2018, 5 (3), 295-302.

(47) Barnes, W. L.;  Laming, R. I.;  Tarbox, E. J.; Morkel, P., Absorption and emission cross section of Er 3+  doped silica fibers. IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics 1991, 27 (4), 1004-1010.

(48) Furusawa, K.;  Kogure, T.;  Monro, T. M.; Richardson, D. J., High gain efficiency amplifier based on an erbium doped aluminosilicate  holey  fiber. Optics  Express 2004, 12 (15),  34523458.

(49) Siegman,  A.  E.,  Lasers  university  science  books. Mill Valley, CA 1986, 37 , 208.

(50) Svelto, O.; Hanna, D. C., Principles of lasers . Springer: 1998; Vol. 4.

(51) Delevaque, E.;  Georges, T.;  Monerie, M.;  Lamouler, P.; Bayon, J.-F., Modeling of pair-induced quenching in erbiumdoped silicate fibers. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 1993, 5 (1), 73-75.

(52) Ma, L.;  Hu, Z.;  Liang, X.;  Meng, Z.; Hu, Y., Relaxation oscillation  in  Er 3+ -doped  and  Yb 3+ /Er 3+   co-doped  fiber  grating lasers. Applied optics 2010, 49 (10), 1979-1985.

(53) Rønnekleiv, E., Frequency and intensity noise of single frequency  fiber  Bragg  grating  lasers. Optical  Fiber  Technology 2001, 7 (3), 206-235.

(54) Turitsyn, S. K.;  Babin, S. A.;  Churkin, D. V.;  Vatnik, I. D.;  Nikulin, M.; Podivilov, E. V., Random distributed feedback fibre lasers. Physics Reports 2014, 542 (2), 133-193.

(55) Ding, M.; Cheo, P. K., Analysis of Er-doped fiber laser stability  by  suppressing  relaxation  oscillation. IEEE  Photonics Technology Letters 1996, 8 (9), 1151-1153.

(56) Turitsyn, S. K.;  Babin, S. A.;  El-Taher, A. E.;  Harper, P.;    Churkin,  D.  V.;    Kablukov,  S.  I.;    Ania-Castañón,  J.  D.; Karalekas,  V.;  Podivilov,  E.  V.,  Random  distributed  feedback fibre laser. Nature Photonics 2010, 4 (4), 231.

(57) Desurvire,  E.;  Simpson,  J.  R.,  Evaluation  of 4 I15/2  and 4 I13/2  Stark-level  energies  in  erbium-doped  aluminosilicate  glass fibers. Optics letters 1990, 15 (10), 547-549.

(58) Kesavulu, C.;   Sreedhar,  V.;    Jayasankar,  C.;    Jang,  K.; Shin,  D.-S.;  Yi,  S.  S.,  Structural,  thermal  and  spectroscopic properties  of  highly  Er 3+ -doped  novel  oxyfluoride  glasses  for photonic  application. Materials  Research  Bulletin 2014, 51 ,  336344.

(59) Pantell, R. H.; Puthoff, H. E., Fundamentals of quantum electronics . John Wiley &amp; Sons: 1969.

(60) Zyskind, J.;  Desurvire, E.;  Sulhoff, J.; Di Giovanni, D., Determination of homogeneous linewidth by spectral gain holeburning in an erbium-doped fiber amplifier with GeO2:SiO2 core. IEEE Photonics technology letters 1990, 2 (12), 869-871.

(61) The line width at room temperature (300 K) is δλ = 4 nm,  which  gives T 2(300K)  =  λ 2 /(2πc∙δλ)  ~  3×10 -13   s. 60   We  also find 60 1/ T 2 ~ T 1.61 , with T being temperature. Therefore, we have T 2(77K)/ T 2(300K) ~ 9, so that T 2(77K) ~ 3×10 -12  s.

Authors are required to submit a graphic entry for the Table of Contents (TOC) that, in conjunction with the manuscript title, should give the reader a representative idea of one of the following: A key structure, reaction,  equation,  concept,  or  theorem,  etc.,  that  is  discussed  in  the  manuscript.  Consult  the  journal's  Instructions for Authors for TOC graphic specifications.

## Insert Table of Contents artwork here

<!-- image -->