&gt; FOR CONFERENCE-RELATED PAPERS, REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR SESSION NUMBER, E.G.

, AB-02 (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE) &lt;

## Optimized Hidden Markov Model based on Constrained Particle Swarm Optimization

Liu Chang 1,2,3 , Yacine Ouzrout 1 , Antoine Nongaillard 1 , Abdelaziz Bouras 1 , Zhou Jiliu 2,3

1

DISP Laboratory, University Lumiere of Lyon 2, France 2 Key Laboratory of Pattern Recognition and Intelligent Information Processing in Sichuan, China 3 College of Information Science and Technology, Chengdu University, Chengdu, China

As one of Bayesian analysis tools, Hidden Markov Model (HMM) has been used to in extensive applications. Most HMMs are solved by Baum-Welch algorithm (BWHMM) to predict the model parameters, which is difficult to find global optimal solutions. This paper proposes an optimized Hidden Markov Model with Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) algorithm and so is called PSOHMM. In order to  overcome  the  statistical  constraints  in  HMM,  the  paper  develops  re-normalization  and  re-mapping  mechanisms  to  ensure  the constraints  in  HMM.  The  experiments  have  shown  that  PSOHMM  can  search  better  solution  than  BWHMM,  and  has  faster convergence speed.

Index Terms -Hidden Markov Model, Particle Swarm Optimization, Non-negative Constraint, Normalization Constraint

## I. INTRODUCTION

s an efficient statistics  tool,  Hidden  Markov  Model (HMM)  has  been  tested  and  proved  in  a  wide  range  of applications. It is a powerful algorithm to estimate the model parameters. Therefore, to optimize the model parameter exactly is a crucial element in HMM. A

To find optimal model parameters, traditional approach often use Baum-Welch (BW) algorithm to optimize model parameters based on expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm. However, BW algorithm often converge into local optimum.[1] re-estimates model parameters with reinforcement learning, but still cannot overcome local convergence  problem.  Recently,  various  intelligent  evolution algorithms are introduced to optimize HMM and achieve good performance. [2] optimizes HMM by tabu search algorithm; [3] [4] proposes to training HMM  structure with genetic algorithm(GA); [5] trains HMM by Particle Swarm Optimization(PSO)  algorithm; [6, 7]  make  a  comparison between PSO and GA for HMM training and demonstrate that hybrid  algorithm  based  on  PSO  and  BW  is  superior  to  BW algorithm  and  the  hybrid  algorithm  based  on  GA  and  BW. Because model parameters need to satisfy statistical characteristic, the optimization of model parameters in HMM is a constraint problem. But these evolution algorithms usually combine  evolution  algorithms  with  HMM  directly  and  leave these parameter constraints in HMM out of consideration.

In  this  paper,  we  employ  Particle  Swarm  Optimization  to search  optimal  model  parameters  of  HMM  (PSOHMM)  to avoid  local  optimum  in  BW  algorithm,  solve  the  parameter constraints  in  HMM  with  remapping  and  re-normalization

Corresponding author:  Liu Chang (e-mail: chang.liu.scu@gmail.com). Digital Object Identifier inserted by IEEE

mechanism. The simulation experiments demonstrate PSOHMM  achieves  better  optimization  performance  than BWHMM.

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  In  the next section,  some  basic  knowledge  of  HMM  is  given. Section3  introduces  Optimized  Hidden  Markov  Model.  In section4, we discuss the performance of the proposed algorithm. Finally, Section 5 concludes this paper and proposes future works.

## II. HIDDEN MARKOV MODEL

Given a set of m observation states 1 { , , } m V v v = " ,  HMM consists of a finite set of n hidden states 1 { , , } n S s s = " with an associated probability distribution. It means  that  suppose  that  HMM  regularly  undergoes  a  statechange along a certain constant period of time according to a set of probabilities associated with its current state. So HMM is a probabilistic model with a collection of random variables 1 1 { , , , , , } t t o o q q " " where 1 { , , } t O o o = " is the sequence  of  observation  states  and i o V ∈ , [1, ] i t ∈ ,  and 1 { , , } t Q q q = " is the sequence of hidden states and q S ∈ , [1, ] i t ∈ .

i

For simplicity, two conditional independence assumptions are given to make associated algorithms tractable as following: (1).The t th hidden variable, given the ( 1) t -st hidden variable, is independent of previous variables, i.e. 1 1 1 ( | , , ) ( | ) t t t t P q q q P q q + + = " .

(2).The t th  observation  depends  only  on  the t th  state,  i.e. ( | , , , ) ( | ) P o q q o P o q = " .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The definition of HMM can be described as following:

1

&gt; FOR CONFERENCE-RELATED PAPERS, REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR SESSION NUMBER,

Definition  1 (Hidden  Markov  Model)  Given  a  set  of m observation  states V ,  HMM  with  a  finite  set  of n hidden states S consist of a triple ( , , ) A B λ π = , where 1 { ( )} i i P q s π π = = = is  the  prior  probabilities  of i s being  the  first  state  of Q ; { } ij A a = is  the  state  transition probabilities matrix, 1 , i j n ≤ ≤ , 1 { | } ij t j t i a P q s q s + = = = characterize the transition probability  from  hidden  state 1 t q + into t q ,  and 1 ij j a = ∑ ; { } ij B b = is the emission probabilities matrix,1 i m ≤ ≤ , 1 j n ≤ ≤ , { | } ij t t b P o i q j = = = describ es the relation between observation t o and hidden state t q at time t, and 1 ij j b = ∑ ;

According  to  Definition  1,  the  triple λ in  HMM  should satisfy the prior probabilities, the state transition probabilities matrix A and  the  emission  probabilities  matrix B should  be non-negative and normalized, which also called non-negative and normalization constraint respectively.

Given an observation sequence 1 { , , } t O o o = " , it can solve the following three basic problems[8]:

(1)  Given O and λ ,  how  to  compute  the  probability  of observing  sequence,  i.e. ( | ) P O λ .The  problem  is  called  the evaluation problem.

(2)  Given O and λ ,  how  to  find  a  corresponding  hidden states  sequence  that  most  probably  generated  an  observed sequence. The problem is called the decoding problem.

(3)  Given O ,  how  to  adjust  the  model  parameter λ to maximize ( | ) P O λ . The  problem  is  called  the  learning problem.

According to the second and third problems, before the hidden states sequence that most probably generated observed sequence  is  found,  it's  necessary  to  compute  optimal  model parameters λ to   maximize the following objective function:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Given  model  parameter λ ,  the  above  probability  of O is obtained  according  to  sum  joint  probability  over  all  possible state sequence Q as following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

According to Bayesian theory, we can get:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Give a hidden state sequence, the likelihood of an observation sequence is equal to the product of the emission probabilities computed along the specific path:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

E.G.

, AB-02 (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE) &lt;

2

Give model parameter λ , the probability of a state sequence 1 { , , } T Q q q = " can  be  computed  by  the  product  of  the transition probabilities from one state to another state:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let Eq. and (5) substitute into (3), then we can get:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, the objective function in Eq. becomes:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Traditional method  to solve Eq. is  to  use  Baum-Welch algorithm, which also is called forward and backward algorithm. However, BW algorithm finds maximum-likelihood with iterative expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm and is sensitive  to  initial  model  parameters  which  are  easy  to  trap into the local optimum.

## III. OPTIMIZED HIDDEN MARKOV MODEL BASED ON

## CONSTRAINED PARTICLE SWARM OPTIMIZATION

Particle  Swarm  Optimization(PSO)  algorithm  is  one  kind  of evolutionary  method proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart [9]. It  imitates  social  behavior  of  birds  and  fish  to  find  global optimum for optimization problems and has been applied into various scientific fields [10, 11, 12, 13, 14].

For n particles in PSO,  a  particle is a solution,  which represents  the  position  of  a  particle,  the  group  solutions consist  of  a  swarm.  In  order  to  find  the  best  position  of  the particle, i.e. the optimal solution, PSO constantly updates the positions of all particles with a velocity vector in the swarm in iterative  manner  until  the  termination  condition  met.  For example,  each  particle i is  represented  by  a D dimensional position vector ( ) i x t and has a corresponding velocity vector

( ) i v t .  During each iteration t ,  the  best  position  of  a  particle and the swarm pbest , gbest that  result  in  the  best  value  of fitness  function  are  recorded,  which  are  called  the  particles' personal  experience  and  the  social  knowledge  respectively, then the velocity vector is updated using the following rule:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The parameter ω is called inertia weight to scale the previous time  step  velocity; 1 c and 2 c are  scalar  factor  to  control  the influence of the personal experience and social knowledge; 1 ξ and 2 ξ represent the random number that satisfy a uniform distribution and 1 2 , [0,1] ξ ξ ∈ .The new position of the particle is updated:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If  the  best  position  of  the  swarm gbest is  searched from the positions  of  all  particles,  then  the  PSO  algorithm  is  called global best PSO; if gbest is searched only from the

&gt; FOR CONFERENCE-RELATED PAPERS, REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR SESSION NUMBER,

neighborhood ( ) i N t of  the  particle i x ,i.e.  | ( ) | i N t n &lt; ,  then the PSO algorithm is called local best PSO.

The fitness functions ( ) f x derived from Eq. to find optimal model parameters λ to maximize the probability of observation sequence O :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since  all  model  parameters λ represent  the  probability,  so [0,1] λ ∈ . However, it's easy to find that the position update rule  in  Eq.(8)  cannot  only  guarantee  model  parameters  are within  [0,1] ,  but  it  also  cannot  satisfy  the  normalization constraint  of  model  parameters.  The  reason  is  that  PSO  was originally proposed to handle unconstrained optimization. So it's necessary to modify PSO algorithm to cope with constrained optimization.

To cope with the constraints in HMM, this paper employs two different methods to guarantee the interval and normalization constraints respectively.

Concerning the problem that model parameters exceed number interval, we  employ  re-mapping method  to adjust these parameters. Let 1 b U = denotes upper bound, 0 b L = denotes  lower  bound, ψ denotes these model  parameters exceeded number interval. The re-mapping method repairs ψ considering the following four cases:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Meanwhile ， velocity vector ( ) i v t is also updated:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore,  in  order  to  ensure  that  transition  matrix  and emission  matrix  satisfy the normalization  constraints, the following re-normalization method is employed:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where ij ρ denotes ij a and ij b .

## IV. SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS

In  this  section,  two  simulation  experiments  are  conducted  to validate  the  performance  of  the  algorithm  proposed  in  this paper. Firstly, we demonstrate that optimized HMM based on PSO( called PSOHMM) can search better solution than HMM solved  BW  algorithm(called  BWHMM)  and  analyze  the reason.

In  the  first  experiments,  two  group  datasets  are  generated randomly.  To  improve  the  efficiency  of  computation,  we select a small number as the number of observation states and let it equal 5. In some e-commerce environments, the feedback often contains multi-dimensional rate scores, such as the rate to  the  quality  of  products,  the  quality  of  service  and  the E.G.

, AB-02 (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE) &lt;

3

delivery time. In order to imitate the rating score, we generate five  different  1-dimension  observation  sequences  with  the length of 100 in the first group and generate five different 2dimension observation sequences with the length of 100.

For each dataset, the model parameters of HMMs are trained using these observation sequences respectively and the number of hidden state is 2. At last, we can get five different HMMs. As shown in Section 2, the optimal model parameter should maximize the probability of observation sequence. So the log likelihoods of these observation sequences with these optimized HMMs are computed, i.e. log ( | ) P O λ to compare the optimization ability between PSOHMM and BWHMM as shown  in  Fig.  1  and  Fig.  2.For  PSOHMM,  the  number  of particle  is  25  and  the  iteration  number  is  10.  For  BWHMM, the iteration number is 50.

Fig.1 The log likelihoods of 1-dimensional data

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2 The log likelihoods of 2-dimensional data

<!-- image -->

From  Fig.1  and  Fig.2,  we  can  find  easily  that  PSOHMM always achieves larger log likelihoods of observation sequences  than  BWHMM  for  both  two  data  sets  with  one dimension and two dimension data. It means BWHMM is easy to trap into local optimum, but PSOHMM has the capability to find  global  optimal  solution  and  can  be  applied  into  any dimension observation sequence. Actually, in PSOHMM, the current  best  position  of  a  particle pbest represents  a  local optimum, gbest represents  the  best  solution  of  all  local optimum found in current iteration, as shown in Fig.3. In each iteration,  the  position  is  update  with  velocity  vector,  which means to search a better solution than previous local optimum within the neighborhood  of previous position  and  make gbest move toward to global optimal solution continuously. Moreover, PSOHMM  employs  some  particles to search optimal solution simultaneously and have larger probability to find  global  optimal  solution,  So  PSOHMM  is  superior  to BWHMM to search model parameters.

&gt; FOR CONFERENCE-RELATED PAPERS, REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR SESSION NUMBER,

Fig.3 The global and local solution in Rastrigin's Function

<!-- image -->

Fig.4 The convergence of pbest and gbest with iterative number

<!-- image -->

Fig.4 exactly verifies the above analysis. It shows that the best position of every particle pbest always converges to gbest with the increase of iteration number.

In order to demonstrate the convergence of PSOHMM, Fig.5 compares  the  convergence  performance  of  PSOHMM  and BWHMM with different  iteration  number.  We  can  find  that PSOHMM  converge gradually after one iteration, but BWHMM begin to converge after 10 iterations. So PSOHMM has better convergence performance than BWHMM and more stable than BWHMM.

E.G.

, AB-02 (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE) &lt;

Fig.5 The convergence of log likelihoods with different iterative number V. CONCLUSION

<!-- image -->

This  paper  proposes  optimization  HMM  based  on  Particle Swarm Optimization. The proposed algorithm takes full use of the global  searching  capability  of  PSO  and  avoids  BW algorithm trap into the local optimum. In addition, this paper employs re-mapping and re-normalized methods to guarantee the interval and normalized constraints in HMM.  The simulation  experiments  have  demonstrated  that  PSOHMM is superior to BW algorithm to search optimal model parameters and more stable than BW algorithm.

## References

- [1] M.  E.  G.  Moe,  M.  Tavakolifard,  S.  J.  Knapskog, Learning Trust in Dynamic Multiagent Environments using HMMs[C]. in Proceedings of The 13th Nordic Workshop  on  Secure  IT  Systems  (NordSec2008), Copenhagen, Denmark,2008
- [2] T.  Y.  Chen,  X.  D.  Mei,  J.  S.  Pan,  S.  H.  Sun, Optimization of HMM by the tabu search algorithm[J]. Journal of Information science and engineering , 2004,20(5):949-957.
- [3] K.  J.  Won,  A.  Prügel-Bennett,  A.  Krogh,  Training HMM structure with genetic algorithm for biological sequence analysis[J]. Bioinformatics , 2004,20(18):3613-3619.
- [4] K. B. Sim, Training HMM Structure and Parameters with Genetic Algorithm and Harmony Search Algorithm[J].  Journal  of  Electrical  Engineering  &amp; Technology , 2012,7(1):109-114.
- [5] M. SLIMANE, Hidden Markov Models Training by a Particle  Swarm  Optimization  Algorithm[J].  Journal of Mathematical Modelling and Algorithms , 2007,6:175-193.
- [6] F.  Yang,  C.  Zhang,  T.  Sun,  Comparison  of  particle swarm optimization and genetic algorithm for HMM training[C].  in  International  Conference  on  Pattern Recognition,2008: 1-4.
- [7] S. PandaN. P. Padhy, Comparison of particle swarm optimization and genetic algorithm for FACTS-based controller design[J]. Applied Soft Computing , 2008,8(4):1418-1427.
- [8] L.  R.  Rabiner,  A  tutorial  on  hidden  Markov  models and  selected  applications  in  speech  recognition[J]. Proceedings of the IEEE , 1989,77(2):257-286.

4

&gt; FOR CONFERENCE-RELATED PAPERS, REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR SESSION NUMBER,

- [9] J. KennedyR. Eberhart, Particle swarm optimization[C]. in Proceedings of the IEEE international Joint Conference on Neural Networks,1995,4: 1942-1948 vol. 4.
- [10] M.  AlRashidiM.  El-Hawary,  A  survey  of  particle swarm  optimization  applications  in  electric  power systems[J]. Evolutionary Computation, IEEE Transactions on , 2009,13(4):913-918.
- [11] M. Abido, Multiobjective particle swarm optimization for environmental/economic dispatch problem[J]. Electric Power Systems Research , 2009,79(7):1105-1113.
- [12] C. Yeung, F. Leung, K. Chan, S. Ling, An integrated approach of particle swarm optimization and support vector machine  for gene  signature selection and cancer prediction[C]. in International Joint Conference on Neural Networks,2009: 3450-3456.
- [13] Z.  Zhu,  J.  Zhou,  Z.  Ji,  Y.  H.  Shi,  DNA  Sequence Compression Using Adaptive Particle Swarm Optimization-Based Memetic Algorithm[J]. Evolutionary  Computation,  IEEE  Transactions  on , 2011,15(5):643-658.
- [14] S.  Cheng,  Y.  Shi,  Q.  Qin,  Experimental  Study  on Boundary  Constraints  Handling  in  Particle  Swarm Optimization: From Population Diversity Perspective[J]. International Journal of Swarm Intelligence Research , 2011,2(3):43-69.

Chang  Liu received  the  B.S.  and  M.S.  degrees  from  School  of  Computer Science,  Sichuan  Normal  University,  Chengdu,  China,  in  2004  and  2007, respectively.  She  is  currently  pursuing  the  Ph.D.  degree  in  the  college  of computer, Sichuan University.

Her  research  interests  focus  on  machine  learning,  computer  vision,  pattern recognition and image processing.

E.G.

, AB-02 (DOUBLE-CLICK HERE) &lt;

5