## Emotion Recognition based on Third-Order Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Model

Ismail Shahin Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Sharjah

Sharjah, United Arab Emirates

E-mail: ismail@sharjah.ac.ae

Abstract -This  work  focuses  on  recognizing  the  unknown emotion  based  on  the  'Third-Order  Circular  Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Model (CSPHMM3)' as a classifier. Our work has been tested on 'Emotional Prosody Speech and Transcripts (EPST)' database. The extracted features of EPST database are Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs). Our results give average  emotion  recognition  accuracy  of  77.8%  based  on  the CSPHMM3. The results of this work demonstrate that CSPHMM3  is  superior  to  the  Third-Order  Hidden  Markov Model  (HMM3),  Gaussian  Mixture  Model  (GMM),  Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Vector Quantization (VQ) by 6.0%, 4.9%, 3.5%, and 5.4%, respectively, for emotion recognition. The average  emotion  recognition  accuracy  achieved  based  on  the CSPHMM3  is  comparable  to  that  found using 'subjective assessment by human judges'.

Keywords-'emotion recognition, mel-frequency cepstral coefficients,  third-order  circular  suprasegmental  hidden  Markov model'.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Emotion  recognition  is  defined  as  recognizing  the  talking condition  of  a  speaker  speaking  emotionally  such  as  disgust, anger, and happiness. Emotion recognition has a large number of  applications  that  emerge  in  'telecommunications,  human robotic  interfaces,  smart  call  centers,  and  intelligent  spoken tutoring systems'. In 'telecommunications, emotion recognition' can be seen in assessing the emotion of a caller for telephone  reply  facilities.  Recognizing  emotions  can  also  be utilized  in  'human  robotic  interfaces'  where  robots  can  be trained to interact with humans and recognize human emotions. Further applications can be found in 'smart call centers' where probable problems happening from unsatisfactory communications  can  be  discovered  by  'emotion  recognition systems'. 'Emotion recognition' can be utilized in 'intelligent spoken tutoring systems' to feel and regulate to the emotions of students when students went into a tiresome state throughout tutoring meetings [1], [2], [3].

This work focuses on enhancing emotion recognition accuracy  based  on  the  'Third-Order  Circular  Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Model (CSPHMM3)' as a classifier. Our work has been tested on 'Emotional Prosody Speech and Transcripts (EPST)' corpus.

The remaining of this paper is given as: Literature review is presented  in  Section  II.  The  fundamentals  of  CSPHMM3  are given  in  Section  III.  The  utilized  database  and  extraction  of features  appear  in  Section  IV.  The  algorithm  of  emotion recognition  based  on  CSPHMM3  is  explained  in  Section  V. The  achieved  findings  and  the  experiments  are  discussed  in Section  VI.  Concluding  remarks  of  our  work  are  given  in Section VII.

## II. LITERATURE REVIEW

Emotion recognition research branch is covered by a huge number  of  studies [4-12].  Morrison et.al [4] focused  on enhancing the classification of emotion techniques using 'ensemble  or  multi-classifier  system  (MCS)'  methods.  They also investigated the variances to recognize emotions of human beings  that  are  taken  from  various  techniques  of  acquisition. Casale et.al [5] introduced a new 'feature vector' that assists in improving the grouping accuracy of 'emotional/stressful' human conditions. The elements of such a 'feature vector' are achieved  from  a  'feature  subset  selection  method  based  on genetic algorithm'. Yogesh et.al [6]  proposed 'a new particle swarm  optimization  assisted  biogeography-based  algorithm' for feature selection. They performed their experiments utilizing  'Berlin  Emotional  Speech  database  (BES),  Surrey Audio-Visual  Expressed  Emotion  database  (SAVEE),  and Speech Under Simulated and Actual Stress (SUSAS)' database.

Shahin  focused  in  one  of  his  previous  research  [7]  on studying and enhancing 'text-independent and speakerindependent  talking  condition  identification  in  stressful  and emotional environments' (entirely two independent environments) based on three independent and diverse classifiers:  'Hidden  Markov  Models  (HMMs),  Second-Order Circular Hidden Markov Models (CHMM2s), and Suprasegmental  Hidden  Markov  Models  (SPHMMs)'.  His study demonstrated that 'SPHMMs'  lead 'HMMs  and CHMM2s' for emotion recognition in the two environments [7]. Shahin and Ba-Hutair [8] directed in one of their research on improving 'text-independent and speaker-independent talking condition recognition in each of stressful and emotional  environments'  based  on  utilizing  'Second-Order Circular Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models (CSPHMM2s)' as classifiers.  Furthermore,  one  of  the  major goals  of  their  work  was  to  differentiate  between  'stressful talking environment and emotional talking environment based on CSPHMM2s'. Their conclusion was that talking recognition  in  'stressful  and  emotional  environments'  based on  'CSPHMM2s'  is  superior  to  that  based  on  'HMMs, CHMM2s, and SPHMMs'. In one of his preceding studies [9], Shahin  operated  emotions  to  identify  the  unknown  speakers. He  proposed  a  new  framework  to  recognize  speakers  from their  emotions  based  on  HMMs.  In  another  work  by  Shahin [10], he introduced, applied, and evaluated 'speakerdependent  and  text-dependent  speaking  style  authentication (verification) systems' that admit or deny the identity claim of a  speaking  style  based  on  SPHMMs.  His  results,  based  on SPHMMs, showed that the 'average speaking style authentication  performance  is:  99%,  37%,  85%,  60%,  61%, 59%, 41%, 61%, and 57% corresponding, respectively, to the speaking styles: neutral, shouted, slow, loud, soft, fast, angry, happy, and fearful'. To enhance speaker verification accuracy in  'emotional talking environments', Shahin [11] proposed a two-stage approach that employs the emotion of speaker cues '(text-independent and emotion-dependent speaker verification problem) based on both HMMs and SPHMMs as classifiers'.  This  framework  is  comprised  of  two  cascaded stages that combine and integrate 'emotion recognizer' followed  by  a  'speaker  recognizer'  into  one  recognizer.  His approach  has  been  evaluated  on  two  diverse  and  separate emotional speech databases: his collected database and 'Emotional Prosody Speech and Transcripts (EPST)' database.  The  results  of  his  work  present  that  his  introduced approach yields better results with a significant enhancement over  prior  studies  and  other  approaches  such  as  'emotionindependent speaker verification approach and emotiondependent speaker verification approach based completely on HMMs'. In a new work by Shahin and Bou Nassif [12], they aimed  at  enhancing  emotion  recognition  accuracy  based  on 'Third-Order Hidden Markov Models (HMM3s)' as a classifier.  Their  work  has  been  assessed  on  EPST  database. 'The extracted features of EPST database are Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs)'. Their results gave an average emotion recognition accuracy of 71.8%. Their results indicated  that  HMM3s  are  superior  to  'First-Order  Hidden Markov Models (HMM1s) and Second-Order Hidden Markov Models  (HMM2s)'  by  14.0%  and  5.7%,  respectively,  for emotion recognition accuracy.

In  this  work,  we  aim  at  improving  emotion  recognition accuracy  based  on  the  'Third-Order  Circular  Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Model (CSPHMM3)' as a classifier. Our work has been evaluated on EPST corpus. The extracted features that have  been used  in this work  are  called  'Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs)'.

## III. FUNDAMENTALS OF CSPHMM3

'Third-Order  Circular  Suprasegmental  Hidden  Markov Model has been developed from acoustic Third-Order Hidden Markov Model (HMM3)'. Shahin [13] proposed, applied, and evaluated  HMM3  to  improve  the  dropped  'text-independent speaker identification accuracy in a shouted talking environment'.

## A. Basics of HMM3

In  'HMM1, the underlying  state  sequence is  a  first-order Markov chain' where the 'stochastic process is specified by a 2-D  matrix  of  a  priori  transition  probabilities  ( a ij )'  between states s i and s j where a ij is given as [14],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In 'HMM2, the underlying state sequence is a second-order Markov chain' where the 'stochastic process is described by a 3-D  matrix ( a ijk )'. Hence,  the 'transition probabilities in HMM2' are given as [15],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

'with the constraints',

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  'HMM3, the underlying state sequence is a third-order Markov chain' where the 'stochastic process is stated by a 4-D matrix  ( a ijkw )'.  Subsequently,  the  'transition  probabilities  in HMM3' are given as [13],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

'with the constraints',

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The probability of the state sequence, , q ,..., , q q Δ Q T 2 1 is expressed as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ' i Ψ is  the probability of a state s i at  time t =  1,  a ijk is the probability of the transition from a state s i to  a  state  s k at time t = 3'. a ijk can be processed from equation (2). Thus, the initial  parameters  of  HMM3  can  be  attained  from  the  trained HMM2.

Given a sequence of observed vectors, , O ,..., , O O O T 2 1 Δ the joint state-output probability is expressed as [13]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Readers can get more details about the three models from [13], [14], [15].

## B. CSPHMM3

Within 'Third-Order Circular Hidden Markov Model (CHMM3), prosodic and acoustic information can be merged into CSPHMM3' as given by the formula [16],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  ' v CHMM3 λ is  the  acoustic  third-order  circular  hidden Markov  model  of  the v th emotion  and v CSPHMM3 Ψ is the suprasegmental third-order circular  hidden  Markov  model  of the v th emotion'.  Figure  1  displays  an  example  of  a  basic structure of CSPHMM3 that has been formed from CHMM3. This  figure  is  comprised  of  'six  third-order  acoustic  hidden Markov states: q1, q 2 ,…, q6 positioned in a circular form. p 1 is a third-order suprasegmental state that is made up of q 1 , q 2 , and q3. p 2 is a third-order suprasegmental state which is composed of  q 4 ,  q 5 ,  and  q 6 '.  'The  suprasegmental  states  p 1 and  p 2 are located in a circular form. p 3 is  a  third-order  suprasegmental state that is comprised of p 1 and p2' .

## IV. SPEECH DATASET AND EXTRACTION OF FEATURES

## A. Speech Dataset

In this research, our work has been tested on a worldwide speech dataset termed 'Emotional Prosody Speech and Transcripts  (EPST)'.  EPST  contains  8  trained  speakers  ('3 actors and 5 actresses') who utter a sequence of 'semantically neutral utterances comprising of dates and numbers' uttered in 15 diverse  emotions.  These  emotions  are  'neutral,  hot  angry, cold  angry,  panicky,  anxious,  despaired,  sad,  elated,  happy, interested,  bored,  shameful,  proud,  disgusted,  and  contempt' [17].  In  our  work,  only  20  distinct  utterances  '(10  utterances were utilized for training and the rest were utilized for testing) spoken by 8 speakers (5 speakers were utilized for training and the rest were utilized for testing) talking in 6 different emotions were  used.  The  emotions  are  neutral,  hot  angry,  sad,  happy, disgusted, and panicky'.

## B. Extraction of Features

In the present work, the 'phonetic content of speech signals' in EPST database is characterized by 'Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (static MFCCs) and delta MelFrequency Cepstral Coefficients (delta MFCCs)'. Such coefficients  have  been  mainly  used  in  many  studies  in  the fields  of  'speech  recognition  [18],  [19],  speaker  recognition [20], [21], and emotion recognition' [12], [22]. In this  work, 'MFCC feature analysis' is utilized to establish the 'observation vectors in each of HMM3 and CSPHMM3'. The computation of MFCC is shown in the block diagram of Fig. 2 [23].

A  32-dimension  'MFCC  (16  static  MFCCs  and  16  delta MFCCs) feature analysis' is used to produce the 'observation vectors'  in  every  model  of  'HMM3  and  CSPHMM3'.  The 'number of conventional states, N , in every model is 6 and the number of suprasegmental states is two (each suprasegmental state  is  made  up  of  three  conventional  states)  in  CSPHMM3 with a continuous mixture observation density has been chosen for each model'.

Fig. 2.  Block diagram of MFCC algorithm

<!-- image -->

## V. ALGORITHM OF EMOTION RECOGNITION BASED ON CSPHMM3

The 'training phase' of CSPHMM3 is very identical to the training  phase  of  the  conventional  CHMM3.  In  the  training phase  of  'CSPHMM3,  suprasegmental  third-order  circular model is trained on top of acoustic third-order circular model'. In  the  'training  phase  of  CHMM3',  one reference  model per emotion has been built utilizing '5 of the 8 speakers speaking 10 utterances with a replication of 2 times per utterance'. The overall number of utterances that has been utilized in this phase to  construct  the  models  of  the  six  emotions  (each  emotion  is represented by one model) is '600 (5 speakers × 10 utterances × 2 replicates/utterance × 6 emotions)'.

In  the  'test  phase'  of  CSPHMM3,  every  one  of  the  '3 remaining speakers uses different 10 utterances with a replication of 2 times per utterance under each emotion (textindependent  and  speaker-independent  experiments).  The  total number of utterances that has been utilized in this phase is 360 (3 speakers × 10 utterances × 2 times/utterance × 6 emotions)'. The probability of generating each utterance is calculated as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  ' E * is  the  index  of  the  recognized  emotion, O is  the observation vector that belongs to the unknown emotion, ( λ e ) is the e th  CHMM3 emotion model, and ( Ψ e ) is the e th  CSPHMM3 emotion model'.

## VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

In this work, emotion recognition has been evaluated based on  'CHMM3  and  CSPHMM3'  using  a  renowned  speech database named 'Emotional Prosody Speech and Transcripts'.

Table  I illustrates emotion  recognition  accuracy  using EPST based on 'CHMM3 and CSPHMM3'. This table yields average  emotion  recognition  accuracy  of  73.4%  and  77.8% based on 'CHMM3 and CSPHMM3', respectively. It is clear that average emotion recognition accuracy based on CSPHMM3 is greater than that based on CHMM3 by 6.0%. It is  evident  from  this  table  that  the  'suprasegmental  model CSPHMM3  is  superior  to  its  corresponding  acoustic  model CHMM3' for emotion recognition.

A  'statistical  significance  test'  has  been  implemented  to investigate  whether  emotion  recognition  accuracy  difference (emotion recognition  accuracy  based  on  CSPHMM3 and  that based  on  CHMM3)  is  real  or  only  comes  from  statistical variations.  The  'statistical  significance  test'  has  been  used based on the 'Student's t distribution test' as given by,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  ' x model x is  the  mean  of  the  first  sample  (model x )  of size n , y model x is the mean of the second sample (model y ) of the same size, and SD pooled is the pooled standard deviation of the two samples (models x and y )' given as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 'SD model x : is an estimate of the standard deviation of the average of the first sample (model x ) of size n and SD model y is an  estimate  of  the  standard  deviation  of  the  average  of  the second sample (model y ) of the same size'.

The 'calculated t value' between CSPHMM3  and CHMM3 is computed based on Table I. The computed value is t CSPHMM3, CHMM3  = 1.864  which  is  greater  than  the  'tabulated critical value t 0.05 = 1.645 at 0.05 significant level'. Thus, it is apparent  that  CSPHMM3  outperforms  CHMM3  for  emotion recognition.

Table  II  exhibits  a  'confusion  matrix'  that  characterizes the 'percentage of confusion' of a test emotion with the other emotions based on CSPHMM3. This table states that:

1. The most easily recognizable emotion is neutral (96.5%). Consequently, the highest emotion recognition accuracy is neutral.
2. The least easily recognizable emotion is hot anger (64.5%). Therefore, the least emotion recognition accuracy is hot anger.
3. The last column 'Panic', for instance, explains that 5% of the utterances that were portrayed in a panic emotion were assessed  as  spoken  in  a  hot  anger  emotion,  3%  of  the utterances  that  were  produced  in  a  panic  emotion  were recognized as generated in a happy emotion. This column shows  that  panic  emotion  has  the  maximum  'confusion percentage' with sad emotion (9%). Hence, panic emotion is  largely  confused  with  sad  emotion.  This  column  also displays that panic  emotion  has the least 'confusion percentage' with neutral emotion (0%). So, panic emotion is absolutely not confused at all with neutral emotion. This column  indicates  that  75.5%  of  the  utterances  that  were produced in a panic emotion were recognized properly.

Emotion recognition accuracy based on 'CSPHMM3 has been contrasted with that based on the state-of-the-art classifiers  and models  such  as  Gaussian  Mixture  Model (GMM)  [24],  Support  Vector  Machine  (SVM)  [25],  and Vector Quantization (VQ)' [26]. Emotion recognition accuracy based on GMM, SVM, and VQ is 74.2%, 75.2%, and 73.8%,  respectively.  It  is  apparent  from  this  experiment  that CSPHMM3 leads GMM, SVM, and VQ by 4.9%, 3.5%, and 5.4%, respectively, for emotion recognition.

An 'informal subjective assessment' for emotion recognition  using  EPST  dataset  has  been  conducted  using  10 human  non-professional  adult  listeners.  In  this  assessment,  a sum  of 480 utterances (8 speakers × 6 emotions  ×  10 utterances) have been utilized. These listeners are enquired to recognize the unknown emotion. The average emotion recognition  accuracy  using  EPST  database  is  71.4%.  This average is close to the obtained average based on CSPHMM3 (77.8%).

## VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

In  this  work,  we  utilize  CHMM3  and  CSPHMM3  as classifiers  to  identify  the  unknown  emotion  using  a  very famous speech dataset called Emotional Prosody Speech and Transcripts.  Some  concluding  remarks  can  be  drawn  in  this work. Firstly, 'CSPHMM3' is superior to each of 'CHMM3, GMM, SVM, and VQ' for emotion recognition. Secondly, the maximum emotion recognition accuracy happens when speakers speak neutrally. Finally, the  minimum  emotion recognition accuracy takes place when speakers speak angrily.

There  are  some  limitations  in  this  work.  First,  EPST dataset has limited number of speakers. Second, the achieved emotion recognition accuracy based on CSPHMM3  is imperfect.  Our  plan  for  future  work  is  to  use  up-to-date classifiers to improve emotion recognition accuracy.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The author of this  work  wishes  to  express  his  thanks  and gratitude  to  the  'University  of  Sharjah'  for  supporting  this work through the 'two competitive research projects' entitled 'Emotion  Recognition  in  each  of  Stressful  and  Emotional Talking Environments Using Artificial Models, No. 1602040348-P'  and 'Capturing, Studying, and Analyzing Arabic  Emirati-Accented  Speech  Database  in  Stressful  and Emotional  Talking  Environments  for  Different  Applications, No. 1602040349-P'.

## REFERENCES

- [1] V.A.  Petrushin,  'Emotion  recognition  in  speech  signal:  experimental study, development,  and  application,' Proceedings  of International Conference on Spoken Language Processing, ICSLP 2000.
- [2] R. Cowie, E. Douglas-Cowie, N. Tsapatsoulis, G. Votsis S. Collias, W. Fellenz, and J. Taylor, 'Emotion recognition in  human-computer interaction,' IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 18 (1), 2001, pp. 32-80.
- [3] N.  Fragopanagos  and  J.  G.  Taylor,  'Emotion  recognition  in  humancomputer  interaction,'  Neural  Networks,  special  issue  (18),  2005,  pp. 389-405.
- [4] D.  Morrison,  R.  Wang,  and  L.  C.  De  Silva,  "Ensemble  methods  for spoken  emotion  recognition  in  call-centres,"  Speech  Communication, Vol. 49, issue 2, February 2007, pp. 98-112.
- [5] S. Casale, A. Russo, and S. Serrano, 'Multistyle classification of speech under stress using feature subset selection based on genetic algorithms,' Speech  Communication,  Vol.  49,  issues  10-11,  October-November 2007, pp. 801-810.
- [6] C. K. Yogesh, M. Hariharan, R. Ngadiran, A. H. Adom, S. Yaacob, C. Berkai, and K. Polat, 'A new hybrid PSO assisted biogeography-based
7. optimization  for  emotion  and  stress  recognition  from  speech  signal,' Expert Systems with Applications, Vol. 69, 2017, pp.149-158.
- [7] I.  Shahin,  'Studying  and  enhancing  talking  condition  recognition  in stressful and emotional talking environments based on HMMs, CHMM2s and SPHMMs,' Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, Vol. 6, issue 1, June 2012, pp. 59-71, DOI: 10.1007/s12193-011-0082-4.
- [8] I. Shahin and  Mohammed  Nasser Ba-Hutair, 'Talking condition recognition  in  stressful  and  emotional  talking  environments  based  on CSPHMM2s,'  International  Journal  of  Speech  Technology,  Vol.  18, issue 1, March 2015, pp. 77-90, DOI: 10.1007/s10772-014-9251-7.
- [9] I.  Shahin, 'Using emotions to identify speakers,' The 5th International Workshop  on  Signal  Processing  and  its  Applications  (WoSPA  2008), Sharjah, United Arab Emirates, March 2008.
- [10] I.  Shahin,  'Speaking  style  authentication  using  suprasegmental  hidden Markov  models,'  University  of  Sharjah  Journal  of  Pure  and  Applied Sciences, Vol. 5, No. 2, June 2008, pp. 41-65.
- [11] I.  Shahin,  'Employing  emotion  cues  to  verify  speakers  in  emotional talking environments,' Journal of Intelligent Systems, Special Issue on Intelligent Healthcare Systems, DOI: 10.1515/jisys-2014-0118, Vol. 25, issue 1, January 2016, pp. 3-17.
- [12] I.  Shahin  and  Ali  Bou  Nassif,  'Utilizing  third-order  hidden  Markov models for emotional talking condition recognition,' 14th IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing (ICSP2018) 12-16 August 2018, Beijing, China, pp. 250-254.
- [13] I. Shahin, 'Novel  third-order  hidden  Markov  models  for  speaker identification in shouted talking environments,' Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 35, October 2014, pp. 316323, DOI: 10.1016/j.engappai.2014.07.006.
- [14] X.  D.  Huang,  Y.  Ariki,  and  M.  A.  Jack,  Hidden  Markov  Models  for Speech Recognition, Edinburgh University Press, Great Britain, 1990.
- [15] J.  F.  Mari,  J.  P.  Haton,  and  A.  Kriouile,  'Automatic  word  recognition based on second-order hidden Markov models,' IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, Vol. 5, No. 1, January 1997, pp. 22-25.
- [16] I.  Shahin,  'Speaker  identification  in  a  shouted  talking  environment based  on  novel  third-order  circular  suprasegmental  hidden  Markov models,' Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing, DOI:
18. 10.1007/s00034-015-0220-4, Vol. 35, issue 10, October 2016, pp. 37703792.
- [17] www.ldc.upenn.edu/Catalog/CatalogEntry.jsp?catalogId=LDC2002S28 (visited on 20/10/2018).
- [18] G.  Zhou,  J.  H.  L.  Hansen,  and  J.  F.  Kaiser,  'Nonlinear  feature  based classification of speech under stress,' IEEE Transactions on Speech and Audio Processing, Vol. 9, No. 3, March 2001, pp. 201-216.
- [19] V.  Pitsikalis  and  P.  Maragos,  'Analysis  and  classification  of  speech signals by generalized fractal dimension features,' Speech Communication, Vol. 51, issue 12, December 2009, pp. 1206-1223.
- [20] I. Shahin, 'Employing both gender and emotion cues to enhance speaker identification performance in emotional talking environments,' International Journal of Speech Technology, Vol. 16, issue 3, September 2013, pp. 341-351, DOI: 10.1007/s10772-013-9188-2.
- [21] I.  Shahin,  Ali  Bou  Nassif,  and  Shibani  Hamsa,  'Novel  cascaded Gaussian  mixture  model-deep  neural  network  classifier  for  speaker identification  in  emotional  talking  environments,'  Neural  Computing and Applications (Accepted). DOI: 10.1007/s00521-018-3760-2.
- [22] T.  L.  Nwe,  S.  W.  Foo,  L.  C.  De  Silva,  "Speech  emotion  recognition using hidden Markov models," Speech Communication, Vol. 41, issue 4, November 2003, pp. 603-623.
- [23] Y. Pan, P. Shen and L. Shen, 'Speech emotion recognition using support vector machine', International Journal of Smart Home, April 2012, Vol. 6, No. 2, pp. 101-108.
- [24] D. A. Reynolds, 'Speaker identification and verification using Gaussian mixture  speaker  models,'  Speech  Communication,  Vol.  17,  1995,  pp. 91-108.
- [25] V.  Wan  and  W.  M.  Campbell,  'Support  vector  machines  for  speaker verification and identification,' Neural Networks for Signal Processing X, Proceedings of the 2000 IEEE Signal Processing Workshop, Vol. 2, 2000, pp. 775 - 784.
- [26] T.  Kinnunen  and  H.  Li,  'An  overview  of  text-independent  speaker recognition:  From  features  to  supervectors,'  Speech  Communication, Vol. 52, No. 1, January 2010, pp. 12 - 40.

Table I.  Emotion Recognition Accuracy using EPST based on 'CHMM3 and CSPHMM3'

| Model  Gender  'Emotion recognition accuracy under each emotion' (%)  'Neutral'  'Hot Anger'  'Sadness'  'Happiness'  'Disgust'  'Panic'  CHMM3  Male  96  59  72  68  72  72  Female  96  58  72  69  73  74  Average  96.0  58.5  72  68.5  72.5  73.0  CSPHMM3  Male  97  65  76  77  77  75  Female  96  64  78  77  76  76  Average  96.5  64.5  77.0  77.0  76.5  75.5   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table II.  Confusion Matrix of Emotion Recognition based on CSPHMM3

| 'Percentage of confusion of a test emotion with the other emotions' (%)  Talking condition  'Neutral'  'Hot Anger'  'Sadness'  'Happiness'  'Disgust'  'Panic'  Neutral  96.5  3  3  6  2.5  0  Hot Anger  0  64.5  5  2  8  5  Sadness  0  10  77  2  3  9  Happiness  1.5  2  2  77  2  3  Disgust  1  6.5  5  6  76.5  7.5  Panic  1  14  8  7  8  75.5   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

b

b

12

22

P

2

b

21

3

P

Fig. 1.  Basic structure of CSPHMM3 derived from CHMM3

b

11

P

1