## Dependencies and systemic risk in the European insurance sector: Some new evidence based on copula-DCC-GARCH model and selected clustering methods

## Stanisław Wanat, Anna Denkowska

Cracow University of Economics Faculty of Finance and Law Department of Mathematics

December 30 th 2018

Abstract

The subject of the present article is the study of correlations between large insurance companies and their contribution to systemic risk in the insurance sector. Our main goal is to analyze the conditional  structure  of  the  correlation  on  the  European  insurance  market  and  to  compare systemic risk in different regimes of this market. These regimes are identified by monitoring the weekly rates of returns of eight of the largest insurers (five from Europe and the biggest insurers from the USA, Canada and China) during the period January 2005 to December 2018. To this aim we use statistical clustering methods for time units (weeks) to which we assigned the  conditional  variances  obtained  from  the  estimated  copula-DCC-GARCH  model.  The advantage of such an approach is that there is no need to assume a priori a number of market regimes, since this number has been identified by means of clustering quality validation. In each of the identified market regimes we determined the commonly now used CoVaR systemic risk  measure.  From  the  performed  analysis  we  conclude  that  all  the  considered  insurance companies are positively correlated and this correlation is stronger in times of turbulences on global markets which shows an increased exposure of the European insurance sector to systemic risk during crisis. Moreover, in times of turbulences on global markets the value level of the CoVaR systemic risk index is much higher than in `normal conditions'.

Keywords:

systemic risk, insurance market, copula-DCC-GARCH.

JEL:

G22

## 1. Introduction

Following the financial crisis in the years 2007-2009 and the European public debt crisis in the years 2010-2012, there has been significantly growing interest in systemic risk. This resulted in a prolific specialized literature proposing, among others, a wide range of new methods for the study of the influence of financial institutions on systemic risk. Moreover, both the academic community and the financial regulatory authorities paid more attention to the role played  by  non-bank  financial  institutions,  in  particular  insurance  companies,  in  creating systemic  risk.    Before  the  crisis  it  was  generally  accepted  that  the  insurance  market  has  a negligible impact on it. However, in the subsequent literature - although many a study still supported the latter point of view - there appeared several articles suggesting the possibility of the insurance market creating systemic risk. Let us quote here a few articles the authors of which claim that insurance companies:

-  have  become  an  unavoidable  source  of  systemic  risk  (e.g.  [Billio  et  al..  2012]  ,  [Weiß, Mühlnickel 2014]);
-  can be systemically important, but only due to their non-traditional (banking) activities (e.g. [Baluch et al.. 2011], [Cummins, Weiss 2014]), while in general the systemic significance of the insurance sector as a whole is still subordinated to the banking sector ([Chen et al. 2013], [Czerwińska 2014]);
-  are systemically unimportant due to the low level of interconnections and the lack of a strong dependance  on  external  funding  (e.g.  [Harrington  2009],  [Bell,  Keller  2009],  [Geneva Association 2010], [Bednarczyk 2013]).

On the other hand, in [Bierth et al. 2015] the authors, after having studied a very large sample of insurers in a long-term horizon, claim that the contribution of the insurance sector to systemic risk is relatively small, its peak having been reached during the financial crisis in the years 2007-2008. They also indicate the four L's: linkages, leverage, losses, liquidity, as the crucial factors influencing the exposure of insurers to systemic risk.

The present article belongs to the main stream of the studies concerning the linkages between large insurance companies and their contribution to systemic risk in the insurance sector. Our main aim is to check whether the strength of the existing connections between the eight largest insurers (five from Europe, one from the USA, Canada and China) together with their contribution to systemic risk in the European insurance sector depend on the insurance market regime. The market regimes were identified by analysing weekly rates of return of the insurers in question during the period between January 2005 and December 2018.  They were assessed using statistical clustering methods of time units (weeks) to which there had been assigned  conditional  variances  obtained  from  the  estimated  copula-DCC-GARCH  model. Indeed,  we  assumed  that  the  the  change  (increase)  of  the  risk  (variance)  is  a  good  (and, moreover, classical) index of the financial market tension. The advantage of such an approach is that there is no need to assume a priori a number of market regimes, because the latter is identified  by  the  clustering  quality  assessment.  Next,  in  each  of  the  identified  regimes  we established the CoVaR systemic risk measure, commonly used nowadays (see e.g. [Acharya et al. 2010],  [Bierth et al. 2015], [Jobst 2014]). We assumed that the European insurance market is represented by the weekly rates of return from the STOXX 600 Europe Insurance index. The CoVaR  measure,  indicating  the  contribution  of  each  of  the  insurers  to  systemic  risk,  was assessed using the conditional distributions obtained from eight bivariate copula-DCC-GARCH models. In each of these models one boundary distribution represents the European insurance market (the logarithmic return from the STOXX 600 Europe Insurance index), while the other one  represents  the  insurer  (the  appropriate  logarithmic  rate  of  return).  To  the  best  of  our knowledge, such an approach has not been used in systemic risk analysis ever before.

The paper is organised as follows. The second chapter reviews the subject literature devoted to identification of of systemic risk in the insurance sector, the third chapter presents the methodology and the empirical strategy used in the paper, the fourth one presents the data and discusses the results obtained, while the fifth chapter contains the conclusions.

## 2. Systemic risk in insurance - a literature review

Let us start with recalling a natural definition of systemic risk which is 'any set of circumstances that threatens the stability of or public confidence in the financial system' [Billio et al. 2012].

Usually, it is endogenous, coming from the financial system itself, and amplifies the exogenous risk. It can be seen as a coordination failure. Specific sources of systemic crisis are contagion,  bank  runs,  liquidity  crisis.  Up  to  now,  insurance  has  virtually  been  immune  to systemic  risk,  which  is  partly  explained  by  pyramidal  risk  sharing  (that  removes  a  lot  of contagion  risk)  and  less  room  for  coordination  failure  than  in  other  financial  institutions. However, as insurance companies become increasingly involved in other financial activities, or rather,  as  insurance  is  more  and  more often carried out by  financial institutions that do not specialize only in this sector, the situation may well change. Of course, there are other causes that may lead to this, such as e.g. more pervasive liquidity insurance offer by the companies. In particular, these conclusions can be found in the Special Report [Geneva Association 2010], Systemic risk in insurance - An analysis of insurance and financial stability. Also in the work [Billio  et  al.  2010]  already  mentioned  the  growing  interrelations  between  the  insurance, banking, hedge funds sectors are cited as one of the causes of increasing systemic risk.

Another question is how to measure systemic risk, as several approaches are possible. Leaving for the moment this question (raised in many of the papers listed below, e.g. [Bernardi, Catania, 2015], let us have a quick look on recent points of view on systemic risk in insurance.

The  general  and  most  widespread  view  is  that  the  contribution  of  the  insurance  sector  to systemic risk (whatever its definition and measurement tools) is very low (for various reasons), but in recent times this is subject to change as the insurance market keeps evolving (compare also the 2015 Report on systemic risks in the EU insurance sector [ESRB, 2015]).

Indeed, M. Kanno in [Kanno, 2016] observes that contrary to the interbank market, the insurance  one  does not contain the  feedback  mechanisms  that  would  make  it  fully interconnected. However, he points out that interconnectedness in the insurance sector has not been explored yet using network theory or contagious default approach. As a conclusion, the author sustains the opinion of [IAIS, 2011]. Insurance and financial stability that the degree of interconnectedness  within  the  (re)insurance  sector  is  small  which  adds  to  the  immunity  to systemic risk. However, an earlier study [Dungey, Luciani, Veredas, 2014] notes that insurance companies display substantial systemic risk via interconnectedneess with the financial sector and the real economy. Similarly, in [Bierth, Irresberger, Weiß, 2015] the authors studied the contribution of 253 international life and non-life insurers to global systemic risk in the period from 2000 to 2012, observing that systemic risk in the international insurance sector is small in comparison  to  the  case  of  banks.  Still,  during  the  financial  crisis  insurers  did  contribute significantly  to  the  instability  of  the  financial  sector.  In  conclusion,  the  various  factors determining  systemic risk of insurers are an insurer's interconnectedness and leverage, loss ratios, and the insurer's funding fragility. They also state that there is no big difference in the contribution to global systemic risk between life insurers and non-life insurers. In particular, there seems to be no relations between an insurer's size and it contribution. The authors support the point of view that unlike in the banking sector, the insurance one predominantly suffers from being exposed to systemic risk, rather than adding to the financial system's fragility. Also the study [Mühlnickel, Weiß, 2015] indicates a strong positive relation between consolidation in the insurance industry and moderate systemic risk in the insurance sector, but definitely no extreme systemic risk. Similar conclusion are drawn by Elia Berdin, Matteo Sottocornola (using three measurements) in [Berdin, Sottocornola, 2015]: the insurance industry has a persistent systemic relevance over time, but far from the role of banks in causing systemic risk compared to  banks. An interesting contrast between the Eurozone and the USA is observed by Oscar Bernal,  Jean-Yves  Gnabo,  Grégory  Guilmin  in  [Bernal,  Gnabo,  Guilmin,  2014]  where  the authors conclude that in the Eurozone during the years 2004-2012, the other financial services sector and the banking sector contribute relatively more to systemic risk in periods of distress than the insurance sector, while in the USA the insurance industry is the systemically riskiest financial sector.

These recent results were preceded by several articles (many of them triggered off by the AIG collapse in the recent crisis) in the years 2009-2013 (as listed in the excellent survey [Eling,  Pankoke,  2014]).  Scott  E.  Harrington  in  [Harrington,  2009]  claimed  that  traditional insurance products do not contribute to systemic risk. Marc P. Radice in [Radice, 2010] came to a two-fold conclusion, namely that unavailability of insurance, insurance run on life insurers, CDS payment default, credit rating utilization (long-term investment, short-term funded) do not contribute  to  systemic  risk,  whereas  asset  contagion,  limited  fungibility  of  available  group liquidity, distress of non-regulated/non-insurance business within an insurance group could be systemically  risky.  Faisal  Baluch,  Stanley  Mutenga,  Chris  Parsons  in  [Baluch,  Mutenga, Parsons,  2011]  observed  that  systemic  risk  in  insurance  has  grown  in  the  last  years,  since insurers increased their participation in the capital markets and offered more banking services. The  same  year  Iman  van  Lelyveld,  Franka  Liedorp,  Manuel  Kampman  in  [van  Lelyveld, Liedorp,  Kampman,  2011]  studied  contagion  and  the  contribution  of  the  linkages  between insurers and reinsurers to systemic failure coming to the conclusion that even if many reinsurers would go bankrupt the market would not fail and only a few primary insurers would go bankrupt - the potential failure of a (re)insurer (or several of them) is thus not a systemic risk. Still in 2011, a study of the US insurance sector was performed by J. David Cummins, Mary A. Weiss [Cummins,  Weiss,  2014a]  showing  that  traditional  insurers'  activities  do  not  contribute  to systemic risk,  it is the derivatives trading and financial guarantees that might contribute: life insurers are vulnerable due to leverage, both life and property-casualty insurers are vulnerable to reinsurance crisis; this was corroborated in 2013 again by the same authors in [Cummins, Weiss, 2014b] - they claimed that core property-casualty insurance and reinsurance activities do not contribute to systemic risk, as opposed to non-core insurance activities such as trading in derivatives, asset lending and management, financial guarantees. Martin F. Grace stated in [Grace,  2011]  that  insurers  do  not  contribute  to  systemic  risk,  since  duration  of  assets  and liabilities  are  more  closely  matched  than  in  the  case  of  banks.    Similarly,  Denis  Kessler  in [Kessler, 2013] asserted that reinsurance does not contribute to systemic risk; Patrizia Baur, Rudolf Enz, Aurelia Zanetti in [Baur, Enz, Zanetti, 2003] had come to the same conclusion. On the other hand, in [Mühlnickel,Weiß, 2014] the authors claim that insurers can contribute to systemic risk and are vulnerable to impairments of the financial system. D. Schwarcz and S. L. Schwarcz in [Schwarcz, Schwarcz, 2014] concentrate on systemic risk in insurance as resulting from correlations among firms.

Let us end with some general remarks. Andreas A. Jobs in [Jobst, 2014] also underlines that in general core insurance activities are unlikely to cause or propagate systemic risk. Nevertheless, he suggests that further study is needed with a particular focus on non-traditional and/or noninsurance activities. The interdependencies in the international financial market are a major determinant of systemic risk; they are analysed in e.g. [Brechmann et al., 2013], [Reboredo, Ugolini, 2015], [Di Bernardino et al., 2015]. Note that the problem of assessing the risk, of finding good risk measures, still remains a major research problem, see e.g. [Barrieu et al., 2014] and [Tang, Yang, 2012]. Among the most recent copula-based approaches let us cite [Di Clemente, 2018], [Karimalis, Nomikos, 2018] and [Oh, Patton, 2018].

## 3. Methodology

The empirical strategy we are using in this article in order to analyze the dependances and assess systemic risk on the European insurance market consists of two basic steps:

1. Market regime identification,
2. Analysis, in the identified market regimes, of:
3.  the dependances between the studied insurance companies,
4.  the  correlations  between  a  given  insurance  company  and  the  European  insurance market as represented by the STOXX 600 Europe Insurance index,
5.  the systemic risk.

It  is  assumed  in  the  first  step  that  market  regimes  are  identified  using  statistical methods of grouping weekly periods t according to the assigned conditional variances of the rates of return of all the instruments being analyzed. The conditional variances that are essential in  this  approach are obtained  through the multivariate  copula-DDC-GARCH model. In this model the distribution of the rates of return vector )' ,..., ( , 1, t k t t r r r  , conditional with respect to the set 1   t of informations available up to the moment 1  t , is modelled using the conditional copulae proposed by Patton [2006]. It takes the following form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where t C denotes the copula, whereas t F and t i F , are the multivariate CDF and the CDFs of the marginal distributions at time t ,  respectively.  In the  general case, the univariate rates of return t i r , can  be  modelled  by  various  specifications  of  the  mean  model  (e.g.  the  ARIMA process) and various specifications of the variance model (e.g. sGARCH, fGARCH, eGARCH, gjrGARCH, apARCH,  iGARCH ,  csGARCH).

In our study the following ARIMA process is applied for all series of returns for the mean:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

while for the variance we use the eGARCH model [Nelson 1991]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where t i z , are  independent  random  variables  with  the  same  distribution  (in  the  empirical analysis we considered the following distributions: normal, skew-normal, t-Student, skew-tStudent and GED).

The structure of the dependances between the rates of return is modelled using elliptic copulae with conditional correlations t R as parameters, the dynamics of which is described by the DCC( m , n ) model:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the conditional variances t i h , are modelled using univariate GARCH( p , q ) processes of the form (7), t t t y D 1    ( ) ,..., ( , 1,   t k t t y y y ) and Q is the unconditional covariance matrix of the  standardized  residuals t  .  In  the  specification  (11) ) 1 ,..., ( m j c j  , ) 1 ,..., ( n j d j  are scalars describing the influence on the current correlations of the respective previous shocks and previous conditional correlations.

The  parameters  of  the  copula-DCC-GARCH  model  above  are  estimated  using  the inference function for margins -IFM approached. This method is presented in details e.g. in: [Joe 1997, s. 299-307], [Doman 2011, s. 35-37], [Wanat 2012, s. 98-99]. The computations were done in the R environment using the 'rmgarch' package developed by Alexios Ghalanos.

To identify market regimes statistical methods of unsupervised classification are used. We assumed that the groups obtained form periods t with similar levels of risk (i.e. having a similar conditional variance). The clustering is performed by means of hierarchical methods in which groups are created recursively by connecting the most similar objects (Ward's method) We are also using two division methods, i.e. the classical k-means method and the partitioning around medoids method (PAM) proposed by Kaufman and Rousseeuw [1990]. The optimal number of groups, and thus the market regimes, are assessed under the following measures of cluster validity: the Calinski-Harabasz index [Calinski, Harabasz 1974], the silhouette indexSI ) [Kaufman, Rousseeuw 1990], the Dunn index ) [Dunn 1974] and the Xie-Beni separation measure ) [Xie, Beni 1991].

In the second stage of analysis, in each of the identified market regimes we assessed the CoVaR . The systemic risk measure j i t CoVaR | ,  is defined to be the value at risk ( VaR ) of the institution  (market  index) i under  the  condition  that  another  institution  (market  index) j is subject to distress i.e. its rate of return is smaller than its value at risk, meaning:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the conditional probability formula we get:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The definition of the value at risk for the institution j , i.e. j t VaR ,  yields       j t t j VaR P r , , , that is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, the assessment of j i t CoVaR | ,  requires knowledge of the bivariate distribution Ft of the vector   t j t i r r , , , .  Due to the Sklar Theorem this distribution can be represented using the copula in the following way:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Invoking  (15), j i t CoVaR | ,  can be determined by solving (numerically) the equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the empirical analysis we studied the influence on the European insurance market's systemic risk of the five largest insurance companies from Europe and the biggest insurers from the USA, Canada and China. In accordance, it was assumed that t i r , represents the European insurance  market  (we  made  use  of  the  weekly  rates  of  return  from  STOXX  600  Europe Insurance), while t j r , describes the insurers (we made use of the weekly logarithmic returns on shares). For each of the eight pairs:

( rate of return from the STOXX 600 index t i r , , logarithmic return of the insurer t j r , )

we  assessed  the  parameters  of  the  bivariate  copula-DCC-GARCH  model  described  by  the formulae  (1)-(7).  Then,  using  these  parameters  together  with  the  conditional  correlations obtained by these models, we determined the copulae t C and the distributions t F . The values j i t CoVaR | ,  for the analyzed period were obtained by solving numerically the equation (16).

## 4. Data and analysis results

As a basis for our study we took the stock prices of the five largest insurers from Europe and the biggest insurers from the USA, Canada and China (cf. Tab. 1 and Fig. 1) as well as the STOXX 600 Europe Insurance index representing the European insurance market (cf. Fig. 2). We analyzed the weekly weekly log-returns for the period between January 2005 and December 2018.

Table 1. Insurance companies considered in the study with their acronyms used in the presentation of the results

| No.  Insurer  Acronym  Country  Total assets  (in mld USD)  1  AXA  AXA  France  944.145  2  Allianz  Allianz  Germany  934.654  3  Prudential plc  Prud  Great Britain  578.149  4  Legal &amp; General  Legal  Great Britain  574.901  5  Aviva  Aviva  Great Britain  541.188  6  Metlife  Metlife  USA  898.764  7  Manulife Financial  Manu  Canada  534.705  8  Ping An Insurance  Ping  China  802.975   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Source: Compiled from http://www.relbanks.com/top-insurance-companies/world

In the first stage of study we identified the regimes of the insurance market on the basis of the conditional variances of the rates of return of the insurance companies in question. These were  assessed  using  the  8-variate    copula-DCC-GARCH  model.  During  the  analysis  we considered  various  ARMA-GARCH  specifications  of  univariate  models.  Finally,  on  the grounds of information criteria and model appropriateness tests (result available upon request to the author) we opted, for all the instruments, for the ARMA(1,1)-eGARCH(2,2) model with the  skew  Student  distribution  (with  skewness ξ and  shape υ ) 1 .  During  the  analysis  of  the dynamics of the dependances between the rates of return we considered the Gauss and Student copulae  together  with  various  specifications  of  the  DCC  model.  As  earlier,  in  the  basis  of information  criteria  we  chose  the  Student  copula  with  conditional  correlation  coefficients obtained from the DCC(1, 1) model and a constant shape parameter η . The assessment results are presented in Table 2, while the conditional variances obtained are shown in Figure 3.

Figure 1. Quotations of the insurance companies studied for the period 07.01.2005 - 21.12.2018

<!-- image -->

Source : Author's own study.

1  The eGARCH means exponential GARCH model put forward by Nelson.

Figure 2. STOXX 600 Europe Insurance index during the period 07.01.2005 - 21.12.2018

<!-- image -->

Source

: Author's own study.

Table 2. Copula-DCC-GARCH model estimation results

| Param.  AXA  Allianz  Prud  Legal  Aviva  Metlife  Manu  Ping  μ  0.00096  0.00109  0.00088  0.00110  -0.00059  0.00090  0.00025  0.00394  0.35692  0.32940  0.28148  0.06039  0.56085  0.09304  0.80474  0.01980  φ  1  0.84452  0.28441  0.60722  0.74250  0.72107  0.78764  -0.86865  -0.93666  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00054  0.00000  θ  1  -0.88966  -0.33966  -0.73356  -0.81227  -0.77971  -0.84399  0.80562  0.91175  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00730  0.00000  Ω  -0.18911  -0.20240  -0.12869  -0.18544  -0.24923  -0.16082  -0.20182  -0.27178  0.00001  0.00008  0.00106  0.02815  0.00398  0.00409  0.01234  0.08481  α  1  -0.30001  -0.25969  -0.19735  -0.20584  -0.17208  -0.19634  -0.18676  -0.03959  0.00000  0.00004  0.00028  0.01911  0.00025  0.00000  0.00971  0.36170  α  2  0.20207  0.15644  0.09066  0.10362  -0.01844  0.08099  0.02249  0.03560  0.00018  0.01251  0.10526  0.32087  0.73485  0.00843  0.72404  0.48038  β  1  1.00000  1.00000  1.00000  1.00000  0.19314  1.00000  0.59507  0.24303  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  β  2  -0.02985  -0.03002  -0.02046  -0.02843  0.76824  -0.02518  0.37509  0.71127  0.00002  0.00014  0.00090  0.03756  0.00000  0.00443  0.00000  0.00000  γ  1  -0.03655  0.05317  -0.09294  0.12954  0.02767  0.11685  0.14136  0.28382  0.63396  0.60211  0.28044  0.20640  0.72923  0.25838  0.15328  0.00001  γ  2  0.17901  0.05073  0.21587  0.07644  0.30621  0.01034  0.08238  0.09320  0.03338  0.63029  0.01862  0.46385  0.00006  0.91989  0.33795  0.20801  ξ  (skew.)  0.85192  0.83317  0.80222  0.89056  0.81522  0.87085  0.92185  1.13212  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  υ  (shape)  11.73223  10.13238  6.04081  5.43739  6.06003  4.51676  5.06490  5.48191  0.01179  0.00788  0.00003  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00001  0.00000   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## Copula-DCC parameters

| Distribution  Octovariate t-Student  DCC order  DCC(1.1)  Parameters  c  1  0.01063 (  0.00012  )  d  1  0.94801 (  0.00000  )  η  (shape)  9.96436 (  0.00000  )   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Probability values (p-values) are in parentheses.

Source: Author's own calculation.

Market regimes were identified by means of clustering weekly periods with respect to the conditional variances of the rates of return of the studied insurance companies. In this crucial - from the point of view of the whole study - step we considered various combinations of distance measures, clustering methods and number of classes. Eventually, led by criteria of clustering quality (cf. Table 3) we chose a division into two classes obtained using the method of k-means with the Euclidean distance (cf. Fig. 4). In this case the silhouette index is 0.8683 (clustering quality is pictured in Fig. 5). We assumed therafter that to different classes there correspond different market regimes. The variance distribution in different regimes is shown in Fig. 6. From it we can infer that the first regime is characterized by a low volatility (low risk level),  while  the  second  one,  occurring  during  the  period  17.10.2008-05.06.2009  -  a  high volatilty (high risk level).

Figure 3. Conditional variances

<!-- image -->

Source: Author's own calculation.

Table 3. Validation indices for data partitions

| Validation criterion  Number of clusters  2  3  4  5  6  Ward's method  Silhouette  0.8683  0.4202  0.3958  0.3987  0.3986  Calinski Harabasz index  1545.1570  1006.8530  771.5901  963.3596  814.7552  Dunn index  0.0552  0.0080  0.0080  0.0110  0.0110  Xie-Beni index  1.9208  76.1650  68.5520  45.4610  43.3223  PAM  Silhouette  0.8623  0.4788  0.4153  0.4181  0.1549  Calinski Harabasz index  1501.2950  1036.3830  791.2769  990.6590  809.8822  Dunn index  0.0353  0.0082  0.0077  0.0104  0.0053  Xie-Beni index  4.1444  66.2503  72.2987  47.7384  177.4645  k-means  Silhouette  0.8683  0.5238  0.5177  0.4713  0.4394  Calinski Harabasz index  1545.1570  1063.6570  1170.1440  1047.2740  915.3568  Dunn index  0.0552  0.0071  0.0106  0.0146  0.0127  Xie-Beni index  1.9208  92.8171  62.4426  28.7042  34.8416   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Source : Author's own calculation.

Note:  numbers in bold indicate the optimal number of groups with reference to a given criterion.

Figure 4. Identified market regimes

<!-- image -->

Source : Author's own calculation

Figure 5. Silhouette plot

<!-- image -->

Source : Author's own calculation.

Figure 6. Distribution of the conditional variance in the identified market regimes

<!-- image -->

Source

:

Author's own calculation.

In the second step of our studies the analysis of the dependances between the studied insurance  companies  was  done  based  on  the  conditional  correlations  from  the  previously assessed octovariate copula-DCC-GARCH model. Their distribution for the respective pairs in the identified market regimes is shown in Figure 7.

On  the  other  hand,  the  analysis  of  the  dependances  between  the  insurer  and  the European insurance market, as well as the analysis of systemic risk in the first and second market  regime  was  carried  out  on  the  basis  of  the  estimated  eight  bivariate  copula-DCCGARCH models for the following pairs: the rate of return on the European market index and the individual rate of return for the given insurance company. In the case of the insurers we were working with the earlier estimated   ARMA(1,1)-eGARCH(2,2) models with the skew Student distribution. On the grounds of information criteria and model appropriateness tests we considered the same specification for the STOXX 600 Europe Insurance index rate of return. The parameters of the estimated model are given in Table 4. During the analysis of the dynamics between the rate of return on the index representing the European insurance market and the insurers' rates of return, we were considering the Gauss and Student copulae as well as various specifications of the DCC model. On the basis of information criteria for each pair we chose the  Student  copula  with  conditional  correlations  obtained  from  the  DCC(1,  1)  model  and constant  shape  parameters.  The  estimation  results  are  presented  in  Table  5,  while  the conditional  correlations  obtained  are  shown  in  Figure  8.  Finally,  the  distribution  of  the conditional correlations between the domestic and European capital markets in the identifie regimes is given in Figure 9.

The systemic risk assessment in the identified market regimes was performer using the CoVaR measure determined by the method described in the previous section. The CoVaR value distribution illustrating the influence of a given insurer on the European insurance market is shown in Figure 10.

Figure 7. Distribution of the conditional correlations between analyzed markets in the identified regimes

<!-- image -->

Source

: Author's own study

Table 4. Univariate ARAM(1,1)- eGARCH(2,2) model estimations for the STOXX 600 Europe Insurance index

| Parameter  μ  φ  1  θ  1  ω  α  1  α  2  estimation  0.00086  0.68392  -0.72741  -0.20234  -0.25814  0.16812  p-Value  0.35844  0.00000  0.00000  0.00221  0.00003  0.00570  Parameter  β  1  β  2  γ  1  γ  2  ξ  (skew.)  υ  (shape)  estimation  1.00000  -0.02848  0.09708  0.05358  0.79261  9.87665  p-Value  0.00000  0.00691  0.35870  0.60707  0.00000  0.00438   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Source

: Author's own calculations

Table 5. Bivariate DCC(1, 1) models estimations for the pairs: STOXX 600 Europe Insurance and a given insurer

| AXA  Allianz  Prud  Legal  Aviva  Metlife  Manu  Ping  c  1  0.02513  0.02159  0.03199  0.04218  0.02631  0.07105  0.03338  0.00942  0.04014  0.01083  0.02421  0.00990  0.00191  0.02998  0.08039  0.73776  d  1  0.95214  0.96262  0.94015  0.92320  0.96805  0.72663  0.90777  0.85545  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00000  0.00027  0.00000  0.32845  η  (shape)  6.85867  11.11860  8.13343  7.99758  6.31898  16.80825  7.86310  15.97758  0.00026  0.00241  0.00000  0.00012  0.00000  0.10873  0.00122  0.14136   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Source:

Author's own calculations

Figure  8.  Conditional  correlations  between  the  insurer  and  the  European  insurance market

<!-- image -->

Source :

Author's own calculation.

Figure  9.  Distribution  of  the  conditional  correlations  between  the  insurer  and  the European insurance market in the identified regimes

<!-- image -->

Źródło : Opracowanie własne

Figure 10. Distribution of the CoVaR measure in the identified regimes

<!-- image -->

Source

: Author's own work

## 5. Conclusions

In this work we used the copula-DCC-GARCH model to analyze the dependances in the group formed by the largest five insurance companies from Europe and the biggest insurers from the USA, Canada and China. Then, availing ourselves of the CoVaR measure we studied the influence of each insurer on the European insurance market systemic risk. The European market was represented by the STOXX 600 Europe Insurance index, while for the insurers we considered their quotations on domestic markets. The study was performer in two steps. The first one consisted in identifying the regimes of the European insurance market, while in the second one, we analyzed - for the identified regimes - the following items: the correlations (usisng conditional correlations) between the considered insurance companies, the dependances between a given insurer and the European insurance market as well as the influence  of the studied  insurance  companies  on  the  European  insurance  market  systemic  risk.  The  market regimes were identified by monitoring the insurers' logarithmic returns on shares. To this aim we applied statistical clustering methods for weekly periods to which we were assigning the conditional variances obtained from the estimated octovariate  copula-DCC-GARCH model. Both,  the  clustering  quality  measures  and  the  possibility  of  a  reasonable  economical intepretation exposed two different market regimes in the considered period of time: a regime of low volatility (1st regime - `normal') and a regime of unstable quotations (2nd regime `risk')  that  appeared  during  the  time  of  the  biggest  turbulences  experienced  by  the  global markets.

We can draw the following conclusions from our study:

-  The  insurance  companies  from  the  investigated  group  are  positively  correlated.  The strongest dependance is to be seen among the insurers from Europe (Axa and Allianz are the pair with the strongest tie), a somewhat weaker dependance exists between the insurers from Europe and those from North America, while the weakest is between the insurer from China and  the  remaining  ones.  These  correlations  are  clearly  stronger  in  the  second  identified regime, i.e. during the turbulences on global markets period (cf. Fig. 7). On that basis we can state that during a global crisis the exposure to systemic risk on the European insurance market increases.
-  The European insurance market as represented by the STOXX 600 Europe Insurance index is  most  strongly  correlated  to  the  largest  insurance  companies  from  Europe,  i.e.  Axa  or Allianz, a weaker correlation exists in the case of insurers from North America and a notably

- weaker still in the case of the insurer from China 2 (cf. Fig. 8). As earlier, these correlations are sronger in the second market regime (cf. Fig. 9).
-  There  is  an  important  difference  between  the CoVaR measures  for  the  first  and  second regimes of the European insurance market in the case of all the insurers from the studied group. The influence of insurance companies on systemic risk is much stronger during the turbulences period (cf. Fig. 10). It is also apparent that in a fixed regime this influence is more or less at the same level, which in the case of the insurer from China is somewhat lower than average.
-  The influence of insurance companies from North America on the European inurance market systemic risk is at a comparative level with the influence of companies from Europe, both in the first and second identified market regimes.

## References

- Acharya, V. V., Pedersen, L. H., Philippon, T.,  Richardson, M. P. [2010], Measuring Systemic Risk , SSRN Electronic Journal, doi:10.2139/ssrn.1573171
- Baluch, F., Mutenga, S., &amp; Parsons, C. [2011], Insurance, Systemic Risk and the Financial Crisis , The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance - Issues and Practice ,36 (1), 126-163. doi:10.1057/gpp.2010.40
- Barrieu,  P.,  Scandolo,  G.  [2014], Assessing  financial  model  risk ,  European  Journal  of  Operational Research, online, 1-30
- Baur, P., Enz, R., Zanetti, A.,[2003], Reinsurance-A Systemic Risk? Report
- Bednarczyk,.T. [2013], Czy sektor ubezpieczeniowy kreuje ryzyko systemowe? ,  (in  Polish, Does the insurance sector generate systemic risk? ) Studia Oeconomica Posnaniensia,  11 (260), 7-17
- Bell,  M.,  Keller,  B.,  [2009], Insurance  and  Stability:  The  Reform  of  Insurance  Regulation ,  Zurich Financial Services Group Working Paper.
- Berdin,  E.,  Sottocornola,  M.,  [2015], Assessing  Systemic  Risk  of  the  European  Insurance  Industry, Financial Stability Report, EIOPA, 57-75
- Bernal, O., Gnabo, J.-Y., Guilmin, G., [2014], Assessing the contribution of banks, insurance and other financial services to systemic risk, Journal of Banking &amp; Finance 47, 270-287
- Bernardi,  M.,  Catania,  L.,  [2015], Switching  GAS  Copula  Models  for  Systemic  Risk  Assessment , arXiv:1504.03733v1 [stat.ME]

Bierth, C., Irresberger, F., Weiß, G. N. F., [2015], Systemic risk of insurers around the globe . Journal of Banking &amp; Finance, 55, 232-245. doi:10.1016/j.jbankfin.2015.02.014

2 It should be noted here that these results may be biased to some extend by the construction of the STOXX 600 Europe Insurance index

- Billio, M., Getmansky, M., Lo, A. W., Pelizzon, L. [2012], Econometric measures of connectedness and systemic risk in the finance and insurance sectors , Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3), 535-559, doi:10.1016/j.jfineco.2011.12.010
- Brechmann, C., Hendrich, K., Czado, C., [2013], Conditional copula simulation for systemic risk stress testing , Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, Vol. 53, Issue 3, 722-732
- Calinski, T., Harabasz, J., [1974], A dendrite method for cluster analysis , Communications in Statistics, 3 (1), 1-27
- Chen,  H.,  Cummins,  J.  D.,  Viswanathan,  K.  S.,  Weiss,  M.  A.  [2013], Systemic  Risk  and  the Interconnectedness  Between  Banks  and  Insurers:  An  Econometric  Analysis , Journal  of  Risk  and Insurance , 81 (3), 623-652. doi:10.1111/j.1539-6975.2012.01503.x
- Cummins, J. D., Weiss, M. A. [2014a], Systemic Risk and The U.S. Insurance Sector , Journal of Risk and Insurance , 81 (3), 489-528. doi:10.1111/jori.12039
- Cummins, J. D., Weiss, M. A., [2014b], Systemic Risk and Regulation of the U.S. Insurance Industry , Journal of Risk and Insurance, SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2400577
- Czerwińska, T. [2014], Systemic risk in the insurance sector, Problemy Zarządzania , 12 (48), 41-63. doi:10.7172/1644-9584.48.3
- Di Bernardino, E., Fernández-Ponce, J. M., Palacios-Rodríguez, F., Rodríguez-Griñolo, M. R., [2015], On multivariate extensions of the conditional Value-at-Risk measure , Insurance: Mathematics and Economics Vol. 61, 1-16
- Di Clemente, A., [2018], Estimating the marginal contribution to systemic risk by a CoVar-model based on copula functions and extreme value theory , Economic Notes by Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena SpA, vol. 47 no. 1, 69-112
- Doman, R., [2011], Zastosowanie kopuli w modelowaniu dynamiki zależności na rynkach finansowych (in  Polish, Application  of  copula  in  modelling  the  dynamic  dependence  on  financial  markets ), Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Ekonomicznego w Poznaniu, Poznań
- Dungey, M., Luciani, M., Veredas, D.,  [2014], The  Emergence  of  Systemically  Important  Insurers , SSRN Electronic Journal
- Dunn, C. J., [1974], Well-separated clusters and optimal fuzzy partitions , Journal of Cybernetics 4,  95104
- Eling, M., Pankoke, D., [2014], Systemic risk in the insurance sector - what do we know ,  Working Papers on management and risk insurance, University of St Gallen
- European Systemic Risk Board, [2015], Report on systemic risks in the EU insurance sector , December 2015
- Geneva Association, [2010], Systemic risk in insurance: an analysis of insurance and financial stability , Technical  report,  Special  Report  of  The  Geneva  Association  Systemic  Risk  Working  Group, Switzerland

- Grace, M. F., [2011], The Insurance Industry and Systemic Risk: Evidence and Discussion, Working Paper
- Harrington,  S.  E.  [2009], The  Financial  Crisis,  Systemic  Risk,  and  the  Future  of  Insurance Regulation , Journal of Risk and Insurance , 76 (4), 785-819. doi:10.1111/j.1539-6975.2009.01330.x IAIS, [2011], Insurance and financial stability,
- Jobst,  A.  A.  [2014], Systemic  Risk  in  the  Insurance  Sector:  A  Review  of  Current  Assessment Approaches , The  Geneva  Papers  on  Risk  and  Insurance  -  Issues  and  Practice, 39 (3),  440-470. doi:10.1057/gpp.2013.7
- Joe, H., [1997], Multivariate models and dependence concepts , Chapman-Hall, London
- Kanno, M., [2016], The network structure and systemic risk in the global non-life insurance market, Insurance: Mathematics and Economics 67, 38-53,
- Karimalis, E. N., Nomikos, N. K., [2018], Measuring systemic risk in the European banking sector: a copula CoVar approach , The European Journal of Finance vol. 24 issue 11, 944-975
- Kaufman, L., Rousseeuw, P. J., [1990], Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction to Cluster Analysis , New York: Wiley &amp;Sons
- Kessler, D., [2013], Why (Re)insurance is Not Systemic, Journal of Risk and Insurance, vol. 81, Issue 3, 477-488
- van Lelyveld, I., Liedorp, F., Kampman, M., [2011], An Empirical Assessment of Reinsurance Risk, Journal of Financial Stability, vol. 7, issue 4, 191-203
- Mühlnickel J., Weiß, G. N. F., [2014], Why do some insurers become systemically relevant? , Journal of Financial Stability, 13, 95-117
- Mühlnickel, J., Weiß, G. N. F., [2015], Consolidation and systemic risk in the international insurance industry, Journal of Financial Stability 18, 187-202
- Nelson, D. B., [1991], Conditional Heteroskedasticity in Asset Returns:  A  New  Approach , Econometrica, 59, 347-370
- Oh, D. H., Patton, A. J., [2018], Time-varying systemic risk: evidence from a dynamic copula model of CDS spreads , Journal of Business and Economic Statistics vol. 36 issue 2, 181-195
- Patton, A. J., [2006], Modelling asymmetric exchange rate , International Economic Review,  47,  527556
- Radice, M. P., [2010], Systemische Risiken im Versicherungssektor? FINMA Working Pape
- Reboredo, J. C., Ugolini, A., [2015], Systemic risk in European sovereign debt markets: A CoVaRcopula approach , Journal of International Money and Finance Vol. 51, 214-244
- Wanat,  S.,  [2012], Modele  zależności  w  agregacji  ryzyka  ubezpieczyciela ,  (in  Polish, Dependance models in insurer's risk aggregation ) Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Ekonomicznego w Krakowie, Kraków
- Schwarcz, D., Schwarcz, S. L., [2014], Regulating Systemic Risk in Insurance , 81 University of Chicago Law Review, 1569-1640

| Tang, Q., Yang, F., [2012], On the Haezendonck-Goovaerts risk measure for extreme risks , Insurance: Mathematics and Economics vol. 50, Issue 1, 217-227  Xie, X., Beni, G., [1991], Validity measure for fuzzy clustering , IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 13, 841-847  Cracow University of Economics  Department of Mathematics  Rakowicka 27  31-510 Kraków  Poland  wanats@uek.krakow.pl, anna.denkowska@uek.krakow.pl   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|