## Normal approximation for functions of hidden Markov models

Christian Houdr´ e ∗

George Kerchev †

October 12, 2020

## Abstract

The generalized perturbative approach is an all purpose variant of Stein's method used to obtain rates of normal approximation. Originally developed for functions of independent random variables this method is here extended to functions of the realization of a hidden Markov model. In this dependent setting, rates of convergence are provided in some applications, leading, in each instance, to an extra log-factor vis a vis the rate in the independent case.

AMS Mathematics Subject Classification 2010: 60F05, 60K35, 60D05.

Key words: Stein's Method, Markov Chains, Generalized Perturbative Approach, Normal Approximation, Stochastic Geometry.

## 1 Introduction

Let X = ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) be a random vector with coordinates in a Polish space E and let f : E n → R be a measurable function such that f ( X ) is square integrable. For a large class of such functions f it is expected that as n grows without bound, f ( X ) behaves like a normal random variable. To quantify such estimates one is interested in bounding the distance between f ( X ) and N ∼ N ( m f , σ 2 f ) where m f = E [ f ( X )] and σ 2 f = V ar ( f ( X )). Two such distances of interest are the Kolmogorov distance

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∗ School of Mathematics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332-0160, USA.

Email: houdre@math.gatech.edu. Research supported in part by the grant # 524678 from the Simons Foundation.

† Universit´ e du Luxembourg, Unit´ e de Recherche en Math´ ematiques, Maison du Nombre, 6 Avenue de la Fonte, L-4364 Esch-sur-Alzette, Grand Duch´ e du Luxembourg.

Email: gkerchev@gmail.com. Research partially supported by TRIAD NSF grant (award 1740776) and the FNR grant APOGee at Luxembourg University (R-AGR-3585-10-C).

and the Wasserstein distance

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where this last supremum is taken over real valued functions h such that | h ( x ) -h ( y ) | ≤ | x -y | , for all x, y ∈ R .

When the components of X are independent random variables upper bounds on d W ( f ( X ) , N ) were first obtained in [1] and these were extended to d K ( f ( X ) , N ) in [12]. Both results rely on a class of difference operators that will be described in Section 2.

Very few results address the (weakly) dependent case, and in the present work we provide estimates on d K ( f ( X ) , N ) and d W ( f ( X ) , N ) when X is generated by a hidden Markov model. Such a model is of interest from its many applications in fields such as computational biology and speech recognition, see, e.g., [6]. Recall that a hidden Markov model ( Z, X ) consists of a Markov chain Z = ( Z 1 , . . . , Z n ) which emits the observed variables X = ( X 1 , . . . , X n ). The possible states in Z are each associated with a distribution on the values of X . In other words the observation X is a mixture model where the choice of the mixture component for each observation depends on the component of the previous observation. The mixture components are given by the sequence Z . Note also that given Z , X is a Markov chain.

To briefly describe the content of the paper, Section 2 contains a short overview of results on normal approximation in the independent setting and introduces a simple transformation involving iid random variables allowing to adapt these estimates to the hidden Markov model. By exploiting the structure of this construction, we develop further quantitative bounds in Section 3, for the special case when f is a Lipschitz function. Finally, applications to variants of the ones analyzed in [1] and [12], are developed in Section 4, leading to an extra log-factor in the various rates obtained there.

## 2 Normal approximation via Stein's method

Let W := f ( X ). Originally in [1], and then in [12], various bounds on the distance between W and the normal distribution are obtained through a variant of Stein's method. As is well known, Stein's method is a way to obtain normal approximation based on the observation that the standard normal distribution N is the only, centered and unit variance, distribution that satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all absolutely continuous g with a.e. derivative g ′ such that E | g ′ ( N ) | &lt; ∞ , [3], and for the random variable W , | E [ Wg ( W ) -g ′ ( W )] | can be thought of as a distance measuring the proximity of W to N . In particular, for the Kolmogorov distance, the solutions g t to the differential equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

are absolutely continuous with a.e. derivative such that E | g ′ t ( N ) | &lt; ∞ , [3]. Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further properties of the solutions g t (see [12]) allow for upper bounds on E [ g ′ t ( W ) -Wg t ( W )] using difference operators associated with W introduced in [1]. This is coined as the generalized perturbative approach in [2], and it is described next. First, we recall the perturbations used to bound the right-hand side of (2.1) in [1] and [12]. Let X ′ = ( X ′ 1 , . . . , X ′ n ) be an independent copy of X and let W ′ = f ( X ′ ). Then ( W,W ′ ) is an exchangeable pair since it has the same joint distribution as ( W ′ , W ). A perturbation W A = f A ( X ) := f ( X A ) of W is defined through the change X A of X as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any A ⊆ [ n ] := { 1 , . . . , n } , including A = ∅ . With these definitions, still following [1], difference operators are defined for any ∅ ⊆ A ⊆ [ n ] and i / ∈ A , as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and for k n,A = 1 / ( n | A | ) ( n -| A | ), set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now for W = f ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) such that E [ W ] = 0, 0 &lt; σ 2 = E [ W 2 ] &lt; ∞ , and assuming all the expectations below are finite, the following result is proved, for d W , in [1, Theorem 2.2]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

while, for d K , [12, Theorem 4.2] yields:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in both cases N is now a standard normal random variable.

Our main abstract result generalize (2.2) and (2.3) to the case when X is generated by a hidden Markov model. It is as follows:

Moreover, set Proposition 2.1. Let ( Z, X ) be a hidden Markov model with Z an aperiodic time homogeneous and irreducible Markov chain with finite state space S , and X taking values in a non-empty finite A . Let W := f ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) with E [ W ] = 0 and 0 &lt; σ 2 = E [ W 2 ] &lt; ∞ . Then, there exist a finite sequence of independent random variables R = ( R 0 , R 1 , . . . , R |S| ( n -1) ) , with R i taking values in S × A , for i = 0 , . . . , | S | ( n -1) , and a measurable function h : ( S × A ) | S | ( n -1)+1 -→ R such that h ( R 0 , . . . , R |S| ( n -1) ) and f ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) are identically distributed. Therefore:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

At a first glance the above results might appear to be simple corollaries to (2.2) and (2.3). Indeed, as well known, every Markov chain (in a Polish space) admits a representation via iid random variables U 1 , . . . , U n , uniformly distributed on (0 , 1) and the inverse distribution function. Therefore, f ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) d = h ( U 1 , . . . , U n ), for some function h , where, as usual, d = indicates equality in distribution. However, providing quantitative estimates for E | ∆ j h ( U 1 , . . . , U n ) | via f seems to be out of reach, since passing from f to h involves the 'unknown' inverse distribution function. For this reason, we develop, for our analysis, a more amenable, although more restrictive, choice of iid random variables described intuitively in the next paragraph and then again in greater details in Section 2.1.

Consider R = ( R 0 , . . . , R |S| ( n -1) ) as stacks of independent random variables on the |S| possible states of the hidden chain that determine the next step in the process, with R 0 specifying the initial state. Each R i takes values in S × A and is distributed according to the transition probability from the present hidden state. Then, one has f ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) d = h ( R 0 , . . . , R |S| ( n -1) ), for h = f ◦ γ , where the function γ translates between R and X , and where d = indicates equality in distribution. This construction is carried out in more details in the next section. Further note that when ( X i ) i ≥ 1 is a sequence of independent random variables, the hidden chain in the model consists of a single state and then the function γ is the identity function.

Remark 2.2. As observed in [4], the terms involving ∆ i h ( R ) in (2.4) and (2.5) can be removed, leaving only the variance terms. Here is a different way to establish this fact. Indeed, recall that the expressions on the right-hand side of (2.4) and (2.5) are bounds on terms of the form E | g ′ t ( W ) -g ′ t ( W ) T | + | E [ g t ( W ) W -g ′ t ( W ) T ] | , where | g ′ t | ≤ 1 and | g t ( W ) W -g ′ t ( W ) | = | 1 W ≤ t -P ( N ≤ t ) | ≤ 1 (see [12] and [2]). First, note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and Then, by the triangle inequality and the above,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, if E | g ′ t ( W ) -g ′ t ( W ) T | /σ 2 → 0 , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some constant C &gt; 0 that does not depend on n . Therefore, the asymptotic behavior of the bounds in (2.4) and (2.5) is given by the terms corresponding to E | g ′ t ( W ) -g ′ t ( W ) T | , i.e., the terms involving the variance. This modification of the method is also valid in our framework and would 'improve' our results. However, this has no really significant incidence on the rates obtained in our applications in Section 4, and so this will not be pursued here any further.

## 2.1 Construction of R

Let ( Z, X ) be a hidden Markov model with Z an aperiodic time homogeneous and irreducible Markov chain on a finite state space S , and X taking values in an alphabet A . Let P be transition matrix of the hidden chain and let Q be the |S|×|A| probability matrix for the observations, i.e., Q ij is the probability of seeing output j if the latent chain is in state i . Let the initial distribution of the hidden chain be µ . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next we introduce a sequence of independent random variables R 0 , . . . , R |S| ( n -1) taking values in S × A and a function γ such that γ ( R 0 , . . . , R |S| ( n -1) ) = ( Z 1 , . . . , Z n ; X 1 , . . . , X n ). For any s, s ′ ∈ S , x ∈ A and i ∈ { 0 , . . . , n -1 } , let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The random variables R i are well defined since ∑ x Q s,x = 1 , for any s ∈ S , and ∑ s P s ′ ,s = ∑ s µ ( s ) = 1 , for any s ′ ∈ S . One can think of the variables R i as a set of instructions indicating where the hidden Markov model goes next. The function γ reconstructs the realization ( Z i , X i ) i ≥ 1 sequentially from the sequence ( R i ) i ≥ 0 . In particular, γ captures the following relations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

One can also think of the sequence ( R i ) i ≥ 0 as |S| stacks of random variables on the S possible states of the latent Markov chain, and the values being rules for the next step in the model. Note that only one variable on the i th level of the stack will be used to determine the ( i +1)-st hidden and observed pair. Furthermore, the distribution of the random variables R i , for i ≥ 1 encodes the transition and output probabilities in the P and Q matrices of the original model.

Thus one can write f ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) = h ( R 0 , . . . , R |S| ( n -1) ), for h := f ◦ γ , where the function γ does the translation from ( R i ) i ≥ 0 to ( Z i , X i ) i ≥ 1 as described above. Let R ′ = ( R ′ 0 , . . . , R ′ |S| ( n -1) ) be an independent copy of R . Let A ⊆ { 0 , 1 , . . . , | S | ( n -1) } and let the change R A of R be defined as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where, as before, when A = { j } we write R j instead of R { j } . Recall that the 'discrete derivative' of h with a perturbation A is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then (2.4) and (2.5) follow from (2.2) and (2.3), respectively, since when ( Z, X ) is a hidden Markov model one writes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the sequence ( R i ) i ≥ 0 is a sequence of independent random variables.

Remark 2.3. (i) The idea for using stacks of independent random variables to represent a hidden Markov model is somehow reminiscent of Wilson's cycle popping algorithm for generating a random directed spanning tree, see [15]. The algorithm has also been related to loop-erased random walks in [9].

(ii) If S consists of a single state, making the hidden chain redundant, there is a single stack of instructions. This corresponds to the independent setting of [1] and [12], and then γ is just the identity function.

(iii) The same approach of using instructions is also applicable when A and S are countable. The Q s,x no longer form a finite matrix but the same definition holds as long as ∑ x ∈A Q s,x = 1 , for all s ∈ S . We need countably infinite independent instructions to encode ( Z i , X i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ n . In particular, let R 0 and ( R i,s ) 1 ≤ i ≤ n,s ∈S be such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the function γ reconstructs ( Z i , X i ) 1 ≤ i ≤ n from R 0 and ( R i,s ) 1 ≤ i ≤ n,s ∈S via

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3 Further quantitative bounds

In the present section several bounds on the quantities appearing on the right-hand side of (2.4) and (2.5) are presented, under some standard assumption on the underlying hidden Markov model. Furthermore, assuming a Lipschitz property for the function f in W := f ( X ), it is shown that up to a log factor, V ar ( f ( X )) is linearly upper-bounded in the size of X .

## 3.1 Bounds on ∆ i h

Again, let the latent chain in the hidden Markov model be irreducible and aperiodic, with finite state space S , and assume that it is started at the stationary distribution. Then there exist K ≥ 1, and ǫ ∈ (0 , 1), such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all n ≥ 1 and s, s ′ ∈ S . A simple corollary of these facts is the following lemma.

Lemma 3.1. Let K ≥ 1 and ǫ ∈ (0 , 1) be as in (3.1) and ( Z i ) i ≥ 1 be an irreducible and aperiodic Markov chain with finite state space S . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

for any t ≥ 1 , j ≥ 1 and ( s 1 , . . . , s t ) ∈ S t .

Proof. We show (3.2) by induction. The case t = 1 follows from (3.1). Next, for ( s 1 , . . . , s t +1 ) ∈ S t +1 ,

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

where we have used the Markov property, (3.1) and finally the induction hypothesis. This suffices for the proof of (3.2) and thus the proof of the lemma is complete.

The next result provides first a tail inequality from which moments can be estimated.

̸

Proposition 3.2. Let ( Z, X ) be a hidden Markov model as above and let K &gt; 0 and ǫ &gt; 0 be as in (3.1) . Let g : A n → R be Lipschitz, i.e., be such that | g ( x ) -g ( y ) | ≤ c ∑ n i =1 1 x i = y i , for every x, y ∈ A n , and where c &gt; 0 . Let R = ( R 0 , . . . , R | S | ( n -1) ) be a vector of independent random variables and h be the function such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

and thus,

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

Then, for R i , as defined in (2.6) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any x ∈ N , and where C &gt; 0 depends on the parameters of the model but neither on n nor on x . Then, for any r &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for n large enough and where ˜ C = ˜ C ( r ) .

Proof. The sequence of instructions R i may give rise to a different realization ( Z ′ , X ′ ) of the hidden Markov model, as compared to ( Z, X ) - the one generated by R . The two models are not independent. In particular, if instruction R i determines ( Z j , X j ) and R ′ i determines ( Z ′ j , X ′ j ) then ( Z k , X k ) = ( Z ′ k , X ′ k ) for k &lt; j . Let s be the smallest nonnegative integer (possibly s = ∞ ) such that Z j + s = Z ′ j + s . Then for any k &gt; j + s , ( Z k , X k ) = ( Z ′ k , X ′ k ) as well. Finally, if k ∈ { j, . . . , j + s -1 } , the pairs ( Z k , X k ) and ( Z ′ k , X ′ k ) are independent. We show next, that for K ≥ 1 as in (3.1), and any t ∈ N ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

Indeed,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By independence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

and thus by Lemma 3.1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as desired. Let E ( t ) be the event

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

Note that P ( E ( t )) ≤ P ( s ≥ tK ) ≤ (1 -ǫ ) t . In particular, if | h ( R ) -h ( R i ) | ≥ cx , where c &gt; 0 is the Lipschitz constant of g , then s ≥ x , as there are at least x positions k such that X k = X ′ k . Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

where C &gt; 0 depends on the parameters of the model but not on x . This suffices for the proof of (3.3). Next for (3.4), let E t be the event that | h ( R ) -h ( R i ) | ≥ tK . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall that | g ( x ) | ≤ cn , for all x ∈ A n , and then | h ( R ) -h ( R i ) | ≤ 2 cn . Using (3.6),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let t = -r ln n/ (ln(1 -ǫ )) &gt; 0. Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The order of the bound is optimal for t such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or

it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the right-hand side has the same order of growth as (3.8).

If the growth order of (1 -ǫ ) t is larger than the one in (3.9), the bound on the second term in (3.7) is of larger order as well.

Remark 3.3. Recall that in the independent setting, there is a single stack, or equivalently the state space of the latent chain consists of a single element. Then for s defined in the first paragraph of the above proof, P ( s &gt; 1) = 0 . Thus we can take tK = 2 , and since P ( E t ) ≤ P ( s ≥ tk ) = 0 , (3.7) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which recovers the independent case.

The proposition just proved leads to upper bounds on the central moments of g ( X ).

̸

Corollary 3.4. Let ( Z, X ) be a hidden Markov model as above. Let g : A n → R be such that | g ( x ) -g ( y ) | ≤ c ∑ n i =1 1 x i = y i , for all x, y ∈ A n and where c &gt; 0 . Then, for any r &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for n large enough and where C = C ( |S| , r ) .

Proof. As in Proposition 3.2 let R = ( R 0 , . . . , R |S| ( n -1) ) be a vector of independent random variables and h be a function such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let R ′ = ( R ′ 0 , . . . , R ′ |S| ( n -1) ) be an independent copy of R . Recall the generalization of the Efron-Stein inequality (see [11], [14]) for r ≥ 2

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and for r ∈ (0 , 2),

i

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with R defined as in Proposition 3.2. By Proposition 3.2 there is C &gt; 0, such that, for all r &gt; 0,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C ′ &gt; 0 is a function of | S | and r . Finally, note that g ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) d = h ( R ).

Remark 3.5. Note that the bound on the central moments also follows from using an exponential bounded difference inequality for Markov chains proved by Paulin [5]. This holds for the general case when X is a Markov chain (not necessarily time homogeneous), taking values in a Polish space Λ = Λ 1 ×···× Λ n , with mixing time τ min . Then for any t ≥ 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where f is such that

̸

for any x, y ∈ R n and some c ∗ = ( c 1 , . . . , c n ) ∈ R n , and where || c ∗ || 2 = ∑ n i =1 c 2 i .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3.2 Bounds on the variance terms in (2.4) and (2.5)

Let U := ∑ ∅⊆ A ⊊ [ | R | ] k | R | ,A U A / 2 for a general family of square-integrable random variables U A ( R,R ′ ). From [1, Lemma 4.4],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As in [12] this inequality will be used for both U A = T A ( h ) and U A = T ′ A ( h ). A major difference from the setting in [12, Section 5] is that the function h is not symmetric, i.e., if σ is a permutation of { 0 , . . . , | S | ( n -1) } , it is not necessarily the case that h ( R 0 , . . . , R | S | ( n -1) ) = h ( R σ (0) , . . . , R σ ( | R | ( n -1)) ). Indeed, each variable in R is associated with a transition at a particular step and from a particular state. Fix A ⊊ [ | R | ] and let ˜ R be another independent copy of R . Introduce the substitution operator

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall that from the Efron-Stein inequality,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ ∆ i U A ( R ) = U A ( ˜ S i ( R )) -U A ( R ). Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall also that U A = ∑ j / ∈ A ∆ j h ( R ) a (∆ j h ( X A )), where the function a is either the identity, or a ( · ) = | · | . Then

Fix 0 ≤ i ≤ | R | -1, and note that for j / ∈ A ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, using | ˜ ∆ i a ( · ) | ≤ | ˜ ∆ i ( · ) | , the summands in (3.11) are bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Y, Y ′ , Z, Z ′ are recombinations of R,R ′ , ˜ R , i.e., Y i ∈ { R i , R ′ i , ˜ R i } , for i ∈ [0 , | R | -1].

Next, as in [12], bound each type of summand appearing in (3.11).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If i = j = k and using ˜ ∆ i (∆ i ( · )) = ∆ i ( · ), (3.13) is bounded by

If i = j = k , switch ˜ R i and R ′ i , and Y is still a recombination. Then (3.13) is equal to

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

where the last step follows from the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. If i = j = k , (3.13) is equal to

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we have exchanged ˜ R i and R ′ i and used the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality as in (3.14).

Similarly if i = j = k , the bound is

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Finally, if i = k = j , the bound is by symmetry

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining (3.14), (3.15), (3.16) and (3.17) in (3.11) we finally get

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Then (3.10), leads to a bound on the conditional variance V ar ( E [ U | R ]), for U = T | R | ( h ) or U = T ′ | R | ( h ).

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

Proposition 3.6. With the notation as above and for U = T | R | ( h ) or U = T ′ | R | ( h ) :

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

Note again that function h is not symmetric and therefore the expression above cannot be simplified further in contrast to the case in [12].

## 4 Applications

Although our framework was initially motivated by [10] and finding a normal approximation result for the length of the longest common subsequences in dependent random words, some applications to stochastic geometry are presented below. Our methodology can be applied to other related settings, in particular the variant of the occupancy problem introduced in the recent article [8] (see Remark 4.6).

## 4.1 Covering process

Let ( K, K ) be the space of compact subsets of R d , endowed with the hit-and-miss topology. Let E n be a cube of volume n , and C 1 , . . . , C n be random variables in E n called germs . In the iid setting of [12] each C i is sampled uniformly and independently in E n , i.e., if T ⊂ E n with measure | T | ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, we consider C 1 , . . . , C n , generated by a hidden Markov model in the following way. Let Z 1 , . . . , Z n be an aperiodic irreducible Markov chain on a finite state space S . Each s ∈ S is associated with a measure m s on E n . Then for each measurable T ⊆ E n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume that there are constants 0 &lt; c m ≤ c M such that for any s ∈ S and measurable T ⊆ E n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that c m = c M = 1 recovers the setting of [12].

Let K 1 , . . . , K n be compact sets ( grains ) with V ol ( K i ) ∈ ( V 1 , V 2 ) (absolute constants) for i = 1 , . . . , n . Let X i = C i + K i for i = 1 , . . . , n be the germ-grain process. Consider the closed set formed by the union of the grains translated by the grain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i ∈ { 1 , . . . , n } .

We are interested in the volume covered by F n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the number of isolated grains

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Theorem 4.1. Let N be a standard normal random variable. Then, for all n ∈ N ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some constant C &gt; 0 , independent of n .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The study of the order of growth of V arf I and V arf V is not really the scope of the current paper. In the independent case, there are constants 0 &lt; c V ≤ C V , such that c V n ≤ V arf V ≤ C V n , and c V n ≤ V arf I ≤ C V n , for n sufficiently large (see [13, Theorem 4.4]). In our dependent setting a variance lower bound of order n will thus provide a rate of order (log n ) 4 / √ n .

Proof. Write f V ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) = h ( R 0 , . . . , R |S| ( n -1) ) for a set of instructions R defined as in Section 2.1. The volume of each grain is bounded by V 2 , so f V is Lipschitz with constant V 2 . Proposition 2.1 holds, and from Proposition 3.2, the non-variance terms in the bounds in Proposition 2.1 are bounded by C (ln n ) 3 / √ n . Here and below, C is a constant, independent of n , which can vary from line to line. Indeed, for instance,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To analyze the bound on the variance terms given by Proposition 3.6 first note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

using Proposition 3.2. Next, we analyze

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Let E be the event that at least one of the perturbations of the instructions in (4.4) yields a difference in more than K points. By Proposition 3.2, there is ǫ &gt; 0, such that P ( E ) ≤ (1 -ǫ ) K . Then, by the Lipschitz properties of h ,

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

If S ( Y ) is the set of points generated by the instructions Y and S ( Y i ) -the set of points generated by Y after the perturbation of Y i , let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ is the symmetric difference operator. Similarly, let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that, conditioned on E c , | S i | ≤ 2 K for i = 1 , 2 , 3 , 4. Furthermore, if s 1 ∩ s 2 = ∅ , for all ( s 1 , s 2 ) ∈ ( S 1 , S 2 ), then ∆ i,j h ( Y ) = 0. Then

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This bound is meaningful if the sets S 1 and S 2 are disjoint sets of random variables. Conditioned on E c , this is the case if | i -j | ≥ | R | K . We introduce events E 1 , E 2 and E 3 corresponding to 0 , 1, or 2 of the conditions {| i -j | ≤ | R | K, | j -k | ≤ | R | K } holding, respectively. The events E 1 , E 2 , and E 3 are deterministic. Then,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Then, for the term with 1 E 3 ,

̸

̸

̸

̸

To bound E [ 1 s 1 ∩ s 2 = ∅ ,s 3 ∩ s 4 = ∅ ], condition on s 2 , s 3 and the values of all hidden variables H . Then, since S 1 and S 4 are disjoint we have independence,

̸

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

Therefore,

Next, as before,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

for some C &gt; 0, independent of K and n , and where we have used that | S i | ≤ 2 K for i = 1 , 2 , 3 , 4.

Finally, for the term with E 2 , we may assume that | i -j | ≥ | R | K , since the case | j -k | ≥ | R | K is identical. Write, using the trivial bound on 1 ∆ j,k h ( Y ′ ) = 0,

̸

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

Then, combining (4.5), (4.6), (4.8) and (4.7), we get the following bound of (4.4),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

when we choose K = c ln n for a suitable c &gt; 0, independent of n . Similarly,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

The bounds on the variance terms in Proposition 3.6 become

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

̸

Then, (4.1) follows from (4.9), (4.3) and Theorem 2.1.

The proof of (4.2) is more involved since the function f I is not Lipschitz. Write, abusing notation, f I ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) = h ( R 0 , . . . , R | S | ( n -1) ) for a set of instructions R as in Section 2.1. Proposition 2.1 holds and, like our analysis for f V , we proceed by estimating the non-variance terms in the bounds. We first prove that, for any t = 1 , 2 , . . . and i ∈ { 0 , . . . , | S | ( n -1) } ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where C = C ( t ) &gt; 0.

As in the proof of Proposition 3.2, the sequence of instructions R i may give rise to a different realization ( Z ′ , X ′ ). Indeed, if instruction R i determines ( Z j , X j ) and R ′ i determines ( Z ′ j , X ′ j ), it is possible that ( Z j , X j ) = ( Z ′ j , X ′ j ). Let s ≥ 0 be the smallest integer (possibly s = ∞ ) such that Z j + s = Z ′ j + s . Then, as in (3.5), there is ǫ &gt; 0, such that for K ∈ N ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fix K , and let E be the event, corresponding to { s ≥ K } . Using the trivial bound | h ( R ) | ≤ n , and thus | ∆ i h ( R ) | ≤ 2 n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let S ( R ) be the set of points generated by the sequence of instructions R , and S ( R j ) - be the points generated by R after the perturbation of R j . Set S = S ( R )∆ S ( R j ) for the symmetric difference and S c = S ( R ) ∩ S ( R j ). Note that E c implies that | S | ≤ 2 K . Furthermore,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Identify the set ( s j , x ℓ ) j,ℓ ∈{ 1 ,...,t } with the edges of the graph G , whose vertices correspond to ( s j ) j ∈{ 1 ,...,t } and ( x ℓ ) ℓ ∈{ 1 ,...,t } . In particular, if s j 1 = s j 2 , for some j 1 = j 2 , we identify them with the same point in the graph G . Conditioned on the realization of the hidden chain Z , we have independence. Then, if G is a tree, fix a root and condition recursively on vertices at different distances from the root. By the restrictions on the volume of the grain and the sampling distribution,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

To estimate (4.11), we need to evaluate E [ ∏ t j,ℓ =1 1 s j ∩ x ℓ = ∅ ], and to do so we proceed as in [12] by studying the shape of the relations of ( s j , x ℓ ) j,ℓ ∈{ 1 ,...,t } .

̸

and where | E ( G ) | is the number of edges in the graph G . Furthermore,

̸

Note that the same result holds if G is a graph without cycles, i.e., a collection of disjoint trees. In general, G might have cycles. Let T be a subgraph of G that contains no cycles. Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where the product on the right-hand side runs over the edges e = ( e 1 , e 2 ) of the graph T , with e 1 ∈ S and e 2 ∈ S c . Let | s | be the number of distinct vertices in ( s 1 , . . . , s t ), and similarly let | x | be the number for ( x 1 , . . . , x t ). The graph G is complete bipartite with | s | + | x | vertices. We can find a subgraph T of G , also with | s | + | x | vertices and no cycles. Then,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where C t &gt; 0 is a constant depending on t , and where we have used that | S | ≤ 2 K and | S c | ≤ 2 n .

Letting K = c ln n , for a suitable c &gt; 0, (4.11) implies (4.10) as desired. Therefore, for the non-variance term in Proposition 2.1, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We are left to analyze the bound on the variance terms given by Proposition 3.6. First, note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

Next, we analyze

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the supremum is taken over recombinations Y, Y ′ , Z, Z ′ of R,R ′ , ˜ R . As before, let E be the event that all perturbations of instructions in (4.13) propagate at most K levels. We have that P ( E c ) ≤ (1 -ǫ ) K , for some ǫ ∈ (0 , 1). Using the trivial bound | h ( Y ) | ≤ n ,

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

Let S ( Y i ) be the set of points generated by the sequence of instructions Y after the perturbation of Y i . Let S be the set of all points in the expectation above, and furthermore let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ is the symmetric difference operator. Conditioned on E , | S i | ≤ 2 K , for i = 1 , . . . , 6 and | S | ≤ 10 n .

Conditioned on E , if j -i ≤ | R | K , the perturbation in i might be propagating past the position, corresponding to instruction j , leading to difficulties in the analysis of ∆ i,j h ( Y ). This is why, we condition further on the events E 1 , E 2 , E 3 corresponding to respectively 0 , 1 , or 2 of the conditions {| i -j | ≥ | R | K, | j -k | ≥ | R | K } holding true. Note that E 1 , E 2 and E 3 are deterministic.

̸

If E 1 holds, use the trivial bound 1 ∆ i,j h ( Y ) =0 , ∆ j,k h ( Y ′ ) =0 ≤ 1, leading to

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

using the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.

Conditioned on E 3 , the sets S 1 , S 2 ∪ S 3 and S 4 are pairwise disjoint. Next, in similarity to an argument presented in [12], if s 1 ∩ s = ∅ and s 2 ∩ s = ∅ , for all ( s 1 , s 2 , s ) ∈ ( S 1 , S 2 , S ), then ∆ i,j h ( Y ) = 0. Therefore,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

and also

Furthermore,

̸

̸

̸

̸

and

Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

where S 56 = S 5 ∪ S 6 and | S 56 | ≤ 4 K , conditioned on E .

Then, if we further condition on the values of the hidden variables H , we get, by independence,

To evaluate the summand expression we use the graph representation. Let E ℓ be the event that there are ℓ distinct points among s ′ , s ′′ , s ′ 5 , . . . , s ′ 8 , different from s 1 , . . . , s 8 . Note that ℓ ∈ [0 , 6]. Conditioned on E ℓ , we can find a subgraph with no cycles and ℓ +2 edges, of the graph with edges {{ s 1 , s ′ } , { s 2 , s ′ } , { s 3 , s ′′ } , { s 4 , s ′′ }} ∪ {{ s a , s ′ b } : a, b ∈ [5 , 8] } . Indeed, note that there are at least 3 different points among s 1 , . . . , s 4 . Next, if there are x points present among s ′ , s ′′ and ℓ -x points among s ′ 5 , . . . , s ′ 8 , we can find a subgraph with no cycles with at least ℓ -x edges among {{ s a , s ′ b } : a, b ∈ [5 , 8] } and x +2 edges among {{ s 1 , s ′ } , { s 2 , s ′ } , { s 3 , s ′′ } , { s 4 , s ′′ }} .

̸

̸

̸

̸

Then, (4.16) is further bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some C &gt; 0, independent of n and K . Finally, assume that E 2 holds and that | i -j | ≥ | R | K . The case | j -k | ≥ | R | K is

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

and

̸

̸

identical. As above, using the trivial bound 1 ∆ j,k h ( Y ′ ) =0 ≤ 1,

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

Then, if we condition on E ℓ and the values of the hidden variables H , we get

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

since in this case s 1 and s 2 are distinct and we can find a subgraph with ℓ +1 edges and no cycles.

Then, (4.18) is bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some C &gt; 0.

We get the following bound on B | R | ( h ) using (4.14), (4.15), (4.19), and (4.17),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

where we have chosen K = c ln n for a suitable c &gt; 0, independent of n . Finally, similar arguments yield, as in the case for f V ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

The bounds on the variance terms in Proposition 3.6 become

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, (4.2) follows from (4.20), (4.12) and Proposition 2.1.

## 4.2 Set approximation with random tessellations.

Let K ⊆ [0 , 1] d be compact, and X be a finite collection of points in K . The Voronoi reconstruction, or the Voronoi approximation, of K based on X is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For x ∈ [0 , 1] d , denote by V ( x ; X ) the Voronoi cell with nucleus x among X , as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( X,x ) = X ∪ { x } , and where, as usual, || · || is the Euclidean norm in R d . The volume approximation of interest is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In [12], X = ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) is a vector of n iid random variables uniformly distributed on [0 , 1] d . Here, we consider X 1 , . . . , X n , generated by a hidden Markov model in the following way. Let Z 1 , . . . , Z n be an aperiodic irreducible Markov chain on a finite state space S . Each s ∈ S is associated with a measure m s on [0 , 1] d . Then for each measurable T ⊆ [0 , 1] d ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume, moreover, that there are constants 0 &lt; c m ≤ c M , such that for any s ∈ S and measurable T ⊆ [0 , 1] n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall the notions of Lebesgue-boundary of K given by

∂K := { x ∈ [0 , 1] d : V ol ( B ( x, ǫ ) ∩ K ) &gt; 0 and V ol ( B ( x, ǫ ) ∩ K c ) &gt; 0 , for any ǫ &gt; 0 } , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where d ( x, A ) is the Euclidean distance from x ∈ R d to A ⊆ R d . Now, for β &gt; 0, let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, recall that K is said to satisfy the weak rolling ball condition if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 4.2. Let K ⊆ [0 , 1] d be such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some S + ( K ) , α &gt; 0 . Then for n, q ≥ 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some C d,q,α &gt; 0 . If furthermore K satisfies the weak rolling ball condition (4.21) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some S -( K ) &gt; 0 , then for n sufficiently large,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some C -d , C + d &gt; 0 ; and for every ǫ &gt; 0 , there is c ǫ &gt; 0 not depending on n such that

for n ≥ 1 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As in [12], we split the proof of Theorem 4.2 into several results. To start, we show:

Theorem 4.3. Let 0 &lt; σ 2 = V ar ( ϕ ( X )) . Assume that V ol ( ∂K r ) ≤ S + ( K ) r α for some S + ( K ) , α &gt; 0 . Then (4.22) holds, and for every ǫ &gt; 0 there is a constant C not depending on n such that, for n ≥ 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Denote by v ( x, y ; X ) = V ol ( V ( y ; X ) ∩ V ( x ; ( y, X )) ) , the volume that V ( y ; X ) loses when x is added to X . Then, for x / ∈ X ,

Proof of Theorem 4.3. Recall that x, y ∈ [0 , 1] d are said to be Voronoi neighbors among the set X if V ( x ; X ) ∩ V ( y ; X ) = ∅ . In general, the Voronoi distance d V ( x, y ; X ) among X of x and y , is given by the smallest k ≥ 1 such that there exist x = x 0 , x 1 ∈ X,... , x k -1 ∈ X,x k = y and x i , x i +1 are Voronoi neighbors for i = 0 , . . . , k -1.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let R k ( x ; X ) be the distance from x to the furthest point in the cell of a k th order Voronoi neighbor in X , i.e., for X = ( X 1 , . . . , X n ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with R ( x ; X ) := R 1 ( x ; X ). If x does not have k th order neighbors, take R k ( x ; X ) = √ d . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where κ d = π d/ 2 / Γ( d/ 2 + 1) is the volume of the unit ball in R d .

Lemma 4.4. Assume there exist S + ( K ) , α &gt; 0 , such that V ol ( ∂K r ) ≤ S + ( K ) r α for all r &gt; 0 . Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, for some c d,qd + α,k &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all n ≥ 1 , q ≥ 1 .

Proof. To simplify computations, introduce the process X ′ defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Unlike the independent setting in [12], here the law of X ′ is only invariant under integer valued translations. Note that a.s. X ′ has exactly n points in any cube [ t, t +1] d , where t ∈ R . Let T x = { [ y, y +1] d : y ∈ R d , x ∈ [ y, y +1] d } . Define R k ( x ; X ) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that if x ∈ [0 , 1] d , then [0 , 1] d ∈ T x and so R k ( x ; X ′ ) ≥ R k ( x ; X ). When the X i are sampled independently and uniformly, as in [12], it is the case that R k ( x ; X ′ ) does not depend on the position of x . However, in the hidden Markov model case we need to find a further bound on R k ( x ; X ′ ).

For that purpose, consider the cube K 0 := [ -1 / 2 , 1 / 2] d of volume 1 centered at 0 ∈ R d . Let B A be the open ball of R d , centered at 0 , and of volume A &lt; 1, to be chosen later. Next, let ˜ X = (0 , ˜ X 1 , . . . , ˜ X n -1 ) be such that ˜ X i ∈ K 0 , for all i = 1 , . . . , n -1. Furthermore, for any Lebesgue measurable T ⊆ K 0 , set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i ∈ 1 , . . . , n -1 where |·| now denotes the Lebesgue measure of the corresponding sets. If A = ( c M -1) / ( c M -c m ), then the above is a well-defined positive measure on K 0 . From the restrictions of the hidden Markov model, if ˜ R k = R k (0; ˜ X ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Indeed, ˜ R k represents the worst-case scenario where the remaining points of X are least likely to be distributed in the volume closest to x . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we have used the upper bound on V ol ( ∂K r ).

To estimate E [ ˜ R qd + α k ], note that if ˜ R k ≥ r , there will be a open ball of radius r/ 2 k in K 0 containing no points of ˜ X . Moreover, there will be s d ∈ (0 , 1), depending only on the dimension d , such that every ball of radius 2 k contains a cube of side length s d r/k of the form [ g -s d r/ 2 k, g + s d r/ 2 k ] where g ∈ ( s d r/k ) Z d . Then, if s d r/k &lt; 1,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If, on the other hand, s d r/k ≥ 1, ˜ X ∩ [ g -s d r/ 2 k, g + s d r/ 2 k ] = ˜ X and P ( ˜ R k ≥ r ) = 0. Then, using 1 -x ≤ e -x , for any u &gt; 0,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying the above in (4.26) yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where c d,k,qd + α &gt; 0 depends only on the parameters of the transition probabilities of the hidden chain and on d, k and qd + α , but neither on n nor on i .

Again, as before, we introduce a set of instructions R and a function h , such that h ( R ) = ϕ ( X ). We apply Proposition 2.1 and the initial step is to bound E [ | ∆ i h ( R ) | r ], where r &gt; 0.

Let S ( R ) be the original set of points generated by R and S ( R i ) be the set of points generated after the change in the instruction R i . The following proposition is the version of [12, Proposition 6.4] for our framework.

Proposition 4.5. (i) If for every s ∈ S ( R ) \ S ( R i ) , the set R 1 ( s, S ( R )) , containing s and all its neighbors, is either entirely in K , or entirely in K c , then ∆ i h ( R ) = 0 . A similar result holds for s ∈ S ( R i ) \ S ( R ) and the set R 1 ( s, S ( R i )) .

(ii) Assume | i -j | is large enough, so that ( S ( R i ) \ S ( R )) ∪ ( S ( R j ) \ S ( R )) = S ( R ij ) \ S ( R ) ,where S ( R ij ) is the set of points generated after the changes in both R i and R j . If for every s 1 ∈ S ( R i )∆ S ( R ) and s 2 ∈ S ( R j )∆ S ( R ) , at least one of the following holds:

1. d V ( s 1 , s 2 ; S ( R ij ) ∩ S ( R )) ≥ 2 , or

2. d V ( s 1 , ∂K ; S ( R ij ) ∩ S ( R )) ≥ 2 and d V ( s 2 , ∂K ; S ( R ij ) ∩ S ( R )) ∩ S ( R )) ≥ 2 , then ∆ i,j h ( R ) = 0 .

In similarity to the proof of Theorem 4.1, then write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As before for some T &gt; 0, there is an event E and ǫ &gt; 0, such that conditioned on E , | S ( R i ) \ S ( R ) | = | S ( R ) \ S ( R i ) | ≤ T and P ( E c ) ≤ (1 -ǫ ) T . Then, from Lemma 4.4 there is S + ( K ) , α &gt; 0, such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where c d,r,α depends on the parameters of the model, the dimension d , as well as r and α . If T = c ln n , for a suitable c &gt; 0, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

An application of the Efron-Stein's inequality then yields (4.22). Moreover, for the non-variance term in Theorem 2.1, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next we analyze

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

where as before the supremum is taken over recombinations Y, Y ′ , Z, Z ′ of R,R ′ , ˜ R . Let E be the event that all perturbations of the instructions in (4.29) propagate at most T levels. There is ǫ &gt; 0, depending only on the parameters of the models, such that P ( E c ) ≤ (1 -ǫ ) T .

As before, conditioned on E , if | j -i | ≤ | R | K , the perturbation in i might be propagating past the position, corresponding to instruction j , leading to difficulties in the analysis of ∆ i,j h ( Y ). This is the reason for conditioning further on the events E 1 , E 2 , E 3 corresponding to respectively 0 , 1 , or 2 of the conditions {| i -j | ≥ | R | K, | j -k | ≥ | R | K } holding. Note that E 1 , E 2 and E 3 are deterministic.

In this setting, we also study the event that all Voronoi cells are small. For that purpose, as in [12], introduce the event Ω n ( X ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ρ n = (ln n ) 1 /d + ǫ ′ for ǫ ′ sufficiently small. Then, after conditioning on the realization of the hidden chain, a proof as in [12, Lemma 6.8] leads to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as n →∞ , and for all η &gt; 0.

We now estimate B | R | ( h ). Write,

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

Using | ∆ j h ( Z ) | , | ∆ k h ( Z ′ ) | ≤ 1, we get that the first two terms in (4.31) are bounded by P ( E c ) + P (Ω c n ). Next,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where we have used the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.

Next, define as before,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, let S 0 = S ( Y ) ∩ S ( Y i ) ∩ S ( Y j ) and S ′ 0 = S ( Y ′ ) ∩ S (( Y ′ ) j ) ∩ S (( Y ′ ) k ). By Proposition 4.5(ii), it follows that conditioned on Ω n ,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Conditioned on E 3 , the sets S 1 , S 2 ∪ S 3 and S 4 are pairwise disjoint.

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

By conditioning on the realization of all hidden chains H .

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

Now, conditioned on H , s ′ 1 and s 2 , we have independence in the innermost expectation. Therefore, the above is bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

Finally, for the event E 2 , assuming that | i -j | ≥ | R | K , the other case being identical,

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Using (4.31), (4.32), (4.34), and (4.33), leads to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar arguments yield,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

where we have chosen K = c ln n , for a suitable c &gt; 0, independent of n , using also (4.30) and the definition of ρ n . Moreover,

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

The bounds on the variance terms in Proposition 3.6 become

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, (4.25) follows from (4.35), (4.28) and Proposition 2.1.

Before the proof of the main result is presented, recall the following result ([12, Corollary 2.4]) concerning the variance. Let X := ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) ∈ E n , where E is a Polish space. If X ′ is an independent copy of X , and f : E n → R is measurable, with E [ f ( X ) 2 ] &lt; ∞ ,

In our setting we take f = ϕ . Unlike [12], the function ϕ is not symmetric and righthand side of (4.36) cannot be simplified.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Theorem 4.2. Note that (4.22) was proved earlier via an application of EfronStein's inequality to (4.27). Furthermore, (4.24) follows from Theorem 4.3 and (4.23). Thus, only (4.23) is left to prove. Let H is the realization of the hidden chain for X . By the law of the total variance, V ar ( ϕ ( X )) ≥ V ar ( ϕ ( X ) | H ). Let X ′ be an independent copy of X , given H . Note that, given H , ( X i ) i =1 ,...,n and ( X ′ i ) i =1 ,...,n are independent random variables which are not identically distributed.

Applying (4.36) to ϕ ( X | H ), it follows that

where X i = ( X 1 , . . . , X i -1 , X ′ i , X i +1 , . . . , X n ), and E H signifies that H is given. To simplify notation we drop the H . The difference with the proof in [12] is that now the variables are no longer identically distributed. Write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

E X [ ϕ ( X ) -ϕ ( X )] = E X [ ϕ ( X ) -ϕ ( X ] -E X [ ϕ ( X ) -ϕ ( X )] , where X ( i ) = ( X 1 , . . . , X i -1 , X i +1 , . . . , X n ). By Lemma 4.4, E X [ ϕ ( X ) ϕ ( X ( i ) )] c d,α n -1 -α/d . (4.37)

We are left to study E [ ϕ ( X ) ϕ ( X ]. Recall that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Now, for the case X ′ i ∈ K C (the other case being equivalent).

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since v ( X ′ i , X j ; X ( i,j ) ) ≥ 0. Then,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

using the independence after conditioning on H and the properties of the model. We want to find an event that implies that v ( x, y ; X ( i,j ) ) ≥ cn -1 . One instance is when no point of X ( i,j ) falls in B ( y, 6 βn -1 /d ). Indeed, then B ( y, 3 βn -1 /d ) ⊂ V ( y, X ( i,j ) ). The distance between y and x is less than βn -1 /d , and so there is z ∈ B ( y, 3 βn -1 /d ), namely z = x + βn -1 /d ( x -y ) / || x -y || such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, v ( x, y ; X ( i,j ) ) ≥ V ol ( B ( z, βn -1 /d ) = κ d β d n -1 . Finally,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some c d,β &gt; 0 depending on the parameters of the model, the dimension d and β . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, by the very definition of γ ( K,r,β ) and since the case X ′ i ∈ K is symmetric,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If the rolling ball condition (4.21), and the lower bound on ∂K n -1 /d both hold, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which dominates the contribution (4.37) from E [ ϕ ( X ) -ϕ ( X ( i ) )]. Therefore, finally

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as desired.

Remark 4.6. Let us expand a bit on another potential application of our generic framework, namely the occupancy problem as studied in [8]. To set up the notation, ( Z 1 , . . . , Z n ) is an aperiodic, irreducible and time homogeneous (hidden) Markov chain that transitions between different alphabets. Then to each alphabet is associated a distribution over the collection of all possible letters, giving rise to the observed letters ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) . We assume that the number of alphabets is finite but that the number of total letters is ⌊ αn ⌋ , for some fixed α &gt; 0 . One studies W := f ( X 1 , . . . , X n ) - the number of letters that have not appeared among the X 1 , . . . , X n . Then, an analysis as in the proof of Theorem 4.1 leads to:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where V ar ( W ) is a function of n , N is the standard normal distribution and C &gt; 0 is a constant depending on the parameters of the model, but not on n . As mentioned at the beginning of the section, the study of the precise order of growth of the variance of W is not within the scope of the current paper. For the iid case one can show, see, e.g. [7], that V ar ( W ) ∼ ( αe -1 /α -(1 + α ) e -2 /α ) n , as n →∞ .

## References

- [1] Chatterjee, S. (2008) A new method for Normal approximation. The Annals of Probability. Vol. 36., 4. 1584-1610.
- [2] Chatterjee, S. (2014) A short survey on Stein's method. Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians - Seoul 2014. Vol. 4., 1-24, Kyung Moon Sa, Seoul .
- [3] Chen, L., Goldstein, L., Shao, Q.-M. (2014) Normal approximation by Stein's method. Springer-Verlag.
- [4] Chu, D., Shao, Q.-M., Zhang, Z. (2019) Berry-Esseen bounds for functionals of independent random variables. Presented at the Symposium in Memory of Charles Stein [1920 - 2016]. https://ims.nus.edu.sg/events/2019/stein/files/shao.pdf.
- [5] Paulin, D. (2015) Concentration inequalities for Markov chains by Marton couplings and spectral methods. Electronic journal in Probability. Vol. 20., 79, 32pp.
- [6] Durbin, R., Eddy, S., Krogh, A., Mitchison, G. (1998) Biological sequence analysis. Cambridge university press, Cambridge .
- [7] Englund, G. (1981) A remainder term estimate for the normal approximation in classical occupancy. The Annals of Probability. Vol. 9., 4., 684-692.
- [8] Grabchak, M., Kelbert, M., Paris, Q. (2020) On the occupancy problem for a regime-switching model. Journal of Applied Probability. Vol. 57., 1., 53-77.
- [9] Gorodezky, I., Pak, I. (2012) Generalized loop-erased random walks and approximate reachability. Random Structures and Algorithms. Vol. 44., 2., 201-223.
- [10] Houdr´ e, C., Kerchev, G. (2019) On the rate of convergence for the length of the longest common subsequences in hidden Markov models. Journal of Applied Probability. Vol. 56., 2., 558-573.
- [11] Houdr´ e, C., Ma, J. (2016) On the order of the central moments of the length of the longest common subsequences in random words. High Dimensional Probability VII: The Carg` ese Volume, 105-136.
- [12] Lachi` eze-Rey, R., Peccati, G. (2017) New Berry-Esseen bounds for functionals of binomial point process. The Annals of Applied Probability. Vol. 27., 4, 1992-2031.
- [13] Kendall, W.S., Molchanov, I. (2010) New perspectives in Stochastic Geometry. Oxford university press, Oxford. Edited by Wilfrid S. Kendall and Ilya Molchanov.
- [14] Rhee, W., Talagrand, M. (1986) Martingale inequalities and the jackknife estimate of the variance. Statistics and Probability Letters. Vol. 4, 5-6.

- [15] Wilson, D.B. (1996) Generating random spanning trees more quickly than the cover time. Proceedings 28th STOC, ACM, 296-303.