## Regime Switching Bandits

Xiang Zhou ∗† Yi Xiong ∗‡ Ningyuan Chen § Xuefeng Gao ¶

February 2, 2021

## Abstract

We study a multi-armed bandit problem where the rewards exhibit regime switching. Specifically, the distributions of the random rewards generated from all arms are modulated by a common underlying state modeled as a finite-state Markov chain. The agent does not observe the underlying state and has to learn the transition matrix and the reward distributions. We propose a learning algorithm for this problem, building on spectral method-of-moments estimations for hidden Markov models, belief error control in partially observable Markov decision processes and upper-confidence-bound methods for online learning. We also establish an upper bound O ( T 2 / 3 √ log T ) for the proposed learning algorithm where T is the learning horizon. Finally, we conduct proof-of-concept experiments to illustrate the performance of the learning algorithm.

## 1 Introduction

The multi-armed bandit (MAB) problem is a popular model for sequential decision making with unknown information: the decision maker makes decisions repeatedly among I different options, or arms. After each decision she receives a random reward having an unknown probability distribution that depends on the chosen arm. The objective is to maximize the expected total reward over a finite horizon of T periods. The MAB problem has been extensively studied in various fields and applications including Internet advertising, dynamic pricing, recommender systems, clinical trials and medicine. See, e.g., Bouneffouf and Rish [2019], Bubeck and Cesa-Bianchi [2012], Slivkins [2019]. In the classical MAB problem, it is typically assumed that the random reward of each arm is i.i.d. (independently and identically distributed) over time and independent of the rewards from other arms. However, these assumptions do not necessarily hold in practice Besbes et al. [2014]. To address the drawback, a growing body of literature studies MAB problems with non-stationary rewards to capture temporal changes in the reward distributions in applications, see e.g. Besbes et al. [2019], Cheung et al. [2018], Garivier and Moulines [2011].

In this paper, we study a non-stationary MAB model with Markovian regime-switching rewards. We assume that the random rewards associated with all the arms are modulated by a common unobserved state (or regime) { M t } modeled as a finite-state Markov chain. Given M t = m , the reward of arm i is i.i.d., whose distribution is denoted Q ( ·| m,i ). Such structural change of the environment is usually referred to as regime switching in finance Mamon and Elliott [2007]. The agent doesn't observe or control the underlying state M t , and has to learn the transition probability matrix P of { M t } as well as the distribution of reward of each arm Q ( ·| m,i ), based on the observed historical rewards. The goal of the agent is to design a learning policy that decides which arm to pull in each period to minimize the expected regret over T periods.

∗ Equal contribution

† Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management; The Chinese University of Hong Kong; zhouxng@se.cuhk.edu.hk

‡

Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management; The Chinese University of Hong Kong; yxiong@se.cuhk.edu.hk

§ The Rotman School of Management; University of Toronto; ningyuan.chen@utoronto.ca

¶ Department of Systems Engineering and Engineering Management; The Chinese University of Hong Kong; xfgao@se.cuhk.edu.hk

¶

Equal contribution

The regime-switching models are widely used in various industries. For example, in finance, the sudden changes of market environments are usually modeled as hidden Markov chains. In revenue management and marketing, a firm may face a shift in consumer demand due to undetected changes in sentiment or competition. In such cases, when the agents (traders or firms) take actions (trading financial assets with different strategies or setting prices), they need to learn the reward and the underlying state at the same time. Our setup is designed to tackle such problems.

Our Contribution. Our study features novel designs in three regards. In terms of problem formulation, online learning with unobserved states has attracted some attention recently Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016], Fiez et al. [2019]. We consider the strongest oracle among the studies, who knows P and Q ( ·| m,i ), but doesn't observe the hidden state M t . The oracle thus faces a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) Krishnamurthy [2016]. By reformulating it as a Markov decision process (MDP) with a continuous belief space (i.e., a distribution over hidden states), the oracle then solves the optimal policy using the Bellman equation. Having sublinear regret benchmarked against the strong oracle, our algorithm has better theoretical performance than others with weaker oracles such as the best fixed arm Fiez et al. [2019] or memoryless policies (the action only depends on the current observation) Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016].

In terms of algorithmic design, we propose a learning algorithm (see Algorithm 2) with two key ingredients. First, it builds on the recent advance on the estimation of the parameters of hidden Markov models (HMMs) using spectral method-of-moments methods, which involve the spectral decomposition of certain low-order multivariate moments computed from data Anandkumar et al. [2012, 2014], Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016]. It benefits from the theoretical finite-sample bound of spectral estimators, while the finite-sample guarantees of other alternatives such as maximum likelihood estimators remain an open problem Leh´ ericy [2019]. Second, it builds on the well-known 'upper confidence bound' (UCB) method in reinforcement learning Auer and Ortner [2007], Jaksch et al. [2010]. To deal with the belief of the hidden state which is subject to the estimation error, we divide the horizon into nested exploration and exploitation phases. Note that this is a unique challenge in our formulation as the oracle uses the optimal policy of the POMDP (belief MDP). We use spectral estimators in the exploration phase to gauge the estimation error of P and Q ( ·| m,i ). We use the UCB method to control the regret in the exploitation phase. Different from other learning problems, we re-calibrate the belief at the beginning of each exploitation phase based on the parameters estimated in the most recent exploration phase using previous exploratory samples.

In terms of technical analysis, we establish a regret bound of O ( T 2 / 3 √ log( T )) for our proposed learning algorithm where T is the learning horizon. Our analysis is novel in two aspects. First, we need to control of the error of the belief state, which itself is not directly observed. This is in stark contrast to learning MDPs [Jaksch et al., 2010, Ortner and Ryabko, 2012] with observed states. Note that the estimation error of the parameters affect the updating of the belief in every previous period. Hence one would expect that the error in the belief state might accumulate over time and explode even if the estimation of the parameters is quite accurate. We show that this is not the case and as a result the regret attributed to the belief error is well controlled. Second, we provide an explicit bound for the span of the bias function (also referred as the relative value function) for the POMDP or the belief MDP which has a continuous state space. Such a bound is often critical in the regret analysis of undiscounted reinforcement learning of continuous MDP, but it is either taken as an assumption [Qian et al., 2018] or proved under H¨ older continuity assumptions that do not hold for the belief transitions in our setting [Ortner and Ryabko, 2012, Lakshmanan et al., 2015]. We provide an explicit bound on the bias span by using an approach based on the classical vanishing discount technique and [Hinderer, 2005] which provides general tools for proving Lipschitz continuity of value functions in finite-horizon discounted MDPs with general state spaces.

Related Work. Studies on non-stationary/switching MAB investigate the problem when the rewards of all arms may change over time Auer et al. [2002], Garivier and Moulines [2011], Besbes et al. [2014], Auer et al. [2019]. Our formulation can be regarded as non-stationary MAB with a special structure. They consider an even stronger oracle than ours, the best arm in each period. However, the total number of changes or the changing budget have to be sublinear in T to achieve sublinear regret. In our formulation, the total number of transitions of the underlying state is linear in T , and the algorithms proposed in these papers fail even considering our oracle (See Section 5). Other studies focus on linear changing budget with some structure such as seasonality Chen et al. [2020], which is not present in this paper.

Our work is also related to the restless Markov bandit problem Guha et al. [2010], Ortner et al. [2014], Slivkins and Upfal [2008] in which the state of each arm evolves according to independent Markov chains.

In contrast, our regime-switching MAB model assumes a common underlying Markov chain so that the rewards of all arms are correlated, and the underlying state is unobservable to the agent. In addition, our work is related to MAB studies where rewards of all arms depend on a common unknown parameter or a latent random variable, see, e.g., Atan et al. [2018], Gupta et al. [2018], Lattimore and Munos [2014], Maillard and Mannor [2014], Mersereau et al. [2009]. Our model differs from them in that the common latent state variable follows a dynamic stochastic process which introduces difficulties in algorithm design and analysis.

Two papers have similar settings to ours. Fiez et al. [2019] studies MAB problems whose rewards are modulated by an unobserved Markov chain and the transition matrix may depend on the action. However, their oracle is the best fixed arm when defining the regret, which is much weaker than the optimal policy of the POMDP (the performance gap is linear between the two oracles). Therefore, their algorithm is expected to have linear regret when using our oracle. Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016] also proposes to use spectral estimators to learn POMDPs. Their oracle is the optimal memoryless policy, i.e., a policy that only depends on the current reward observation instead of using all historical observations to form the belief of the underlying state (the performance gap is generally linear in T between their oracle and ours). Such a policy set allows them to circumvent the introduction of the belief entirely. As a result, the dynamics under the memoryless policy can be viewed as a finite-state (modified) HMM and spectral estimators can be applied. Instead, because we consider the optimal belief-based policy, such reduction is not available. Our algorithm and regret analysis hinge on the interaction between the estimation of the belief and the spectral estimators. Our algorithm needs separate exploration to apply the spectral methods and uses the belief-based policy for exploitation. For the regret analysis, unlike Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016], we have to carefully control the belief error and bound the span of the bias function from the optimistic belief MDP in each episode. The comparison of our study with related papers is summarized in Table 1. Note that we only present the regret in terms of T .

Table 1: Comparison of our study with some related literature.

| Papers  Oracle  Changing Budget  Regret  Auer et al. [2002]  Best fixed action  Linear  ˜  O  (  √  T  )  Garivier and Moulines [2011]  Best action in each period  Finite  ˜  O  (  √  T  )  Besbes et al. [2014]  Best action in each period  Sublinear  ˜  O  (  T  2  /  3  )  Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016]  Optimal memoryless policy  Linear  ˜  O  (  √  T  )  This paper  Optimal POMDP policy  Linear  ˜  O  (  T  2  /  3  )   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 2 MAB with Markovian Regime Switching

## 2.1 Problem Formulation

Consider the MAB problem with arms I := { 1 , . . . , I } . There is a Markov chain { M t } with states M := { 1 , 2 , . . . , M } and transition probability matrix P ∈ R M × M . In period t = 1 , 2 , . . . , if the state of the Markov chain M t = m and the agent chooses arm I t = i , then the reward in that period is R t with discrete finite support, and its distribution is denoted by Q ( ·| m,i ) := P ( R t ∈ ·| M t = m,I t = i ), with µ m,i := E [ R t | M t = m,I t = i ]. We use µ := ( µ m,i ) ∈ R M × I to denote the mean reward matrix. The agent knows M and I , but has no knowledge about the underlying state M t (also referred to as the regime), the transition matrix P or the reward distribution Q ( ·| m,i ). The goal is to design a learning policy that is adapted to the filtration generated by the observed rewards to decide which arm to pull in each period to maximize the expected cumulative reward over T periods where T is unknown in advance.

If an oracle knows P , Q ( ·| m,i ) and the underlying state M t , then the problem becomes trivial as s/he would select I ∗ t = argmax i ∈I µ M t ,i in period t . If we benchmark a learning policy against the oracle, then the regret must be linear in T , because the oracle always observes M t while the agent cannot predict the transition based on the history. Whenever a transition occurs, there is non-vanishing regret incurred. Since the number of transitions during [0 , T ] is linear in T , the total regret is of the same order. Since comparing to the oracle knowing M t is uninformative, we consider a weaker oracle who knows P , Q ( ·| m,i ), but not M t . In this case, the oracle solves a POMDP since the states M t are unobservable. The total expected reward of the POMDP can be shown to scale linearly in T , and asymptotically the reward per period converges to a constant denoted by ρ ∗ . See Section 2.2.

For a learning policy π , we denote by R π t the reward received under the learning policy π (which does not know P, Q ( ·| m,i ) initially) in period t . We follow the literature (see, e.g., Jaksch et al. [2010], Ortner et al. [2014], Agrawal and Jia [2017]) and define its total regret after T periods by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our goal is to design a learning algorithm with theoretical guarantees including high probability and expectation bounds (sublinear in T ) on the total regret.

Without loss of generality we consider Bernoulli rewards with mean µ m,i ∈ (0 , 1) for all m,i . Hence µ m,i characterizes the distribution Q ( ·| m,i ). Our analysis holds generally for random rewards with discrete finite support. In addition, we impose the following assumptions.

Assumption 1. The transition matrix P of the Markov chain { M t } is invertible.

Assumption 2. The mean reward matrix µ = ( µ m,i ) has full row rank.

Assumption 3. The smallest element of the transition matrix ǫ := min i,j ∈M P ij &gt; 0 .

The first two assumptions are required for the finite-sample guarantee of spectral estimators for HMMs Anandkumar et al. [2012, 2014]. The third assumption is required for controlling the belief error of the hidden states by the state-of-art methods; See De Castro et al. [2017] and our Proposition 3 in Section 6. We next reformulate the POMDP as a belief MDP.

## 2.2 Reduction of POMDP to Belief MDP

To present our learning algorithm and analyze the regret, we first investigate the POMDP problem faced by the oracle where parameters P , µ (equivalently Q for Bernoulli rewards) are known with unobserved states M t . Based on the historical observed history, the oracle forms a belief of the underlying state. The belief can be encoded by a M -dimension vector b t = ( b t (1) , . . . , b t ( M )) ∈ B :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We next introduce a few notations that facilitate the analysis. For notation simplicity, we write c ( m,i ) := µ m,i . Given belief b ∈ B , the expected reward of arm i is ¯ c ( b, i ) := ∑ M m =1 c ( m,i ) b ( m ) . In period t , given belief b t = b, I t = i, R t = r , by Bayes' theorem, the belief b t +1 is updated by b t +1 = H µ ,P ( b, i, r ), where the m -th entry is

where B := { b ∈ R M + : ∑ M m =1 b ( m ) = 1 } . It is well known that the POMDP of the oracle can be seen as a MDP built on a continuous state space B , see Krishnamurthy [2016].

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The long-run average reward of the infinite-horizon belief MDP following policy π given the initial belief b can be written as ρ π b := lim sup T →∞ 1 T E [ ∑ T t =1 R π t | b 1 = b ]. The optimal policy maximizes ρ π b for a given b . We use ρ ∗ := sup b sup π ρ π b to denote the optimal long-run average reward. Under this belief MDP formulation, for all b ∈ B , the Bellman equation states that

It is obvious that the forward function H depends on the transition matrix P and the reward matrix µ . We can also define the transition probability of the belief state conditional on the arm pulled: ¯ T ( ·| b, i ) := P ( b t +1 ∈ ·| b, i ), where b t +1 is random due to the random reward.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v : B ↦→ R is the bias function. It can be shown (see the proof of Proposition 2 in Appendix) that under our assumptions, ρ ∗ and v ( b ) are well defined and there exists a stationary deterministic optimal policy π ∗ which maps a belief state to an arm to pull (an action that maximizes the right side of (2)). Various (approximate) methods have been proposed to solve (2) and to find the optimal policy for the belief MDP, see e.g. Yu and Bertsekas [2004], Saldi et al. [2017], Sharma et al. [2020]. In this work, we do not focus on this planning problem for a known model, and we assume the access to an optimization oracle that solve (2) and returns the optimal average reward ρ ∗ and the optimal stationary policy for a given known model.

## 3 The SEEU Algorithm

This section describes our learning algorithm for the regime switching MAB model: the Spectral Exploration and Exploitation with UCB (SEEU) algorithm.

To device a learning policy for the POMDP with unknown µ and P , one needs a procedure to estimate those quantities from observed rewards. Anandkumar et al. [2012, 2014] propose the so-called spectral estimator for the unknown parameters in hidden Markov models (HMMs). However, the algorithm is not directly applicable to ours, because there is no decision making in HMMs. To use the spectral estimator, we divide the learning horizon T into nested 'exploration' and 'exploitation' phases. In the exploration phase, we randomly select an arm in each period. This transforms the system into a HMM so that we can apply the spectral method to estimate µ and P from the observed rewards in the phase. In the exploitation phase, based on the estimators obtained from the exploration phase, we use a UCB-type policy to further narrow down the optimal belief-based policy in the POMDP introduced in Section 2.2.

## 3.1 Spectral Estimator

We introduce the spectral estimator Anandkumar et al. [2012, 2014], and adapt it to our setting.

To simplify the notation, suppose the exploration phase starts from period 1 until period n , with realized arms { i 1 , . . . , i n } , and realized rewards { r 1 , . . . , r n } sampled from Bernoulli distributions. Recall I is the cardinality of the arm set I , then one can create a one-to-one mapping from a pair ( i, r ) into a scalar s ∈ { 1 , 2 , ..., 2 I } . Therefore, the pair can be expressed as a vector y ∈ { 0 , 1 } 2 I such that in each period t , y t satisfies 1 { y t = e s } = 1 { r t = r,i t = i } , where e s is a basis vector with its s -th element being one and zero otherwise. Let A ∈ R 2 I × M be the observation probability matrix conditional on the state: A ( s, m ) = P ( R t = r, I t = i | M t = m ) . It can be shown that A satisfies E [ y t | M t = m ] = Ae m , and E [ y t +1 | M t = m ] = AP T e m . For three consecutive observations y t -1 , y t , y t +1 , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

˜ ˜ where ⊗ represents the tensor product.

From the observations { y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y n } , we may construct the estimations ˆ M 2 and ˆ M 3 for M 2 and M 3 respectively, and apply the tensor decomposition to obtain the estimator ˆ µ for the unknown mean reward matrix and ˆ P for the transition matrix. This procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. We use ˆ A m (respectively ˆ B m ) to denote the m -th column vector of ˆ A (respectively ˆ B ).

In addition, we can obtain the following result from Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016] and it provides the confidence regions of the estimators in Algorithm 1.

Proposition 1. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, for any δ ∈ (0 , 1) and any initial distribution, there exists N 0 such that when n ≥ N 0 , with probability 1 -δ , the estimated ˆ µ and ˆ P by Algorithm 1 satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( µ ) m and ( ˆ µ ) m are the m -th row vectors of µ and ˆ µ , respectively. Here, S = 2 I , and C 1 , C 2 are constants independent of n .

```
Algorithm 1 The subroutine to estimate µ and P from the observations from the exploration phase. Input: sample size n , { y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y n } created from the rewards { r 1 , . . . , r n } and arms { i 1 , . . . , i n } Output: The estimation ˆ µ , ˆ P 1: For i, j ∈ {-1 , 0 , 1 } : compute ˆ W i,j = 1 N -2 ∑ N -1 t =2 y t + i ⊗ y t + j . 2: For t = 2 , . . . , n -1: compute ˆ y t -1 := ˆ W 1 , 0 ( ˆ W -1 , 0 ) -1 y t -1 , ˆ y t := ˆ W 1 , -1 ( ˆ W 0 , -1 ) -1 y t . 3: Compute ˆ M 2 := 1 N -2 ∑ N -1 t =2 ˆ y t -1 ⊗ ˆ y t , ˆ M 3 := 1 N -2 ∑ N -1 t =2 ˆ y t -1 ⊗ ˆ y t ⊗ y t +1 . 4: Apply tensor decomposition (Anandkumar et al. [2014]): ˆ B = TensorDecomposition ( ˆ M 2 , ˆ M 3 ). 5: Compute ˆ A m = ˆ W -1 , 0 ( ˆ W 1 , 0 ) † ˆ B m for each m ∈ M . 6: Return m th row vector (ˆ µ ) m of ˆ µ from ˆ A m . 7: Return ˆ P = ( ˆ A † ˆ B ) ⊤ ( † represents the pseudoinverse of a matrix)
```

The expressions of constants N 0 , C 1 , C 2 are given in Section 8 in the appendix. Note that parameters µ , P are identifiable up to permutations of the hidden states Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016].

## 3.2 The SEEU Algorithm

The SEEU algorithm proceeds in episodes of increasing length, similar to UCRL2 in Jaksch et al. [2010]. As mentioned before, each episode is divided into exploration and exploitation phases. In episode k , it starts with the exploration phase that lasts for a fixed number of periods τ 1 , and the algorithm uniformly randomly chooses an arm and observes the rewards. After the exploration phase, the algorithm applies Algorithm 1 to (re-)estimate µ and P . Moreover, it constructs a confidence interval based on Proposition 1 with a confidence level 1 -δ k , where δ k := δ/k 3 is a vanishing sequence. Then the algorithm enters the exploitation phase. Its length is proportional to √ k . In the exploitation phase, it conducts UCB-type learning: the arm is pulled according to a policy that corresponds to the optimistic estimator of µ and P inside the confidence interval. The detailed steps are listed in Algorithm 2.

## Algorithm 2 The SEEU Algorithm

```
Input: Initial belief b 1 , precision δ , exploration parameter τ 1 , exploitation parameter τ 2 1: for k = 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . do 2: Set the start time of episode k , t k := t 3: for t = t k , t k +1 , . . . , t k + τ 1 do 4: Uniformly randomly select an arm: P ( I t = i ) = 1 I 5: end for 6: Input the realized actions and rewards in all previous exploration phases ˆ I k := { i t 1 : t 1 + τ 1 , · · · , i t k : t k + τ 1 } and ˆ R k := { r t 1 : t 1 + τ 1 , · · · , r t k : t k + τ 1 } to Algorithm 1 to compute ˆ µ k , ˆ P k = Spectral Estimation ( ˆ I k , ˆ R k ) 7: Compute the confidence interval C k ( δ k ) from (3) using the confidence level 1 -δ k = 1 -δ k 3 such that P { ( µ , P ) ∈ C k ( δ k ) } ≥ 1 -δ k 8: Find the optimistic POMDP in the confidence interval ( µ k , P k ) = argmax ( µ ,P ) ∈C ( δ k ) ρ ∗ ( µ , P ) 9: for t = 1 , 2 , . . . , t k + τ 1 do 10: Update belief b k t to b k t +1 = H µ k ,P k ( b k t , i t , r t ) under the new parameters ( µ k , P k ) 11: end for 12: for t = t k + τ 1 +1 , . . . , t k + τ 2 √ k do 13: Execute the optimal policy π ( k ) by solving the Bellman equation (2) under parameters ( µ k , P k ): i t = π ( k ) ( b k t ) 14: Observe reward r t 15: Update the belief at t +1 by b k t +1 = H µ k ,P k ( b k t , i t , r t ) 16: end for 17: end for
```

## 3.3 Discussions on the SEEU Algorithm

Computations. For given parameters ( µ , P ), we need to compute the optimal average reward ρ ∗ ( µ , P ) that depends on the parameters (Step 8 in Algorithm 2). Various computational and approximation methods have been proposed to tackle this planning problem for belief MDPs as mentioned in Section 2.2. In addition, we need to find out the optimistic POMDP in the confidence region C k ( δ k ) with the best average reward. For low dimensional models, one can discretize C k ( δ k ) into grids and calculate the corresponding optimal average reward ρ ∗ at each grid point so as to find (approximately) the optimistic model ( µ k , P k ). However, in general it is not clear whether there is an efficient computational method to find the optimistic plausible POMDP model in the confidence region when the unknown parameters are high-dimensional. This issue is also present in recent studies on learning continuous-state MDPs with the upper confidence bound approach, see e.g. Lakshmanan et al. [2015] for a discussion. In our regret analysis below, we do not take into account approximation errors arising from the computational aspects discussed above, as in Ortner and Ryabko [2012], Lakshmanan et al. [2015]. To implement the algorithm efficiently (especially for high-dimensional models) remains an intriguing future direction.

Dependence on the unknown parameters. When computing the confidence region in Step 7 of Algorithm 2, the agent needs the information of the constants C 1 and C 2 in Proposition 1. These constants depend on a few 'primitives' that can be hard to know, for example, the mixing rate of the underlying Markov chain. However we only need upper bounds for C 1 and C 2 for the theoretical guarantee, and hence a rough and conservative estimate would be sufficient. Such dependence on some unknown parameters is common in learning problems, and one remedy is to dedicate the beginning of the horizon to estimate the unknown parameters, which typically doesn't increase the rate of the regret. Alternatively, C 1 and C 2 can be replaced by parameters that are tuned by hand. See Remark 3 of Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016] for a further discussion on this issue.

## 4 Regret Bound

We now give the regret bound for the SEEU algorithm. The first result is a high probability bound.

Theorem 1. Suppose Assumptions 1 to 3 hold. Fix the parameter τ 1 in Algorithm 2 to be sufficiently large. Then there exist constants T 0 , C which are independent of T , such that when T &gt; T 0 , with probability 1 -7 2 δ , the regret of Algorithm 2 satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S = 2 I and ρ ∗ denotes the optimal long-run average reward under the true model.

The constant T 0 measures the number of periods needed for the sample size in the exploration phases to exceed N 0 arising in Proposition 1. The constant C has the following expression:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, M is the number of hidden states, C 1 , C 2 are given in Proposition 1, D is a uniform bound on the bias span given in Proposition 2, and L 1 , L 2 are given in Proposition 3. For technical reasons we require τ 1 to be large so as to apply Proposition 1 from the first episode. The impact of τ 1 on the regret will be studied numerically in Section 5.

Remark 2 (Dependancy of C on model parameters) . The dependency of C on C 1 and C 2 is directly inherited from the confidence bounds in Proposition 1, where the constants depend on arm similarity, the mixing time and the stationary distribution ω of the Markov chain (see also Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016]). In addition, C depends on L 1 , L 2 (and hence ǫ , the minimum entry of P ), which arises from controlling the propagated error in belief in hidden Markov models (Proposition 3; see also De Castro et al. [2017]). Finally, C depends on the bound D of the bias span (see also Jaksch et al. [2010]) in Proposition 2. The constant C may not be tight, and its dependence on some parameters may be just an artefact of our proof, but it is the best bound we can obtain.

From Theorem 1, we can choose an appropriate δ = 3( S +1) T and readily obtain the following expectation bound on the regret. The proof is omitted.

Theorem 3. Under the same assumptions as Theorem 1, the regret of Algorithm 2 satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 4 (Lower bound) . For the lower bound of the regret, consider the I problem instances (equal to the number of arms): In instance i , let µ m,i = 0 . 5+¯ ǫ for all m for a small positive constant ¯ ǫ , and let µ m,j = 0 . 5 for all m and j = i . Such structure makes sure that the oracle policy simply pulls one arm without the need to infer the state. Since the problem reduces to the classic MAB, the regret is at least O ( √ IT ) in this case. Note that the setup of the instances may violate Assumption 2, but this can be easily fixed by introducing an arbitrarily small perturbation to µ . The gap between the upper and lower bounds is probably caused by the split of exploration/exploitation phases in our algorithm, which resembles the O ( T 2 / 3 ) regret for explore-thencommit algorithms in classic multi-armed bandit problems (see Chapter 6 in Lattimore and Szepesv´ ari 2018). We cannot integrate the two phases because of the following fundamental barrier: the spectral estimator cannot use samples generated from the belief-based policy due to the history dependency. This is also why Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016] focus on memoryless policies in POMDPs to apply the spectral estimator. Since the spectral estimator is the only method that provides finite-sample guarantees for HMMs, we leave the gap as a future direction of research. Nevertheless, we are not aware of other algorithms that can achieve sublinear regret in our setting.

̸

Remark 5 (General reward distribution) . Our model requires the estimation of the reward distribution instead of just the mean to estimate the belief. For discrete rewards taking O possible values, the regret bound holds with S = OI instead of 2 I for Bernoulli rewards. For continuous reward distributions, it might be possible to combine the non-parametric HMM inference method in De Castro et al. [2017] with our algorithm design to obtain regret bounds. However, this requires different analysis techniques and we leave it for future work.

## 5 Numerical Experiment

In this section, we present proof-of-concept experiments. Note that large-scale POMDPs with long-run average objectives (the oracle in our problem) are computationally difficult to solve Chatterjee et al. [2019]. On the other hand, while there can be many hidden states in general, often only two or three states are important to model in several application areas, e.g. 'bull market' and 'bear market' in finance Dai et al. [2010]. Hence we focus on small-scale experiments, following some recent literature on reinforcement learning for POMDPs [Azizzadenesheli et al., 2016, Igl et al., 2018].

µ = [ 0 . 9 0 . 1 0 . 5 0 . 6 ] , where the random reward follows a Bernoulli distribution. We compare our algorithm with simple heuristics ǫ -greedy ( ǫ = 0 . 1), and non-stationary bandits algorithms including Sliding-Window UCB (SW-UCB) [Garivier and Moulines, 2011] with tuned window size and Exp3.S [Auer et al., 2002] with L = T , where the hyperparameter L is the number of changes in their algorithm. In Figure 1(a), we plot the average regret versus T of the four algorithms in log-log scale, where the number of runs for each algorithm is 50. We observe that the slopes of all algorithms except for SEEU are close to one, suggesting that they incur linear regrets. This is expected, because these algorithms don't take into account the hidden states. On the other hand, the slope of SEEU is close to 2 / 3. This is consistent with our theoretical result (Theorem 3). Similar observations are made on other small-scale examples. This demonstrates the effectiveness of our SEEU algorithm, particularly when the horizon length T is relatively large.

As a representative example, we consider a 2-hidden-state, 2-arm setting with P = [ 1 / 3 2 / 3 3 / 4 1 / 4 ] and We also briefly discuss the impact of parameters τ 1 and τ 2 on the algorithm performance. For the example above, we calculate the average regret for several pairs of parameters ( τ 1 , τ 2 ). It can be seen that the choices of these parameters do not affect the order O ( T 2 / 3 ) of the regret (the slope). See Figure 1(b) for an illustration.

Figure 1: (a) Regret comparison of four algorithms; (b) Effect of ( τ 1 , τ 2 ) on the regret.

<!-- image -->

## 6 Analysis: Proof Sketch for Theorem 1

We need the following two technical results. The proof of Proposition 2 is given in the appendix. The proof of Proposition 3 largely follows the proof of Proposition 3 in De Castro et al. [2017], with minor changes to take into account the action sequence, so we omit details.

Proposition 2 (Uniform bound on the bias span) . If the belief MDP satisfies Assumption 3, then for ( ρ, v ) satisfying the Bellman equation (2) , we have the span of the bias function span ( v ) := max b ∈B v ( b ) -min b ∈B v ( b ) is bounded by D ( ǫ ) , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall v k is the bias function for the optimistic belief MDP in episode k . Proposition 2 guarantees that span ( v k ) is bounded by D = D ( ǫ/ 2) uniformly in k , because Assumption 3 can be satisfied (with ǫ replaced by ǫ/ 2) by the optimistic MDPs when T is sufficiently large due to Proposition 1.

Proposition 3 (Controlling the belief error) . Suppose Assumption 3 holds. Given ( ˆ µ , ˆ P ) , an estimator of the true model parameters ( µ , P ) . For an arbitrary reward-action sequence { r 1: t , i 1: t } t ≥ 1 , let ˆ b t and b t be the corresponding beliefs in period t under ( ˆ µ , ˆ P ) and ( µ , P ) respectively. Then there exists constants L 1 , L 2 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where L 1 = 4 M ( 1 -ǫ ǫ ) 2 / min { µ min , 1 -µ max } , L 2 = 4 M (1 -ǫ ) 2 /ǫ 3 + √ M , || · || F is the Frobenius norm, µ max and µ min are the maximum and minimum element of the matrix µ respectively.

Proof Sketch for Theorem 1. We provide a proof sketch for Theorem 1. The complete proof is given in Section 10 in the appendix. From the definition of regret in (1), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where π is our learning algorithm, and F t -1 is the filtration generated by the arms pulled and rewards received under policy π up to time t -1, and R t (superscript π in (1) omitted here for notation simplicity) is the reward received under the policy π . For the second term of equation (4), we can use its martingale property and apply the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality to obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the first term of (4), it can be rewritten as ∑ T t =1 ( ρ ∗ -¯ c ( b t , I t )) , where ¯ c ( b, i ) denotes the expected reward of arm i given belief state b under the true model. Denote by H k and E k the exploration and exploitation phases at episode k respectively. We bound the first term of (4) and proceed with three steps.

Step 1: Bounding the regret in exploration phases. Since the reward is non-negative we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Step 2: Bounding the regret in exploitation phases. We define a success event if the true POMDP environment ( µ , P ) lies in confidence regions C k ( δ k ) for all k = 1 , . . . , K , and a failure event to be its complement. By the choice δ k = δ/k 3 , one can show that the probability of failure events is at most 3 2 δ . Next note that in the beginning of exploitation phase k , SEEU algorithm chooses an optimistic POMDP among the plausible POMDPs, and we denote its corresponding reward matrix, value function, and the optimal average reward by µ k , v k and ρ k , respectively. Thus, on the success event we have ρ ∗ ≤ ρ k for all episode k . So we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ¯ c k and b k t denotes the expected reward and the belief under the optimistic model in episode k . Using the Bellman equation (2) for ρ k and Proposition (3) to carefully control the error in the belief transition kernel which is not directly estimated (different from Jaksch et al. [2010]), we can show with high probability, the first term of (5) is bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( µ k ) i is the i -th column vector of the matrix µ k , and D is the uniform bound on span ( v k ) from Proposition 2. One can directly bound the second term of (5) by ∑ K k =1 ∑ t ∈ E k || ( µ k ) I t -( µ ) I t || 1 + || b k t -b t || 1 . Applying Proposition 3 to bound || b k t -b t || 1 then using Proposition 1, one can infer that the regret in exploitation phases is bounded by O ( K √ log K ).

Step 3: Bounding the number of episodes K . A simple calculation of ∑ K -1 k =1 ( τ 1 + τ 2 √ k ) ≤ T ≤ ∑ K k =1 ( τ 1 + τ 2 √ k ) suggests that the number of episodes K is of order O ( T 2 / 3 ). Thus, we obtain a regret bound of order O ( T 2 / 3 √ log T ).

## 7 Conclusion and Open Questions

In this paper, we study a non-stationary MAB model with Markovian regime-switching rewards. We propose a learning algorithm that integrates spectral estimators for hidden Markov models and upper confidence methods from reinforcement learning. We also establish a regret bound of order of O ( T 2 / 3 √ log T ) for the learning algorithm. As far as we know, this is the first algorithm with sublinear regret for MAB with unobservable regime switching.

There are a few important open questions. First, it would be interesting to find out whether one can improve the regret bound O ( T 2 / 3 √ log T ). A related open question is whether the spectral method can be applied to samples generated from adaptive policies, so that the exploration and exploitation can be integrated to improve the theoretical bound. Finally, it is not clear whether there is an efficient computational method to find the optimistic plausible POMDP model in the confidence region. We leave them for future research.

## References

- S. Agrawal and R. Jia. Optimistic posterior sampling for reinforcement learning: worst-case regret bounds. In In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 1184-1194, 2017.
- A. Anandkumar, D. Hsu, and S. M. Kakade. A method of moments for mixture models and hidden markov models. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages 33-1, 2012.
- A. Anandkumar, R. Ge, D. Hsu, S. M. Kakade, and M. Telgarsky. Tensor decompositions for learning latent variable models. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 15(1):2773-2832, 2014.
- O. Atan, C. Tekin, and M. van der Schaar. Global bandits. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems , 29(12):5798-5811, 2018.
- P. Auer and R. Ortner. Logarithmic online regret bounds for undiscounted reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 49-56, 2007.
- P. Auer, N. Cesa-Bianchi, Y. Freund, and R. E. Schapire. The nonstochastic multiarmed bandit problem. SIAM journal on computing , 32(1):48-77, 2002.
- P. Auer, P. Gajane, and R. Ortner. Adaptively tracking the best bandit arm with an unknown number of distribution changes. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages 138-158, 2019.
- K. Azizzadenesheli, A. Lazaric, and A. Anandkumar. Reinforcement learning of POMDPs using spectral methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07764 , 2016.
- K. Azuma. Weighted sums of certain dependent random variables. Tohoku Mathematical Journal, Second Series , 19(3):357-367, 1967.
- O. Besbes, Y. Gur, and A. Zeevi. Stochastic multi-armed-bandit problem with non-stationary rewards. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 199-207, 2014.
- O. Besbes, Y. Gur, and A. Zeevi. Optimal exploration-exploitation in a multi-armed-bandit problem with non-stationary rewards. Stochastic Systems , 2019.
- D. Bouneffouf and I. Rish. A survey on practical applications of multi-armed and contextual bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10040 , 2019.
- S. Bubeck and N. Cesa-Bianchi. Regret analysis of stochastic and nonstochastic multi-armed bandit problems. Foundations and Trends ® in Machine Learning , 5(1):1-122, 2012.
- K. Chatterjee, R. Saona, and B. Ziliotto. The complexity of pomdps with long-run average objectives. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.13360 , 2019.
- N. Chen, C. Wang, and L. Wang. Learning and optimization with seasonal patterns. Working paper , 2020.
- W. C. Cheung, D. Simchi-Levi, and R. Zhu. Learning to optimize under non-stationarity. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.03024 , 2018.
- M. Dai, Q. Zhang, and Q. J. Zhu. Trend following trading under a regime switching model. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics , 1(1):780-810, 2010.
- Y. De Castro, E. Gassiat, and S. Le Corff. Consistent estimation of the filtering and marginal smoothing distributions in nonparametric hidden markov models. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 63(8): 4758-4777, 2017.
- T. Fiez, S. Sekar, and L. J. Ratliff. Multi-armed bandits for correlated markovian environments with smoothed reward feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.04008 , 2019.
- A. Garivier and E. Moulines. On upper-confidence bound policies for switching bandit problems. In International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory , pages 174-188, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. Springer.

- S. Guha, K. Munagala, and P. Shi. Approximation algorithms for restless bandit problems. Journal of the ACM (JACM) , 58(1):3, 2010.
- S. Gupta, G. Joshi, and O. Ya˘ gan. Correlated multi-armed bandits with a latent random source. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.05904 , 2018.
- K. Hinderer. Lipschitz continuity of value functions in markovian decision processes. Mathematical Methods of Operations Research , 62(1):3-22, 2005.
- M. Igl, L. Zintgraf, T. A. Le, F. Wood, and S. Whiteson. Deep variational reinforcement learning for pomdps. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.02426 , 2018.
- T. Jaksch, R. Ortner, and P. Auer. Near-optimal regret bounds for reinforcement learning. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 11(Apr):1563-1600, 2010.
- V. Krishnamurthy. Partially observed Markov decision processes . Cambridge University Press, 2016.
- K. Lakshmanan, R. Ortner, and D. Ryabko. Improved regret bounds for undiscounted continuous reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 524-532, 2015.
- T. Lattimore and R. Munos. Bounded regret for finite-armed structured bandits. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 550-558, 2014.
- T. Lattimore and C. Szepesv´ ari. Bandit algorithms . preprint, 2018.
- L. Leh´ ericy. Consistent order estimation for nonparametric hidden markov models. Bernoulli , 25(1):464-498, 2019.
- O. A. Maillard and S. Mannor. Latent bandits. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 136-144, 2014.
- R. S. Mamon and R. J. Elliott. Hidden Markov models in finance , volume 4. Springer, 2007.
- A. J. Mersereau, P. Rusmevichientong, and J. N. Tsitsiklis. A structured multiarmed bandit problem and the greedy policy. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , 54(12):2787-2802, 2009.
- R. Ortner and D. Ryabko. Online regret bounds for undiscounted continuous reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pages 1763-1771, 2012.
- R. Ortner, D. Ryabko, P. Auer, and R. Munos. Regret bounds for restless markov bandits. Theoretical Computer Science , 558:62-76, 2014.
- J. Qian, R. Fruit, M. Pirotta, and A. Lazaric. Exploration bonus for regret minimization in undiscounted discrete and continuous markov decision processes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.04363 , 2018.
- S. M. Ross. Arbitrary state markovian decision processes. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 39(6): 2118-2122, 1968.
- N. Saldi, S. Y¨ uksel, and T. Linder. On the asymptotic optimality of finite approximations to markov decision processes with borel spaces. Mathematics of Operations Research , 42(4):945-978, 2017.
- H. Sharma, M. Jafarnia-Jahromi, and R. Jain. Approximate relative value learning for average-reward continuous state mdps. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence , pages 956-964. PMLR, 2020.
- A. Slivkins. Introduction to multi-armed bandits. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.07272 , 2019.
- A. Slivkins and E. Upfal. Adapting to a changing environment: the brownian restless bandits. In Conference on Learning Theory , pages 343-354, 2008.
- H. Yu and D. P. Bertsekas. Discretized approximations for pomdp with average cost. In Proceedings of the 20th conference on Uncertainty in artificial intelligence , pages 619-627. AUAI Press, 2004.

## Online Appendix

## Table of Notations

Table 2: Summary of notations

| Notation  Description  T  The length of decision horizon  P  The transition matrix of underlying states  µ  The mean reward matrix  M  The set of underlying states  I  The set of arms  R  The set of rewards  M  t  The underlying state at time  t  I  t  The chosen arm at time  t  R  t  The random reward at time  t  F  t  The history up to time  t  ρ  ∗  The optimal long term average reward  R  T  Regret during the total horizon  b  t  The belief state at time  t  B  The set of belief states  c  (  m,i  )  The reward function given the state and arm  ¯  c  (  b, i  )  The reward function w.r.t. belief state  Q  The reward distribution  H  The belief state forward kernel  ¯  T  The transition kernel w.r.t.  belief state  D  The uniform upper bound of span(  v  )  E  π  Taken expectation respect to the true parameters  µ  and  P  under policy  π  E  π  k  Taken expectation respect to estimated parameters  µ  k  and  P  k  under policy  π   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 8 Constants in Proposition 1

We consider the action-reward pair ( R t , I t ) as our observation of the underlying state M t . We encode the pair ( r, i ) into a variable s ∈ { 1 , 2 , ..., 2 I } through a suitable one-to-one mapping. We rewrite our observable random vector ( R t , I t ) as a random variable S t . Hence we can define the following matrix A 1 , A 2 , A 3 ∈ R 2 I × M , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for s ∈ { 1 , 2 , ..., 2 I } , k ∈ M = { 1 , 2 , ..., M } . It follows from Lemma 5, Lemma 8 and Theorem 3 in Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016] that the spectral estimators ˆ µ , ˆ P have the following guarantee: pick any δ ∈ (0 , 1), when the number of samples n satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then with probability 1 -δ we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for m ∈ M up to permutation, with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S = 2 I , C 0 is a numerical constant (see Theorem 16 in Azizzadenesheli et al. [2016]), σ 1 , -1 is the smallest nonzero singular value of the covariance matrix E [ y t +1 ⊗ y t -1 ], and σ = min { σ min ( A 1 ) , σ min ( A 2 ) , σ min ( A 3 ) } , where σ min ( A i ) represents the smallest nonzero singular value of the matrix A i , for i = 1 , 2 , 3. In addition, ω = ( ω ( m )) represents the stationary distribution of the underlying Markov chain { M t } , and ω min = min m ω ( m ) ≥ ǫ = min i,j P ij . Finally, G and θ are the mixing rate parameters such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where f 1 → t ( ·| m 1 ) denotes the probability distribution vector of the underlying state at time t , starting from the initial state m 1 . Under Assumption 3, one can take G = 2 and have the (crude) bound θ ≤ 1 -ǫ , see e.g. Theorems 2.7.2 and 2.7.4 in Krishnamurthy [2016].

## 9 Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. We first introduce a few notations. Let V β ( b ) be the (optimal) value function of the infinite-horizon discounted version of the POMDP (or belief MDP) with discount factor β ∈ (0 , 1) and initial belief state b . Define v β ( b ) := V β ( b ) -V β ( s ) for a fixed belief state s , where v β is the bias function for the discounted problem. We also introduce ℓ 1 distance to the belief space B : ρ b ( b, b ′ ) := ‖ b -b ′ ‖ 1 . For any function f : B ↦→ R , define the Lipschitz module of a function f by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

The main idea of the proof is as follows. To bound span( v ) := max b ∈B v ( b ) -min b ∈B v ( b ) where v is the bias function for our undiscounted problem, it suffices to bound the Lipschitz module of v due to the fact that sup b = b ′ || b -b ′ || 1 = 2. Under our assumptions, it can be shown that the bias function v for the undiscounted problem satisfy the relation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then applying Lemma 3.2(a) [Hinderer, 2005] yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So it suffices to bound lim β → 1 -l ρ B ( V β ). The bound for l ρ B ( V β ) in turn implies that ( v β ) β is a uniformly bounded equicontinuous family of functions, and hence validates (6) by Theorem 2 in Ross [1968].

̸

We next proceed to bound l ρ B ( V β ) and we will show that for any β ∈ (0 , 1) we have l ρ B ( V β ) ≤ η 1 -γ for some constants η &gt; 0 , γ ∈ (0 , 1) that are both independent of β . To this end, we consider the finite horizon discounted belief MDP, and let V n,β be the optimal value function for the discounted problem with horizon length n and discount factor β . Since the reward is bounded, it is readily seen that lim n →∞ V n,β = V β . Then Lemma 2.1(e) Hinderer [2005] suggests that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, to bound l ρ b ( V β ), it suffices to bound the Lipschitz module l ρ b ( V n,β ). The strategy is to apply the results including Lemmas 3.2 and 3.4 in Hinderer [2005], but it requires a new analysis to verify the conditions there.

To proceed, standard dynamic programming theory states that V n,β ( b ) = J 1 ( b ), and J 1 ( b ) can be computed by the backward recursion:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ¯ T is the (action-dependent) one-step transition law of the belief state, and J t ( b t ) are finite for each t . More generally, for a given sequence of actions i 1: n , the n -step transition kernel for the belief state is define by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To use the results in Hinderer [2005], we need to study the Lipschitz property of this multi-step transition kernel as we will see later. Following Hinderer [2005], we introduce the Lipschitz module for a transition kernel φ ( b, db ′ ) on belief states. Let K ρ B ( ν, θ ) be the Kantorovich metric of two probability measure ν, θ defined on B :

∣ ∣ where Lip 1 ( ρ B ) is the set of functions on B with Lipschitz module l ρ B ( f ) ≤ 1. Then the Lipschitz module of the transition kernel l ρ B ( φ ) is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

The transition kernel φ is called Lipschitz continuous if l ρ B ( φ ) &lt; ∞ . To bound l ρ B ( V n,β ) and to apply the results in Hinderer [2005], the key technical result we need is the following lemma. We defer its proof to the end of this section. Recall that ǫ = min i,j ∈M P i,j &gt; 0.

Lemma 1. For 1 ≤ n &lt; ∞ , the n -step belief state transition kernel ¯ T ( n ) ( ·| b, i 1: n ) in (10) is uniformly Lipschitz in i 1: n , and the Lipschitz module is bounded as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C 4 = 2 1 -α and C 5 = 1 2 + α 2 with α = 1 -ǫ 1 -ǫ ∈ (0 , 1) . As a consequence, there exist constants n 0 ∈ Z + and γ &lt; 1 such that l ρ B ( ¯ T ( n 0 ) ) &lt; γ for any i 1: n . Here, we can take n 0 = ⌈ log α 1 -C 5 2 C 4 ⌉ , and γ = 1 2 (1 + C 5 ) = 3+ α 4 .

With Lemma 1, we are now ready to bound l ρ B ( V n,β ). Consider n = kn 0 for some positive integer k . We can infer from the value iteration in (9) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Bounding ¯ c in (11) by r max = 1 (the bound for rewards) and ¯ T ( l ) by its Lipschitz module, we obtain the following inequality using Lemmas 3.2 and 3.4 in Hinderer [2005]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where l I l ρ B ( ¯ T ( l ) ) is the supremum of the Lipschitz module l ρ B ( ¯ T ( l ) ) over actions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Note that the value function in the last period J n ( b n ) = ¯ c ( b n , i n ) is uniformly Lipschitz in i n with Lipschitz module r max = 1. Applying the last inequality iteratively for n i = 1 + in 0 with 0 ≤ i &lt; k and by Lemma 1, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

and C 4 , C 5 , n 0 , α are given in Lemma 1. Iterating over i and using l ρ B ( J n ) = l ρ B ( J kn 0 ) = r max , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall that for n = kn 0 , V n,β ( b ) = V kn 0 ,β ( b ) = J 0 ( b ). Since β &lt; 1 and γ &lt; 1, we then get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Together with (7) and (8), we can deduce that for a belief MDP satisfying min i,j ∈M P ij = ǫ &gt; 0, the span of the bias function is upper bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where with slight abuse of notations we use η ( ǫ ) (see (12)) and γ ( ǫ ) (see Lemma 1) to emphasize their dependency on ǫ. The proof is completed by simplifying the expression of D ( ǫ ).

## 9.1 Proof of Lemma 1

Proof. Rewriting the Kantorovich metric, we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we can obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ We first bound the second term in (13). We can infer from Theorem 3.7.1 in Krishnamurthy [2016] and its proof that the impact of initial belief decays exponentially fast:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where constant C 4 = 2(1 -ǫ ) ǫ and α = 1 -2 ǫ 1 -ǫ &lt; 1. So the second term of (13) can be bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the first inequality follows from f ∈ Lip 1 .

It remains to bound the first term in (13). Recall that b defines the initial probability distribution M 1 . The n steps observation kernel is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define a vector g ∈ R M as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

We introduce a few notations to facilitate the presentation. We define the n -step reward kernel ¯ Q ( n ) , where ¯ Q ( n ) ( ∏ n t =1 dr t | b, i 1: n ) is a probability measure on R n :

The last equality follows from the following argument. Note that the span of a function f with Lipschitz module 1 is bounded by Diam( B ) where Diam( B ) := sup b 1 = b 2 || b 1 -b 2 || 1 = 2. So for any f ∈ Lip 1 we can find a constant c that || f + c || ∞ ≤ Diam( B ) / 2. Moreover, let φ ( f ) = | ∫ f ( b ′ ) ¯ T ( n ) ( db ′ | b 1 , i 1: n ) -∫ f ( b ′ ) ¯ T ( n ) ( db ′ | b 2 , i 1: n ) | , we know φ ( f ) = φ ( f + c ) for any constant c . Without loss of generality, we can constrain || f || ∞ ≤ Diam( B ) / 2 ≤ 1.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Given the initial belief b , we can define the n -step forward kernel H ( n ) as follows where b n +1 is the belief at time n +1:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then it is easy to see that the belief transition kernel ¯ T ( n ) defined in (10) satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We can rewrite the first term of (13):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the next to last equality follows from ∑ M m =1 ( b 1 ( m ) -b 2 ( m ) ) = 0. Next we bound max m g ( m ) -min m g ( m ). From the equation above, it is clear that the quantity 1 2 (max m g ( m ) -min m g ( m )) ≤ 1, because || f || ∞ ≤ 1. However to prove Lemma 1, we need a sharper bound so that we can find a constant C 5 &lt; 1 (that is independent of b 1 , n and i 1: n ) with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose (16) holds. Then on combining (13), (14) and (15), we obtain

∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ∫ B f ( b ′ ) ¯ T ( n ) ( db ′ | b 1 , i 1: n ) -∫ B f ( b ′ ) ¯ T ( n ) ( db ′ | b 2 , i 1: n ) ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ ≤ C 4 α n || b 1 -b 2 || 1 + C 5 || b 1 -b 2 || 1 . It then follows that the Kantorovich metric is bounded by

where C 4 = 2(1 -ǫ ) ǫ , α = 1 -ǫ 1 -ǫ , and ǫ = min m,m ′ ∈M P m,m ′ &gt; 0. So ¯ T ( n ) is Lipschitz uniformly in actions, and its Lipschitz module can be bounded as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

If we choose n = n 0 := ⌈ log α 1 -C 5 2 C 4 ⌉ , so that C 4 α n 0 + C 5 &lt; 1 2 (1 + C 5 ) := γ &lt; 1, then we obtain the desired result l I n 0 ρ B ( ¯ T ( n 0 ) ) &lt; γ.

It remains to prove (16). Since the set M = { 1 , . . . , M } is finite, we pick m ∗ ∈ argmin m ∈M g ( m ) , ˆ m ∈ argmax m ∈M g ( m ). We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the inequality follows from H¨ older's inequality with || f || ∞ ≤ 1. We can compute

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last equality holds due to the conditional independence. We can then infer that for any { r 1: n } , { i 1: n } ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we can obtain from (17) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α = 1 -ǫ 1 -ǫ ∈ (0 , 1) . The proof is complete.

## 10 Proof of Theorem 1

In this section we provide a complete version of the proof of Theorem 1 sketched in Section 6.

We follow our prior simplication that random reward follows the Bernoulli distribution. Here we want to clarify two notations in advance. E π means the expectation is taken respect to true mean reward matrix µ and transition probabilities P , and E π k denotes that the underlying parameters are estimators µ k and P k .

Recalling the definition of regret in (1), it can be rewritten as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We first bound the second term of (18), i.e. the total bias between the conditional expectation of reward and the realization. Define a stochastic process { X n , n = 0 , · · · , T } as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then the second term in (18) is X T . It is easy to see that X t is a martingale. Moreover, due to the Bernoulli distribution of R t ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality Azuma [1967], we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next we bound the first term of (18). Recall that the definition of belief state under the optimistic and true parameters: b k t ( m ) = P µ k ,P k ( M t = m |F t -1 ) and b t ( m ) = P ( M t = m |F t -1 ), and the definition of reward functions with respect to the true belief state ¯ c ( b t , i ) = ∑ M m =1 µ m,i b t ( m ). We can also define the reward functions with respect to the optimistic belief state b k t as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Because I t is also adapted to F t -1 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ ( M t , I t ) , µ k ( M t , I t ) are the M t -th row I t -th column element of matrix µ, µ k respectively, and ( µ k ) I t and ( µ ) I t are the I t -th column vector of the reward matrix µ k and µ , respectively.

Then we can rewrite the first term of (18):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the first equation is due to the tower property and the fact that R t and F t -1 are conditionally independent given M t and I t .

Let K be the number of total episodes. For each episode k = 1 , 2 , · · · , K , let H k , E k be the exploration and exploitation phases, respectively. Then we can split equation (21) to the summation of the bias in these two phases as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The first term of (22) can be simply upper bounded by:

Moreover, we remark here that the length of the last exploitation phase | E K | = min { τ 2 √ K, max { T -( Kτ 1 + ∑ K -1 k =1 τ 2 √ k ) , 0 }} , as it may end at period T . Step 1: Bounding the regret in exploration phases

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Step 2: Bounding the regret in exploitation phases

We bound it by separating into 'success' and 'failure' events below. Recall that in episode k , we define the set of plausible POMDPs G k ( δ k ), which is defined in terms of confidence regions C k ( δ k ) around the estimated mean reward matrix µ k and the transition probabilities P k . Then choose an optimistic POMDP ˜ G k ∈ G k ( δ k ) that has the optimal average reward among the plausible POMDPs and denote its corresponding reward matrix, value function, and the optimal average reward by µ k , v k and ρ k , respectively. Thus, we say a 'success' event if and only if the set of plausible POMDPs G k ( δ k ) contains the true POMDP G . In the following proof, we omit the dependence on δ k from G k ( δ k ) for simplicity. From Algorithm 2, the confidence level of µ k in episode k is 1 -δ k , we can obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, with probability at least 1 -3 2 δ , 'success' events happen. It means ρ ∗ ≤ ρ k for any k because ρ k is the optimal average reward of the optimistic POMDP ˜ G k from the set G k . Then we can bound the regret of 'success' events in exploitation phases as follows.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To bound the first term of formula (24), we use the Bellman optimality equation for the optimistic belief MDP ˜ G k on the continuous belief state space B :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ¯ T k ( ·| b k t , I t ) = P µ k ,P k ( b t +1 ∈ ·| b k t , I t ) means transition probability of the belief state conditional on pulled arm under estimated reward matrix µ k and transition matrix of underlying Markov chain P k at time t .

Moreover, we note that if value function v k satisfies the Bellman equation (2), then so is v k + c 1 . Thus, without loss of generality, we assume that v k needs to satisfy || v k || ∞ ≤ span( v k ) / 2. Then from Proposition 2, suppose the uniform bound of span( v k ) is D , then we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus the first term of (24) can be bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where recall that ¯ T k ( ·| b k t , I t ) and ¯ T ( ·| b k t , I t ) in the second equality are the belief state transition probabilities under estimated and true parameters, respectively. And the last inequality is applying the H¨ older's inequality.

For the first term of (26), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the first term in the last equality is due to the telescoping from t k + τ 1 +1 to t k + τ 1 + τ 2 √ k , the start and end of the exploitation phase in episode k . The second term in the last equality is because:

Applying Proposition 2, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also need the following result, the proof of which is deferred to the end of this section.

Proposition 4. Let K be the number of total episodes up to time T . For each episode k = 1 , · · · , K , let E k be the index set of the k th exploitation phase and v k be the value function of the optimistic POMDP at the k th exploitation phase. Then with probability at most δ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying Proposition 4, with probability at least 1 -δ , we have:

where the expectation E π is taken respect to the true parameters µ and P under policy π , and the filtration F t is defined as F t := σ ( π 1 , R π 1 , ..., π t -1 , R π t -1 ).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, the first term of (26) can be upper bounded by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the second term of (26), we note that ¯ T ( b k t +1 | b k t , I t ) is zero except for two points where b k t +1 are exactly the Bayesian updating after receiving an observation of Bernoulli reward r t taking value 0 or 1. Thus, we have the following transition kernel:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we use H k and H to denote the belief updating function under the optimistic model ( µ k , P k ) and the true model ( µ , P ), and we use P k and P to denote the probability with respect to the optimistic model and true model respectively.

We bound the first term of (28) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We can bound the second term of (28) as follows:

where the first equality comes from P k ( r t = 1 | b k t , I t ) = ∑ m ∈M P k ( r t = 1 | m,I t ) b k t ( m ) = 〈 ( µ ) I t , b k t 〉 and P k ( r t = 0 | b k t , I t ) = ∑ m ∈M P k ( r t = 0 | m,I t ) b k t ( m ) = 1 - 〈 ( µ ) I t , b k t 〉 , and the third inequality is from (25), we have || v k || ∞ ≤ D 2 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the second inequality is implied from the proof of Proposition 2, and the last inequality if from Proposition 3.

Therefore, from (29) and (30), we can obtain that the second term of equation (26):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Summing up (27) and (31), the first term of formula (24) can be bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next we proceed to bound the second term of (24). By (20), it can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then from the H¨ older's inequality, we can further bounded the right hand side of above formula to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Proposition 3, we have || b k t -b t || 1 ≤ L 1 || µ -µ k || 1 + L 2 || P -P k || F . Combining the above expression with (32), we can see that with probability 1 -δ , the regret incurred from 'success' events, i.e., (24), can be bounded

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let T 0 be the period that the number of samples collected in the exploration phases exceeds N 0 , that is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If T ≥ T 0 after episode k 0 , then from Proposition 1, under the confidence level δ k = δ/k 3 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Together with the fact that the vector norm and matrix norm satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we obtain with probability at least 1 -5 2 δ , the regret in exploitation phase can be bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Step 3: Summing up the regret

Combining (23) and (33), we can get that with probability at least 1 -5 2 δ , the first term of regret (18) is bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, combining (19) and (34), we can see that with probability at least 1 -7 2 δ , the regret presented in (18) can be bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so the number of episodes K is bounded by ( T τ 1 + τ 2 ) 2 / 3 ≤ K ≤ 3( T τ 2 ) 2 / 3 . Thus, we have shown that with probability at least 1 7 δ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S = 2 I , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, M is the number of Markov chain states, where L 1 = 4 M ( 1 -ǫ ǫ ) 2 / min { µ min , 1 -µ max } , L 2 = 4 M (1 -ǫ ) 2 /ǫ 3 + √ M , with ǫ = min 1 ≤ i,j ≤ M P i,j , and µ max , µ min are the maximum and minimum element of the matrix µ respectively.

## 10.1 Proof of Proposition 4

Proof. For each episode k = 1 , 2 , · · · , K , let E k be the index set of the k th exploration phase, and E = ∪ K k =1 E k be the set of all exploitation periods among the horizon T and v k be the value function of the optimistic POMDP at the k th exploitation phase. For an arbitrary time t , let n = ∑ t i =1 1 i ∈ E , which means the number of exploitation periods up to time t . Define a stochastic process { Z n , n ≥ 0 } :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We first show that { Z n , n ≥ 0 } is a martingale. Note that E π [ | Z n | ] ≤ ∑ n j =1 span( v k j ) ≤ nD &lt; TD &lt; ∞ . It remains to show E π [ Z n |F n -1 ] = Z n -1 holds, i.e., E π [ Z n -Z n -1 |F n -1 ] = 0. Note that

where k j = { k : j ∈ E k } and t j = min { t : ∑ t i =1 1 i ∈ E = j } mean the corresponding episode and period of j th exploitation, respectively.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last equality is due to n -1 ≤ n ≤ t n then applying the tower property.

Therefore, { Z n , n ≥ 0 } is a martingale for any given policy π . Moreover, by Proposition 2, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, { Z n , n ≥ 0 } is a martingale with bounded difference.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ¯ N = ∑ T i =1 1 i ∈ E k and apply the Azuma-Hoeffding inequality Azuma [1967], we have

Note that ¯ N ≤ T and Z ¯ N = ∑ K k =1 ∑ t ∈ E k E π [ v k ( b t +1 ) |F t ] -v k ( b t +1 ). Thus, setting ǫ = D √ 2 T ln( 1 δ ), we can obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence we have completed the proof.

-2