## On a mixed singular/switching control problem with multiples regimes ∗

Mark Kelbert Harold A. Moreno-Franco †

Department of Statistics and Data Analysis

Laboratory of Stochastic Analysis and its Applications National Research University Higher School of Economics Moscow, Russia

## Abstract

This paper studies a mixed singular/switching stochastic control problem for a multidimensional diffusion with multiples regimes on a bounded domain. Using probabilistic, partial differential equation (PDE) and penalization techniques, we show that the value function associated with this problem agrees with the solution to a Hamilton-JacobiBellman (HJB) equation. In that way, we see that the regularity of the value function is C 0 , 1 ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc .

Keywords. Singular/switching stochastic control problem, Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations, non-linear partial differential system.

## 1 Introduction

Singular and switching stochastic control problems have been of great research interest in control theory due to their applicability to diverse problems of finance, economy, biology and other fields; see, e.g., [10, 14] and the reference therein. For that reason, new techniques and problems are continuously developed. One of those problems, called mixed singular/switching stochastic control problem, concerns with applying both singular and switching controls in optimal way on some stochastic process that can change regime. Within a regime, a singular control is executed.

This paper is mainly concerned with determining the regularity of the value function in a mixed singular/switching stochastic control problem for a multidimensional diffusion with multiples regimes on a bounded domain. Our study is focused on the stochastic controlled process ( X ξ,ς , I ς ) that evolves as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∗ This study has been funded by the Russian Academic Excellence Project '5-100'.

† Corresponding author: hmoreno@hse.ru

where X ξ,ς 0 = ˜ x ∈ O ⊂ CA d , I ς 0 -= ˜ ℓ ∈ I : = { 1 , 2 , . . . , m } , ˜ τ i : = τ i ∧ τ , and τ represents the first exit time of the process X from the set O . Here W = { W t : t ≥ 0 } is a k -dimensional standard Brownian motion. The couple ( ξ, ς ) is a stochastic control strategy, defined later on (see (2.2), (2.1)), which is comprised of a singular control ξ : = ( n , ζ ) ∈ CA d × CA + and a switching control ς : = ( τ i , ℓ i ) i ≥ 0 with τ i a stopping time and ℓ i ∈ I for i ≥ 1. The process ( ξ, ς ) is chosen in such a way that it will minimize the cost criterion

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

One of the main goals of this paper is to verify that the value function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is in C 0 , 1 ∩ W 2 ,p loc ; see Theorem 2.3.

Previous to this paper, the problem (1.3) has been studied extensively (both in bounded and unbounded set domains) for separate cases: when the process X ξ,ς cannot change its regime or when the singular control ξ is not executed on X ξ,ς ; see, e.g., [10, 11, 14, 16] and the reference therein. It is natural to study stochastic control problems where both controls are involved, and see how they can be applied.

For example, both (singular and switching) controls have been used recently in the study of interactions between dividend and investment policies. In that context, a firm that operates under an uncertain environment and risk constraints wants to determine an optimal control on the dividend and investment policies (see [2, 3, 4, 13]). The authors assumed that the cash reserve process of a firm switches between m -regimes governed by a Brownian motion with the same volatility but different drifts [3, 13], a two-dimensional Brownian motion with the same stochastic volatility but different stochastic drifts [4], or different compound Poisson processes with drifts [2]. The costs and benefits for switching regime are made automatically in the firm's cash reserve and they are not considered in the expected returns.

The optimal dividend/investment policy strategy problem mentioned above was studied on the whole spaces CA or CA 2 ; see [2, 3, 13] and [4], respectively, and using viscosity solution approaches, the authors got qualitative descriptions of the value function

It must be highlighted that the explicit or quasi-explicit solution of the optimal strategy for the first two cases mentioned in the previous paragraph (see [3, 4, 13]), has not been found yet and still remains an open problem. For the case when the cash reserve process switches between m -regimes governed by different Poisson processes with drifts, Azcue and Muler [2] proved that there exists an optimal dividend/switching strategy, which is stationary with a band structure.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, Guo and Tomecek [9] studied a connection between singular control of finite variation and optimal switching problems.

Notice that the mixed singular/switching stochastic control problem, proposed in (1.1)(1.3), is defined on an open bounded domain O ⊂ CA d and the costs for switching of regime, represented by ϑ ℓ,κ , are considered in the functional costs V ξ,ς . Additionally, it must be highlighted that our problem is given in a general way, meaning that for every regime ℓ , the drift and the volatility of the process X ξ,ς are stochastic, and there are two types of costs: g ℓ ( X ξ,ς ) ◦ d ζ when the singular control ξ is exercised or h ℓ ( X ξ,ς ) if not. For more details about the cost g ℓ ( X ξ,ς ) ◦ d ζ , see the next section.

The contribution of this paper is twofold.

1. We characterize the solution u to the HJB equation, which is closely related to the value function V given in (1.3), as limit of a sequence of solutions to another system of variational inequalities that is related to ε -penalized absolutely stochastic continuous/switching control problems; see Subsection 2.2.
2. We give an explicit representation of the optimal strategy of these ε -penalized control problems. Then, by probabilistic methods and construction of an approximating sequence of solutions mentioned previously, we verify that the value function (1.3) and the solution u to the HJB equation (2.9) agree on O , showing that V ℓ belongs to C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 ,p loc ( O ); see Section 4.

The rest of this document is organized as follows: in Section 2 we consistently formulate the stochastic control problem studied here; see (2.8), and give the assumptions for obtaining the main results of this paper; Theorems 2.3, 2.5. Also we introduce the ε -penalized absolutely continuous/switching control problem and its HJB equation (2.19). Then, in Section 3, a non-linear partial differential system (NPDS) is introduced, where some ` a priori estimates are given. Afterwards, using Lemma 3.2, Proposition 3.3, Arzel` a-Ascoli compactness criterion and the reflexivity of L p loc ( O ); see [6, Section C.8, p. 718] and [1, Thm. 2.46, p. 49] respectively, we prove the existence, regularity and uniqueness of the solution u ε to (2.19); see Subsection 3.1. In Subsection 3.2, Theorem 2.3 is verified whose proof is done by selecting a sub-sequence of { u ε } ε ∈ (0 , 1) . Then, in Section 4, a verification lemma of the ε -penalized absolutely continuous/switching control problem is presented. This lemma is divided into two parts: Lemmas 4.1 and 4.4. Afterwards, we give the proof of Theorem 2.3. In section 5, we draw our conclusions and discuss possible extensions of this paper. Finally, the proofs of Lemma 3.2 and Proposition 3.3 are given in the appendix. To finalize this section, let us say that the notations and definitions of the function spaces that are used in this paper are standard and the reader can find them in [1, 5, 6, 7, 8].

## 2 Model formulation, assumptions and main results

Let W = { W t : t ≥ 0 } be the k -dimensional standard Brownian motion defined on a complete probability space (Ω , F ,  ). Let BY = {F t } t ≥ 0 be the filtration generated by W . The process ( X ξ,ς , I ς ) is governed by the SDE (1.1), where the parameters b ℓ : = b ( · , ℓ ) : O -→ CA d and σ ℓ := σ ( · , ℓ ) : O -→ d × k , with ℓ ∈ I fixed, satisfy appropriate conditions to ensure the

CA

CA

well-definiteness of the stochastic differential equation (SDE) (1.1); see Subsection 2.1. The control process ( ξ, ς ) is in U ×S where the singular control ξ = ( n , ζ ) belongs to the class U of admissible controls that satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the switching control process ς : = ( τ i , ℓ i ) i ≥ 0 belongs to the class S of switching regime sequences that satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that I ς is a c` adl` ag process that starts in ˜ ℓ which has a possible jump at 0, i.e., if τ 1 = 0, I ς τ 1 = ℓ 1 . Without the influence of the singular control ξ in X ξ,ς , i.e. ζ ≡ 0, the infinitesimal generator of X ξ,ς , within the regime ℓ ∈ I , is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with a ℓ = ( a ℓ ij ) d × d is such that a ℓ ij := 1 2 [ σ ℓ σ T ℓ ] ij . Here | · | , 〈· , ·〉 and tr[ · ] are the Euclidean norm, the inner product, and the matrix trace, respectively.

Remark 2.1 . Taking ∆ X ξ,ς t : = X ξ,ς t -X ξ,ς t -, with ( ξ, ς ) ∈ U × S , we observe X ξ,ς t = X ξ,ς t --n t ∆ ζ t ∈ O for t ∈ [˜ τ i , ˜ τ i +1 ).

Given the initial state (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) ∈ O × I and the control ( ξ, ς ) ∈ U × S , the functional cost of the controlled process ( X ξ,ς , I ς ) is defined by (1.2), where BX ˜ x, ˜ ℓ is the expected value associated with ˜ x, ˜ ℓ , the probability law of ( X ξ,ς , I ς ) when it starts at (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ), and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where ζ c denotes the continuous part of ζ , c ℓ := c ( · , ℓ ) is a positive continuous function from O to CA , and h ℓ : = h ( · , ℓ ), g ℓ : = g ( · , ℓ ) are non-negative continuous functions from O to CA . Notice that within the regime ℓ ∈ I the singular control ξ = ( n , ζ ) generates two types of costs. One of them is when ξ continuously controls the process X ξ,ς by ζ c , the other is when ξ controls X ξ,ς by jumps of ζ . While X ξ,ς is in the regime ℓ , the term ∫ 1 0 g ℓ ( X ξ,ς s --λ n s ∆ ζ s )d λ represents the cost for using the jump ∆ ζ s = 0 with direction -n s on X n,ζ s -at time s .

Remark 2.2 . If g ℓ ≡ a , with a a positive constant, Equation (2.5) is reduced to the following form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

It means that the costs for controlling X ξ,ς by ζ c or ∆ ζ = 0 are the same.

The cost for switching from the regime ℓ to κ is given by a constant ϑ ℓ,κ ≥ 0 and we assume that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which means that it is cheaper to switch directly from regime ℓ 1 to ℓ 3 than using the intermediate regime ℓ 2 . Additionally, we assume that there is no loop of zero cost , i.e.,

no family of regimes { ℓ 0 , ℓ 1 , . . . , ℓ n , ℓ 0 } such that ϑ ℓ 0 ,ℓ 1 = ϑ ℓ 1 ,ℓ 2 = · · · = ϑ ℓ n ,ℓ 0 = 0 . (2.7)

The value function is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (2.7) and by dynamic programming principle, we identify heuristically that the value function V is associated with the following HJB equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where u = ( u 1 , . . . , u m ) : O -→ CA m and, for ℓ ∈ I , the operators L ℓ is as in (2.3) and M ℓ is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.1 Assumptions and main results

First, let us give the necessary conditions to guarantee the existence and uniqueness of the solution u to the HJB equation (2.9) on the space C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc ( O ).

- (H1) The switching costs sequence { ϑ ℓ,κ } ℓ,κ ∈ I is such that ϑ ℓ,κ ≥ 0 and (2.6) and (2.7) hold.
- (H2) The domain set O is an open and bounded set such that its boundary ∂ O is of class C 4 ,α ′ , with α ′ ∈ (0 , 1) fi xed.
- Let ℓ be in I . Then:
- (H3) The functions h ℓ , g ℓ ∈ C 2 ,α ′ ( O ) are non-negative and || h ℓ || C 2 ,α ′ ( O ) , || g ℓ || C 2 ,α ′ ( O ) are bounded by some finite positive constant Λ .
- (H4) Let S ( d ) be the set of d × d symmetric matrices. The coefficients of the differential part of L ℓ , a ℓ = ( a ℓ ij ) d × d : O -→ S ( d ) , b ℓ = ( b ℓ 1 , . . . , b ℓ d ) : O -→ CA d and c ℓ : O -→ CA , are such that a ℓ ij , b ℓ i , c ℓ ∈ C 2 ,α ′ ( O ) , c ℓ &gt; 0 on O and || a ℓ ij || C 2 ,α ′ ( O ) , || b ℓ i || C 2 ,α ′ ( O ) , || c ℓ || C 2 ,α ′ ( O ) are bounded by some finite positive constant Λ . We assume that there exists a real number θ &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

CA

Under assumptions (H1)-(H4), the first main goal obtained in this document is as follows.

Theorem 2.3. The HJB equation (2.9) has a unique non-negative strong solution (in the almost everywhere sense) u = ( u 1 , . . . , u m ) where u ℓ ∈ C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc ( O ) for each ℓ ∈ I .

Remark 2.4 . Previous to this work, the HJB equation (2.9) was studied by Lenhart and Belbas [11] in 1983, in absence of | D 1 u ℓ | -g ℓ , proving that the unique solution to their HJB equation belongs to W 2 , ∞ ( O ). This HJB equation is related to optimal switching stochastic control problems. Afterwards, Yamada [16] analyzed the HJB equation for (2.8) when ϑ ℓ,κ = 0 and g ℓ = g for ℓ, κ ∈ I . This case is an example of a system with loop zero costs whose HJB equation has the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Yamada showed that there exists a solution ˜ u to (2.12) in C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc ( O ) that does not dependent on the elements of I , and assuming g &gt; 0, he guaranteed that ˜ u belongs to C 1 ( O ) ∩ C( O ) and is the unique viscosity solution to (2.12). Comparing those papers with ours, we see that the results presented here are more general than in [11] and, under the assumption of absence of loop zero cost in the system, we guarantee the unique solution u to (2.9) in the almost everywhere sense.

In addition to the statement in (H2), we need to assume that the domain set is convex, which will permit to verify that the value function V and the solution u to (2.9) agree on O .

(H5) The domain set O is an open, convex and bounded set such that its boundary ∂ O is of class C 4 ,α ′ , with α ′ ∈ (0 , 1) fi xed.

Under assumptions (H1) and (H3)-(H5), the second main goal obtained in this document is as follows.

Theorem 2.5. Let V be the value function given by (2.8) . Then V ˜ ℓ (˜ x ) = u ˜ ℓ (˜ x ) for (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) ∈ O× I .

To finalize, let us comment about the assumptions mentioned above. Under (H1)-(H4) and using the Schaefer fixed point theorem (see, i.e., [6, Thm. 4 p. 539]), for each ε, δ ∈ (0 , 1) fixed, we guarantee the existence and uniqueness of the classical non-negative solution u ε,δ to the NPDS (3.1); see Proposition 3.3 and the appendix for its proof. Also, those assumptions are required to show some ` a priori estimates of u ε,δ , which are independent of ε, δ ; see Lemma 3.2. Since (H1) holds, c ℓ &gt; 0 on O and using Lemma 3.2, we verified that u ε is the unique non-negative solution to the HJB equation (2.20); see Subsection 3.1. Once again making use of (H1) and c ℓ &gt; 0 on O , it is proven that the solution u to the HJB equation (2.9) is unique; see Subsection 3.2. Finally, Assumption (H5) helps to check that the value function V , given in (2.18), and the solution u to the HJB equation (2.9) agree on O .

## 2.2 ε -penalized absolutely continuous/switching control problem

To prove the statements above; Theorems 2.3-2.5, firstly we study an ε -penalized absolutely continuous/switching control problem that is closely related to the value function problem seen previously. At the same time, the solution to the HJB equation related to this stochastic control problem (see Proposition 2.6) helps to guarantee the existence and regularity of the solution to the variational inequalities system (2.9). The verification lemma for this part, which is divided into two lemmas (Lemmas 4.1 and 4.4) will be presented below to provide the proofs of Theorem 2.3 and Proposition 2.6.

Define the penalized controls set U ε in the following way

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with ε ∈ (0 , 1) fixed, where C is some fixed positive constant independent of ε . For each (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) ∈ O × I and ( ξ, ς ) ∈ U ε ×S , the process X ξ,ς t = { X ξ,ς t : t ≥ 0 } evolves as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ τ i = τ i ∧ τ and τ = inf { t &gt; 0 : X ξ,ς t / ∈ O} . Before introducing the corresponding functional cost V ξ,ς of ( ξ, ς ) ∈ U ε ×S , let us define the penalization function ψ ε . Consider ϕ as a function from to itself that is in C ∞ ( ) and

CA

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, ψ ε is taken as ψ ε ( t ) = ϕ ( t/ε ), for each ε ∈ (0 , 1). Also, for each ( x, ℓ ) ∈ O × I fixed, we define the Legendre transform of H ε ℓ ( γ, x ):= H ε ( γ, x, ℓ ):= ψ ε ( | γ | 2 -g ℓ ( x ) 2 ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

CA Notice that, for each ( x, ℓ ) ∈ O × I fixed, H ε ℓ ( γ, x ) is a C 2 and convex function with respect to the variable γ ∈ CA d , since ψ ε ∈ C ∞ ( CA ) is convex. The penalized cost of ( ξ, ς ) ∈ U ε ×S is defined by

The value function for this problem is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

whose corresponding HJB equation is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where L ℓ , M ℓ are as in (2.3), (2.10), respectively. Observe that (2.19) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

because of H ε ℓ ( γ, x ) = sup y ∈ CA d {〈 γ, y 〉-l ε ℓ ( y, x ) } . Under assumptions (H1)-(H4), the following result is obtained, whose proof is given in the next section; see Subsection 3.1.

Proposition 2.6. For each ε ∈ (0 , 1) fi xed, there exists a unique non-negative strong solution u ε = ( u ε 1 , . . . , u ε m ) to the HJB equation (2.20) where u ε ℓ ∈ C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc ( O ) for each ℓ ∈ I .

## 3 Existence and uniqueness to the HJB equations

This section is devoted to guarantee existence and uniqueness to the HJB equations (2.9) and (2.20). The solution u ε to (2.20), with ε ∈ (0 , 1) fixed, will be constructed as the limit of a sequence of functions { u ε,δ } δ ∈ (0 , 1) which are solutions to the following NPDS

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The Schaefer fixed point theorem is employed to guarantee the existence of the classic solution u ε,δ to (3.1). For that aim we need some ` a priory estimates of u ε,δ , which will also help to verify the theorems seen in the section above.

Remark 3.1 . From now on, we consider cut-off functions ω ∈ C ∞ c ( O ) which satisfy 0 ≤ ω ≤ 1, ω = 1 on the open ball B βr ⊂ B β ′ r ⊂ O and ω = 0 on O \ B β ′ r , with r &gt; 0, β ′ = β +1 2 and β ∈ (0 , 1]. It is also assumed that || ω || C 2 ( B βr ) ≤ K 1 , where K 1 &gt; 0 is a constant independent of ε and δ .

Under assumptions (H1)-(H4), the following results are obtained. The proofs of them can be seen in the appendix.

Lemma 3.2. Let u ε,δ = ( u ε,δ 1 , . . . , u ε,δ m ) be a vector solution to the NPDS (3.1) , whose components are in C 4 ( O ) . Then, for each ℓ ∈ I , there exist positive constants C 1 , C 2 , C 3 independent of ε, δ such that if x ∈ O , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proposition 3.3. Let ε, δ ∈ (0 , 1) be fixed. There exists a unique non-negative solution u ε,δ = ( u ε,δ 1 , . . . , u ε,δ m ) to the NPDS (3.1) where u ε,δ ℓ ∈ C 4 ,α ′ ( O ) for each ℓ ∈ I .

Remark 3.4 . The NPDS (3.1) has been studied in a number of similar problems. One of them is when the second term on the left-hand side of (3.1) does not appear. This equation was considered by Lenhart and Belbas in 1983 [11] to study a HJB equation related to a switching stochastic control problem when there is no loop of zero cost. Later, Yamada [16] used a NPDS similar to (3.1), to study the HJB equation (2.12). This type of equations appears also in some stochastic singular control problems; see [10] and the references therein.

## 3.1 Proof of proposition 2.6

Let ε ∈ (0 , 1) and ℓ ∈ I be fixed. Since u ε,δ ℓ , ∂ ij u ε,δ ℓ are bounded, uniformly in δ , on the spaces (C 1 ( O ) , || · || C 1 ( O ) ) and (C( B r ) , || · || C( B r ) ), respectively, where B r ⊂ O ; see Lemma 3.2, and using Arzel` a-Ascoli compactness criterion (see [6, p. 718]) and that for each p ∈ (1 , ∞ ), (L p ( B βr ) , || · || L p ( B r ) ), with B r ⊂ O , is a reflexive space (see [1, Thm. 2.46, p. 49]), it can be proven that there exists a sub-sequence { u ε,δ ˆ n ℓ } ˆ n ≥ 1 of { u ε,δ ℓ } δ ∈ (0 , 1) and u ε ℓ ∈ C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc ( O ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We proceed to prove Proposition 2.6.

Proof of Proposition 2.6. Existence. Taking κ ∈ I \ { ℓ } , Using (2.3), (3.1) and Lemma 3.2, we have that ψ δ ( u ε,δ ℓ -u ε,δ κ -ϑ ℓ,κ ) is locally bounded, uniformly in δ . From here and (3.5), it yields that u ε ℓ -u ε κ -ϑ ℓ,κ ≤ 0 in O . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the previous inequality is true on the boundary set ∂ O , since u ε,δ ℓ = u ε,δ κ = 0 on ∂ O and ϑ ℓ,κ ≥ 0. Recall that the operator M ℓ is defined in (2.10). On the other hand, since u ε,δ ˆ n ℓ is the unique solution to (3.1), when δ = δ ˆ n , it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (3.5) and letting δ ˆ n → 0 in (3.7), we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (3.6) and (3.9), max { [ c ℓ -L ℓ ] u ε ℓ + ψ ε ( | D 1 u ε ℓ | 2 -g 2 ℓ ) -h ℓ , u ε ℓ -M ℓ u ε } ≤ 0 a.e. in O . We shall prove that if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then, there exists a neighborhood N x ∗ ⊂ O of x ∗ such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume (3.10) holds. Then, taking κ ∈ I \ { ℓ } , we see that u ε ℓ -u ε κ -ϑ ℓ,κ ≤ u ε ℓ -M ℓ u ε &lt; 0 at x ∗ . Since u ε ℓ -u ε κ is a continuous function, there exists a ball B r κ ⊂ O such that x ∗ ∈ B r κ and u ε ℓ -u ε κ -ϑ ℓ,κ &lt; 0 in B r κ . From here and defining N x ∗ as ⋂ κ ∈ I \{ ℓ } B r κ , we have that N x ∗ ⊂ O is a neighborhood of x ∗ and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Meanwhile, observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since (3.5) holds. Then, by (3.12)-(3.13), it yields that for each κ ∈ I \ { ℓ } , there exists a δ ( κ ) ∈ (0 , 1) such that if δ ˆ n ≤ δ ( κ ) , u ε,δ ˆ n ℓ -u ε,δ ˆ n κ -ϑ ℓ,κ &lt; 0 in N x ∗ . Taking δ ′ := min κ ∈ I \{ ℓ } { δ ( κ ) } , it follows that u ε,δ ˆ n ℓ -u ε,δ ˆ n κ -ϑ ℓ,κ &lt; 0 in N x ∗ , for all δ ˆ n ≤ δ ′ and κ ∈ I \ { ℓ } . From here and since for each δ ˆ n ≤ δ ′ , u ε,δ ˆ n ℓ is the unique solution to (3.1), when δ = δ ˆ n , it implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, (3.11) holds. Hence, we get that for each ε ∈ (0 , 1), u ε = ( u ε 1 , . . . , u ε m ) is a solution the HJB equation (2.19).

Proof of Proposition 2.6. Uniqueness. Let ε ∈ (0 , 1) be fixed. Suppose that u ε = ( u ε 1 , . . . , u ε m ) and v ε = ( v ε 1 , . . . , v ε m ) are two solutions to the HJB equation (2.20) whose components belong to C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc ( O ). Take ( x 0 , ℓ 0 ) ∈ O × I such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that by (3.14), we only need to verify that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is trivially true, if x 0 ∈ ∂ O , since u ε ℓ 0 -v ε ℓ 0 = 0 on ∂ O . Let us assume x 0 ∈ O . We shall verify (3.15) by contradiction. Suppose that u ε ℓ 0 -v ε ℓ 0 &gt; 0 at x 0 . Then, by continuity of u ε ℓ 0 -v ε ℓ 0 , there exists a ball B r 1 ( x 0 ) ⊂ O such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The last inequality is true because of c ℓ 0 &gt; 0 in O . Taking ℓ 1 ∈ I such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by (2.20) and (3.14), we get that v ε ℓ 0 -( v ε ℓ 1 + ϑ ℓ 0 ,ℓ 1 ) = v ε ℓ 0 -M ℓ 0 v ε ≤ u ε ℓ 0 - M ℓ 0 u ε ≤ 0 at x 0 . If v ε ℓ 0 ( x 0 ) -M ℓ 0 v ε ( x 0 ) &lt; 0, there exists a ball B r 2 ( x 0 ) ⊂ O such that v ε ℓ 0 -M ℓ 0 v ε &lt; 0 in B r 2 ( x 0 ). Moreover, from (2.20),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that ψ ε ( | D 1 u ε ℓ 0 | 2 -g 2 ℓ 0 ) -ψ ε ( | D 1 v ε ℓ 0 | 2 -g 2 ℓ 0 ) is a continuous function in O due to ∂ i u ε ℓ 0 , ∂ i v ε ℓ 0 ∈ C 0 ( O ), which satisfies ψ ε ( | D 1 u ε ℓ 0 | 2 -g 2 ℓ 0 ) -ψ ε ( | D 1 v ε ℓ 0 | 2 -g 2 ℓ 0 ) = 0 at x 0 , since x 0 is the point where u ε ℓ 0 -v ε ℓ 0 attains its maximum. Meanwhile, by Bony's maximum principle (see [12]), it is known that for every r ≤ r 3 , with r 3 &gt; 0 small enough,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So, from (3.16), (3.18) and (3.19), it yields that for every r ≤ ˆ r := min { r 1 , r 2 , r 3 } ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That means ψ ε ( | D 1 u ε ℓ 0 | 2 -g 2 ℓ 0 ) -ψ ε ( | D 1 v ε ℓ 0 | 2 -g 2 ℓ 0 ) is not continuous at x 0 which is a contradiction. Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (3.14) and (3.22), we have that u ε ℓ 1 -v ε ℓ 1 attains its maximum at x 0 ∈ O , whose value agrees with u ε ℓ 0 ( x 0 ) -v ε ℓ 0 ( x 0 ). Then, replacing u ε ℓ 0 -v ε ℓ 0 by u ε ℓ 1 -v ε ℓ 1 above and repeating the same arguments seen in (3.17)-(3.21), we get that there is a regime ℓ 2 ∈ I such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recursively, we obtain a sequence of regimes { ℓ i } i ≥ 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since I is finite, there is a regime ℓ ′ that will appear infinitely often in { ℓ i } i ≥ 0 . Let ℓ n = ℓ ′ , for some n &gt; 1. After ˆ n steps, the regime ℓ ′ reappears, i.e. ℓ n +ˆ n = ℓ ′ . Then, by (3.23), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that (3.24) contradicts the assumption that there is no loop of zero cost (see Eq. (2.7)). From here we conclude that (3.15) must occur. Taking v ε -u ε and proceeding in the same way as before, it follows that for each ℓ ∈ I , v ε ℓ -u ε ℓ ≤ 0 in O , and hence we conclude that the solution u ε to the HJB equation (2.20) is unique.

## 3.2 Proof of Theorem 2.3

In view of Lemma 3.2 and by (3.5), the following inequalities hold for each ℓ ∈ I ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some positive constant C 4 = C 4 ( d, Λ , α ′ ). The constant C 1 is as in (3.2). Besides, for each B βr ⊂ O , there exists a positive constant C 5 = C 5 ( d, Λ , α ′ ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, from (3.25)-(3.26) and using again Arzel` a-Ascoli compactness criterion and that (L p ( B βr ) , || · || L p ( B βr ) ) is a reflexive space, we have that there exists a sub-sequence { u ε n ℓ } n ≥ 1 of { u ε ℓ } ε ∈ (0 , 1) and u ℓ ∈ C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc ( O ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 3.5 . The notations C = C ( ∗ , . . . , ∗ ) and K = K ( ∗ , . . . , ∗ ) represent positive constants that depend only on the quantities appearing in parenthesis.

We proceed to prove Theorem 2.3.

Proof of Theorem 2.3. Existence. Now, let ℓ ∈ I be fixed. Since u ε n ℓ is the unique strong solution to the HJB equation (2.20) when ε = ε n , which belongs to C 0 , 1 ( O ), it follows that for each κ ∈ I \ { ℓ } , u ε n ℓ -( u ε n κ + ϑ ℓ,κ ) ≤ u ε n ℓ - M ℓ u ε n ≤ 0 in O . From here and (3.27), it yields that u ℓ -u κ -ϑ ℓ,κ ≤ 0 in O . Then, u ℓ - M ℓ u ≤ 0, in O . Also, we know that [ c ℓ -L ℓ ] u ε n ℓ + ψ ε n ( | D 1 u ε n ℓ | 2 -g 2 ℓ ) ≤ h ℓ a.e. in O . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, by (H3), (3.25), (3.26) and (3.28), there exists a positive constant C 6 = C 6 ( d, Λ , α ′ ) such that 0 ≤ ∫ B r ψ ε n ( | D 1 u ε n ℓ | 2 -g 2 ℓ ) ̟ d x ≤ ∫ B r { h ℓ -[ c ℓ -L ℓ ] u ε n ℓ } ̟ d x ≤ C 6 for each ̟ ∈ B ( B r ), with B ( · ) as in (3.8). Thus, using definition of ψ ε (see (2.16)) and since | D 1 u ε n ℓ | 2 -g 2 ℓ is continuous in O , we have that for each B r ⊂ O , there exists ε ′ ∈ (0 , 1) small enough, such that for all ε n ≤ ε ′ , | D 1 u ε n ℓ | -g ℓ ≤ 0 in B r . Then, since (3.27) holds, it follows that | D 1 u ℓ | ≤ g ℓ in O . From (3.28), we get ∫ B r { [ c ℓ -L ℓ ] u ε n ℓ -h ℓ } ̟ d x ≤ 0, for each ̟ ∈ B ( B r ). From here and (3.27), we obtain that [ c ℓ -L ℓ ] u ℓ -h ℓ ≤ 0 a.e. in O . Therefore, by the seen previously,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Without loss of generality we assume that u ℓ ( x ∗ ) -M ℓ u ( x ∗ ) &lt; 0, for some x ∗ ∈ O . Otherwise, the equality is satisfied in (3.29). Then, for each κ ∈ I such that κ = ℓ , u ℓ -( u κ + ϑ ℓ,κ ) ≤ u ℓ -M ℓ u &lt; 0 at x ∗ . There exists a ball B r 1 ( x ∗ ) ⊂ O such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

due to the continuity of u ℓ -u κ in O . Now, consider that | D 1 u ℓ | -g ℓ &lt; 0 for some x ∗ 1 ∈ B r 1 ( x ∗ ). Otherwise, the equality is also satisfied in (3.29). By continuity of | D 1 u ℓ | -g ℓ , it yields that for some B r 2 ( x ∗ 1 ) ⊂ O , | D 1 u ℓ | -g ℓ &lt; 0 in B r 2 ( x ∗ 1 ). From here, using (3.27), (3.30) and taking N : = B r 1 ( x ∗ ) ∩ B r 2 ( x ∗ 1 ), it can be verified that there exists an ε ′ ∈ (0 , 1) small enough, such that for each ε n ≤ ε ′ , | D 1 u ε n ℓ | -g ℓ &lt; 0 and u ε n ℓ - M ℓ u ε n &lt; 0 in N . Thus, [ c ℓ - L ℓ ] u ε n ℓ = h ℓ a.e. in N , since u ε n is the unique solution to the HJB equation (2.20), when ε = ε n . Then, ∫ N { [ c ℓ - L ℓ ] u ε n ℓ -h ℓ } ̟ d x = 0, for each ̟ ∈ B ( N ). Hence, letting ε n → 0 and using again (3.27), we get that u = ( u 1 , . . . , u m ) is a solution to the HJB equation (2.9).

Proof of Theorem 2.3. Uniqueness. Suppose that u = ( u 1 , . . . , u m ) and v = ( v 1 , . . . , v m ) are two solutions to the HJB equation (2.9) whose components belong to C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc ( O ). Take ( x 0 , ℓ 0 ) ∈ O × I such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As before (see Subsection 3.1), we only need to verify that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume that u ℓ 0 -v ℓ 0 &gt; 0 at x 0 . Then, there exists a ball B r 1 ( x 0 ) ⊂ O such that c ℓ 0 [ u ℓ 0 -v ℓ 0 ] ≥ min x ∈ B r 1 ( x 0 ) { c ℓ 0 ( x )[ u ℓ 0 ( x ) -v ℓ 0 ( x )] } &gt; 0 in B r 1 ( x 0 ) due to the continuity of u ℓ 0 -v ℓ 0 in O and that c ℓ 0 &gt; 0 in O . Meanwhile, from (3.31), v ℓ 0 -M ℓ 0 v ≤ u ℓ 0 -M ℓ 0 u ≤ 0 at x 0 . If v ℓ 0 -M ℓ 0 v &lt; 0 at x 0 , there exists a ball B r 2 ( x 0 ) ⊂ O such that v ℓ 0 -M ℓ 0 v &lt; 0 in B r 2 ( x 0 ). Now, consider the auxiliary function f ̺ := u ℓ 0 -v ℓ 0 -̺u ℓ 0 , with ̺ ∈ (0 , 1). Notice that f ̺ = 0 on ∂ O , for ̺ ∈ (0 , 1), and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Besides, there is a ̺ ′ ∈ (0 , 1) small enough such that sup x ∈ B r 2 ( x 0 ) { f ̺ ( x ) } &gt; 0 for all ̺ ∈ (0 , ̺ ′ ) because of u ℓ 0 -v ℓ 0 &gt; 0 at x 0 . By (3.31) and (3.33), there exists ˆ ̺ ∈ (0 , ̺ ′ ) small enough such that f ˆ ̺ has a local maximum at x ˆ ̺ ∈ B r 1 ( x 0 ) ∩ B r 2 ( x 0 ). It follows that | D 1 v ℓ 0 ( x ˆ ̺ ) | = [1 -ˆ ρ ] | D 1 u ℓ 0 ( x ˆ ̺ ) | &lt; | D 1 u ℓ 0 ( x ˆ ̺ ) | ≤ g ( x ˆ ̺ ) . Thus, there exists a ball B r 3 ( x ˆ ̺ ) ⊂ B r 1 ( x 0 ) ∩ B r 2 ( x 0 ) such that [ c ℓ 0 -L ℓ 0 ] v ℓ 0 -h ℓ 0 = 0 and [ c ℓ 0 -L ℓ 0 ] u ℓ 0 -h ℓ 0 ≤ 0 in B r 3 ( x ˆ ̺ ). Then, by Bony's maximum principle, we have that 0 ≥ lim r → 0 { inf ess B r ( x ˆ ̺ ) tr[ a ℓ 0 D 2 f ˆ ̺ ] } ≥ c ℓ 0 f ˆ ̺ +ˆ ̺h ℓ 0 at x ˆ ̺ , which is a contradiction because of ˆ ̺h ℓ ≥ 0, f ˆ ̺ &gt; 0 and c ℓ 0 &gt; 0 at x ˆ ̺ . We conclude that, 0 = v ℓ 0 - M ℓ 0 v ≤ u ℓ 0 - M ℓ 0 u ≤ 0 at x 0 . Using the same arguments seen in the proof of uniqueness of the solution to the HJB equation (2.9) (see Subsection 3.1), it can be verified that there is a contradiction with the assumption that there is no loop of zero cost (see Eq. (2.7)). From here we conclude that (3.32) must occur. Taking v -u and proceeding in the same way as before, we see u is the unique solution to the HJB equation (2.9).

## 4 Probabilistic part

In this section, under assumptions (H1) and (H3)-(H5), we shall proceed to verify that the value functions V given in (2.8) agrees with the solution u to the HJB equation (2.9) on O .

For that aim, let us start showing that the value function V ε given in (2.18), with ε ∈ (0 , 1) fixed, agrees with the solution u ε to (2.20). The proof of this result is presented in two parts; see Lemmas 4.1 and 4.4.

Let us consider ( X ξ,ς , I ς ) evolves as (2.14)-(2.15), with ( ξ, ς ) ∈ U ε ×S and initial state (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) ∈ O × I . Recall that U ε is defined in (2.13) and S is the set of elements ς = ( τ i , ℓ i ) i ≥ 0 that satisfy (2.2). The functional cost V ξ,ς is as in (2.17).

Under assumptions (H1)-(H4), Lemmas 4.1 and 4.8 shall be proven.

Lemma 4.1 (Verification Lemma for penalized absolutely continuous/switching control problem. First part) . Let ε ∈ (0 , 1) be fixed. Then, u ε ˜ ℓ (˜ x ) ≤ V ζ,ς (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) for each (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) ∈ O × I and ( ξ, ς ) ∈ U ε ×S .

From now on, for simplicity of notation, we replace X ξ,ς by X in the proofs of the results.

Proof of Lemma 4.1. Let { u ε,δ ˆ n } ˆ n ≥ 1 be the sequence of unique solutions to the NPDS (3.1), when δ = δ ˆ n , which satisfy (3.5). By Proposition 3.3, it is known that u ε,δ ˆ n ℓ ∈ C 4 ,α ′ ( O ) for ℓ ∈ I . Then, using integration by parts and Itˆ o's formula (see [15, Cor. 2 and Thm. 33, pp. 68 and 81, respectively]) in e -r ( t ) u ε,δ ˆ n ℓ i ( X t ) on [˜ τ i , ˜ τ i +1 ), i ≥ 0, where ˜ τ i = τ i ∧ τ , τ = inf { t ≥ 0 : X t ∈ O} and r ( t ) is as in (2.4), and taking expected value on it, we have that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since ˜ M ℓ i [˜ τ i , t ∧ ˜ τ i +1 ; X,u ε,δ ˆ n ] is a square integrable martingale, 〈 γ, y 〉 ≤ ψ ε ( | γ | 2 -g ℓ ( x ) 2 ) +

̸

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have max { e -r ( t ∧ ˜ τ i ) u ε,δ ˆ n ℓ i ( X t ∧ ˜ τ i ) , |D [ t ∧ ˜ τ i +1 , ℓ i , ℓ i +1 , X, u ε,δ ˆ n ] |} ≤ 2 C 1 + max ( x,ℓ ) ∈O× I c ℓ ( x ) due to Lemma 3.2. Meanwhile, we know that max ( x,ℓ ) ∈O× I | u ε,δ ˆ n ℓ ( x ) -u ε ℓ ( x ) | -→ δ ˆ n → 0 0. Then, letting first δ ˆ n → 0 and after t →∞ in (4.3) and by the dominated convergence theorem, it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observe that D [ τ i +1 , ℓ i , ℓ i +1 , X, u ε ] BD { τ i +1 &lt;τ } ≤ 0 for i ≥ 0 because of u ε ℓ -( u ε κ + ϑ ℓ,κ ) ≤ u ε ℓ - M ℓ u ε ≤ 0. With this remark and (4.5), we conclude the statement of the lemma above.

## ε -penalized absolutely continuous/switching optimal control problem

Before presenting the second part of the verification lemma and proving it, let us first construct the control ( ξ ε, ∗ , ς ε, ∗ ) which turns out to be the optimal strategy for the ε -penalized absolutely continuous/switching control problem. For that aim, let us introduce the switching regions.

For any ℓ ∈ I , let S ε ℓ be the set defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that S ε ℓ is a closed subset of O and corresponds with the region where it is optimal to switch regimes. The complement C ε ℓ of S ε ℓ in O , where is optimal to stay in the regime ℓ , is the so-called continuation region

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

Remark 4.2 . Observe that u ε ℓ ∈ W 2 , ∞ loc ( C ε ℓ ) = C 1 , 1 loc ( C ε ℓ ). It implies that h ℓ -ψ ε ( | D 1 u ε ℓ | 2 -g 2 ℓ ) ∈ C 0 ,α ′ loc ( C ε ℓ ) due to h ℓ ∈ C 2 ,α ′ ( O )) and ψ ε ( | D 1 u ε ℓ | 2 -g 2 ℓ ) ∈ C 0 ,α ′ loc ( C ε ℓ ). From here and using Theorem 9.19 of [8], it yields that u ε ℓ ∈ C 2 ,α ′ loc ( C ε ℓ ).

Remark 4.3 . Notice that there are no isolated points in a switching region S ε ℓ .

Also, the set S ε ℓ satisfies the following property.

Lemma 4.4. Let ℓ be in I . Then, S ε ℓ = ˜ S ε ℓ : = ⋃ κ ∈ I \{ ℓ } S ε ℓ,κ where S ε ℓ,κ : = { x ∈ C ε κ : u ε ℓ ( x ) = u ε κ ( x ) + ϑ ℓ,κ } .

̸

Proof. We obtain trivially that ˜ S ε ℓ ⊂ S ε ℓ due to u ε ℓ -u ε κ -ϑ ℓ,κ ≤ u ε ℓ -M ℓ u ε ≤ 0 on O for κ ∈ I \ { ℓ } . If x ∈ S ε ℓ , there is an ℓ 1 = ℓ where u ε ℓ ( x ) = u ε ℓ 1 ( x ) + ϑ ℓ,ℓ 1 . Notice that x must belong either C ε ℓ 1 or S ε ℓ 1 . If x ∈ C ε ℓ 1 , it yields that x ∈ S ε ℓ,ℓ 1 ⊂ ˜ S ε ℓ . Otherwise, there is an ℓ 2 = ℓ 1 such that u ε ℓ 1 ( x ) = u ε ℓ 2 ( x ) + ϑ ℓ 1 ,ℓ 2 . It implies u ε ℓ ( x ) = u ε ℓ 2 ( x ) + ϑ ℓ,ℓ 1 + ϑ ℓ 1 ,ℓ 2 ≥ u ε ℓ 2 ( x ) + ϑ ℓ,ℓ 2 , since (2.6) holds. Then, u ε ℓ ( x ) = u ε ℓ 2 ( x ) + ϑ ℓ,ℓ 2 . Again x must belong either C ε ℓ 2 or S ε ℓ 2 . If x ∈ C ε ℓ 2 , it yields that x ∈ S ε ℓ,ℓ 2 ⊂ ˜ S ε ℓ . Otherwise, arguing the same way than before and since the number of regimes is finite, it must occur that there is some ℓ i = ℓ such that x ∈ C ε ℓ i and u ε ℓ ( x ) = u ε ℓ i ( x ) + ϑ ℓ,ℓ i . Therefore x ∈ S ε ℓ,ℓ i ⊂ ˜ S ε ℓ .

̸

Now we construct the optimal control ( ξ ε, ∗ , ς ε, ∗ ) to the problem (2.18). Let (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) be in O× I . The dynamics of the process X ε, ∗ t := { X ε, ∗ t : t ≥ 0 } and ( ξ ε, ∗ , ς ε, ∗ ) is given recursively in the following way:

- (i) Define τ ∗ 0 = 0 and ℓ ∗ 0 -= ˜ ℓ . If ˜ x / ∈ C ε ˜ ℓ , take τ ∗ 1 : = 0 and pass to item (ii) because of Lemma 4.4. Otherwise, the process X ε, ∗ evolves as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with X ε, ∗ 0 = ˜ x , τ ∗ := inf { t &gt; 0 : X ε, ∗ t / ∈ O} ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The control process ξ ε, ∗ = ( n ε, ∗ , ζ ε, ∗ ) is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ 0 ∈ d is a unit vector fixed, and ζ ε, ∗ t = ∫ t 0 ˙ ζ ε, ∗ s d s , with t ∈ [0 , ˜ τ ∗ 1 ) and

CA

̸

- (ii) Recursively, letting i ≥ 1 and defining

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if τ ∗ i &lt; τ ∗ , the process X ε, ∗ evolves as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

with γ 0 ∈ CA d is a unit vector fixed, and ζ ε, ∗ t = ∫ t τ ε, ∗ i ˙ ζ ε, ∗ s d s , with t ∈ [ τ ∗ i , ˜ τ ∗ i +1 ) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 4.5 . Suppose that τ ∗ i &lt; τ ∗ for some i &gt; 0. We notice that for t ∈ [ τ ∗ i , τ ∗ i +1 ), n ε, ∗ t ˙ ζ ε, ∗ t = 2 ψ ′ ε ( | D 1 u ε ℓ ∗ i ( X ε, ∗ t ) | 2 -g ( X ε, ∗ t ) 2 ) D 1 u ε ℓ ∗ i ( X ε, ∗ t ), ∆ ζ ε, ∗ t = 0, | n ε, ∗ t | = 1 and, by (2.16) and (3.25), it yields that ˙ ζ ε, ∗ t ≤ 2 C 4 ε . Also we see that X t ∈ C ε ℓ ∗ i if t ∈ [ τ ∗ i , τ ∗ i +1 ) due to Lemma 4.4.

Remark 4.6 . On the event { τ ∗ = ∞} , ˜ τ ∗ i = τ ∗ i for i ≥ 0. From here and by (4.8)-(4.9) and (4.12)-(4.13), it yields that the control process ( ξ ε, ∗ , ς ε, ∗ ) belongs to U ε ×S . On the event { τ ∗ &lt; ∞} , let ˆ ι be defined as ˆ ι = max { i ∈ N : τ ∗ i ≤ τ ∗ } . Then, taking τ ∗ i : = τ ∗ + i and ℓ ∗ i = ˆ ℓ for i &gt; ˆ ι , where ˆ ℓ ∈ I is fixed, it follows that ς ε, ∗ = ( τ ∗ i , ℓ ∗ i ) i ≥ 1 ∈ S . Meanwhile, since (3.25) holds on O and u ε ℓ = 0 on O , we take ˙ ζ ε, ∗ t ≡ 0 and n ε, ∗ t := γ 0 , for t &gt; τ ∗ . In this way, we have that ( n ε, ∗ , ζ ε, ∗ ) ∈ U ε .

BD BD Lemma 4.8 (Verification Lemma for penalized absolutely continuous/switching control problem. Second part) . Let ε ∈ (0 , 1) be fixed and let ( X ε, ∗ , I ε, ∗ ) be the process that is governed by (4.6) -(4.13) . Then, u ε ˜ ℓ (˜ x ) = V ξ ε, ∗ ,ς ε, ∗ (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) = V ε ˜ ℓ (˜ x ) for each (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) ∈ O × I .

Remark 4.7 . Taking I ε, ∗ t = ˜ ℓ [0 ,τ ∗ 1 ) ( t ) + ∑ i ≥ 1 ℓ ∗ i [ τ ∗ i ,τ ∗ i +1 ) ( t ), we see that it is a c` adl` ag process.

Proof. Take ˆ τ ∗ ,q i : = τ ∗ i ∧ inf { t &gt; τ ∗ i -1 : X ε, ∗ t / ∈ O q } , with O q : = { x ∈ O : dist( x, ∂ O ) &gt; 1 /q } and q a positive integer large enough. By Remarks 4.2 and 4.5, it is known that u ε ℓ is a C 2 -function on C ε ℓ and that X ε, ∗ t ∈ C ε ℓ ∗ i if t ∈ [ˆ τ ∗ ,q i , ˆ τ ∗ ,q i +1 ). Then, using integration by parts and Itˆ o's formula in e -r ( t ) u ε ℓ ∗ i ( X ε, ∗ t ) on the interval [ˆ τ ∗ ,q i , ˆ τ ∗ ,q i +1 ), an taking expected value on it, we obtain a similar expression as in (4.1). Now, considering that ˜ M ℓ ∗ i [ˆ τ ∗ ,q i , t ∧ ˆ τ ∗ ,q i +1 ; X ε, ∗ , u ε ], which was defined in (4.2), is a square integrable martingale, and since [ c ℓ ∗ i -L ℓ ∗ i ] u ε ℓ ∗ i = h ℓ ∗ i -

ψ ε ( | D 1 u ε ℓ ∗ i | 2 -g 2 ℓ ∗ i ) on C ε ℓ ∗ i and the supremum of l ε ℓ ( η, x ) is attained if γ is related to η by η = 2 ψ ′ ε ( | γ | 2 -g ℓ ( x ) 2 ) γ , i.e., l ε ℓ (2 ψ ′ ε ( | γ | 2 -g ℓ ( x ) 2 ) γ, x ) = 2 ψ ′ ε ( | γ | 2 -g ℓ ( x ) 2 ) | γ | 2 -ψ ε ( | γ | 2 -g ℓ ( x ) 2 ), it can be checked

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Notice that ˆ τ ∗ ,q i ↑ ˜ τ ∗ i as q →∞ ,  ˜ x -a.s.. Consequently, letting first q →∞ and after t →∞ in (4.14), we see that

with D [ τ ∗ i +1 , ℓ ∗ i , ℓ ∗ i +1 , X ε, ∗ , u ε ] as in (4.4). By (4.7) and (4.10),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

BD Therefore, from here and (4.15), we obtain the desired result that was given in the lemma above.

## Proof of Theorem 2.5

To finalize this section, we present the proof of Theorem 2.5, which shall be proven under assumptions (H1) and (H3)-(H5). Recall that U and S are the families of controls ξ = ( n , ζ ) and ς = ( τ i , ℓ i ) i ≥ 0 that satisfy (2.1) and (2.2), respectively. The functional cost V ξ,ς is given by (1.2) for ( ξ, ς ) ∈ U × S .

Proof of Theorem 2.5. Let { u ε n } n ≥ 1 be the sequence of unique strong solutions to the HJB equation (2.20), when ε = ε n , which satisfy (3.27). From Lemma 4.8, we know that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with ( ξ ε n , ∗ , ς ε n , ∗ ) as in (4.7)-(4.10), when ε = ε n . Notice that l ε n ( x, βγ ) ≥ 〈 βγ, g ℓ ∗ i ( x ) γ 〉 -ψ ε n ( | g ℓ ∗ i ( x ) γ | 2 -g ℓ ∗ i ( x ) 2 ) = βg ℓ ∗ i ( x ), with β ∈ CA and γ ∈ CA d a unit vector. Then, from here

̸

and considering ( X ε n , ∗ , I ε n , ∗ ) governed by (4.6) and (4.11), it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that V ξ εn, ∗ ,ς εn, ∗ is the cost function given in (1.2) corresponding to the control ( ξ ε n , ∗ , ς ε n , ∗ ), where the second term in the RHS of (2.5) is zero, since ζ ε n , ∗ has the continuous part only. Letting ε n → 0 in (4.16), it yields V ≤ u on O .

Let { u ε n ,δ ˆ n } n, ˆ n ≥ 1 be the sequence of unique solutions to the NPDS (3.1), when ε = ε n and δ = δ ˆ n , which satisfy (3.5) and (3.27). Let us consider ( X,I ) evolves as in (1.1) with initial state (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) ∈ O × I and the control process ( ξ, ς ) belongs to U × S . Take ˆ τ q i := τ i ∧ inf { t &gt; τ i -1 : X t / ∈ O q } , with i ≥ 1, O q := { x ∈ O : dist( x, ∂ O ) &gt; 1 /q } and q a positive integer large enough. Using integration by parts and Itˆ o's formula in e -r ( t ) u ε n ,δ ˆ n ℓ i ( X t ) on [ˆ τ q i , ˆ τ q i +1 ), i ≥ 0, we get that

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

BD where ˜ M ℓ i [ˆ τ q i , t ∧ ˆ τ q i +1 ; X,u ε n ,δ ˆ n ] is as in (4.2) and

Since X s --n s ∆ ξ t ∈ O for s ∈ [ˆ τ q i , t ∧ ˆ τ q i +1 ), i ≥ 0, and O is a convex set, by Mean Value Theorem, it implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

Taking expected value in (4.17) and since ˜ M ℓ i [ˆ τ q i , t ∧ ˆ τ q i +1 ; X,u ε n ,δ ˆ n ] is a square integrable martingale and [ c ℓ i -L ℓ i ] u ε n ,δ ˆ n ℓ i ≤ h ℓ i , it follows that

̸

̸

̸

Notice that for s ∈ [ˆ τ q i , t ∧ ˆ τ q i +1 ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with λ ∈ [0 , 1]. Then, letting ε n , δ ˆ n → 0 in (4.18), by Dominated Convergence Theorem and using | D 1 u ℓ i | ≤ g ℓ i ,

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

with g ℓ i ( X s -) ◦ d ζ s -as in (2.5). Again, letting q →∞ and t →∞ in (4.19), it implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

with ˜ τ i = τ i ∧ τ and D [ τ i +1 , ℓ i , ℓ i +1 , X, u ] as in (4.4). Noticing that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

BD and using (1.2), (4.20), it yields that u ˜ ℓ (˜ x ) ≤ V ξ,ς (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) for each (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) ∈ O × I . Since the previous property is true for each control ( ξ, ς ) ∈ U × S , we conclude that u ˜ ℓ (˜ x ) ≤ V ˜ ℓ (˜ x ) for each (˜ x, ˜ ℓ ) ∈ O × I .

## 4.1 About penalized absolutely continuous /switching optimal controls

Previously, we checked that the value function V ℓ , defined in (2.8), satisfies the HJB (2.9). This means that for each ℓ ∈ I fixed, the domain set O is divided into three parts. Consider C ℓ := O\ ( N ℓ ∪ S ℓ ), where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The open set C ℓ is where V ℓ satisfies the elliptic partial differential equation [ c ℓ -L ℓ ] V ℓ = h ℓ , which suggests that the 'optimal control' ( ξ ∗ , ς ∗ ) corresponding to this problem will not be exercised when the process X ξ ∗ ,ς ∗ is in C ℓ . Otherwise, either ξ ∗ or ς ∗ will be exercised on X ξ ∗ ,ς ∗ in the following way:

- (i) if X ξ ∗ ,ς ∗ ∈ N ℓ \ S ℓ , the singular control ξ ∗ will act on X ξ ∗ ,ς ∗ in such a way that X ξ ∗ ,ς ∗ will be pushed back to some point y ∈ ∂ C ℓ ;

̸

- (ii) if X ξ ∗ ,ς ∗ ∈ S ℓ , the switching control ς ∗ will be executed in such a way that the process X ξ ∗ ,ς ∗ will switch to some regime κ = ℓ at time τ κ ≤ τ .

The construction of an optimal strategy to the problem (2.8) still remains an open problem of interest. A way for doing this construction is verifying firstly that ∂ C ℓ is at least of class C 1 , which is not easy to get.

In the literature, we can see that the existence of an optimal dividend/switching strategy, which is an example of a mixed singular/switching control problem, has been solved when the payoff expected value is given by (1.4) and the cash reserve process switches between m -regimes governed by different Poisson processes with drifts, see [2]. The authors proved that their solution is stationary with a band structure.

Another way to address the problem (2.8) is by means of ε -penalized absolutely continuous/switching optimal controls which have been constructed in (4.6)-(4.13).

By Lemma 4.8 and the proof of Theorem 2.5, it is known that for each ℓ ∈ I , V ε n ℓ → V ℓ as ε n ↓ 0 and V ℓ ≤ V ξ εn, ∗ ,ς εn, ∗ ( · , ℓ ) ≤ V ε n ℓ on O , with ( ξ ε n , ∗ , ς ε n , ∗ ) as in (4.6)-(4.13), and V ξ εn, ∗ ,ς εn, ∗ ( · , ℓ ) , V ℓ , V ε n ℓ given by (1.2), (2.8) and (2.18), respectively.

Taking ε n small enough and considering that the process X ε n , ∗ t is on the regime ℓ ∗ i at time t ∈ [ τ ∗ i , ˜ τ ∗ i +1 ), we have that X ε n , ∗ t ∈ C ε n ℓ ∗ i and the control ( ξ ε n , ∗ , ς ε n , ∗ ) will be exercised as follows:

- (i) if the controlled process X ε n , ∗ satisfies | D 1 V ε n ℓ ∗ i ( X ε n , ∗ t ) | ≤ g ℓ ∗ i ( X ε n , ∗ t ), then ζ ε n , ∗ t ≡ 0 and X ε n , ∗ t will stay in C ℓ ∗ i ;

- (ii) if 0 &lt; | D 1 V ε n ℓ ∗ i ( X ε n , ∗ t ) | 2 -g ℓ ∗ i ( X ε n , ∗ t ) 2 &lt; 2 ε n , the process X ε n , ∗ t will be crossing ∂ C ℓ ∗ i persistently;
- (iii) otherwise, ξ ε n , ∗ t = ( n ε n , ∗ t , ζ ε n , ∗ t ) will exercise a force 2 ε n | D 1 V ε n ℓ ∗ i ( X ε n , ∗ t ) | and in the direction -D 1 V εn ℓ ∗ i ( X εn, ∗ t ) | D 1 V εn ℓ ∗ i ( X εn, ∗ t ) | at X ε n , ∗ t in such a way that it will be pushed back to ∂ C ℓ ∗ i .
- (iv) At time t = τ ∗ i +1 &lt; τ ∗ , X ε n , ∗ τ ∗ i +1 will be for the first time in S ε n ℓ ∗ i and will switch to the regime ℓ ∗ i +1 .

This procedure will be repeated until the time τ ∗ which represents the first exit time of the process X ε n , ∗ from the set O .

## 5 Conclusions and some further work

Under Assumptions (H1)-(H4), the existence and uniqueness for the strong solutions to the HJB equations (2.9) and (2.20) were guaranteed on the space C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc ( O ). After that, it was proven that the value function V ε for the penalized absolutely continuous/switching control problem seen in Subsection 2.2 satisfies (2.20), showing that for ℓ ∈ I , V ε ℓ ∈ C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc ( O ). Finally, assuming also that the domain set O is an open convex set and by probabilistic arguments, it was verified that the value function V , given in (2.8), is characterized as a limit of V ε as ε ↓ 0 which permitted to conclude that V satisfies (2.9) and from here, to see that for ℓ ∈ I , V ℓ ∈ C 0 , 1 ( O ) ∩ W 2 , ∞ loc ( O ).

Although the optimal control process for the mixed singular/switching stochastic control problem (2.8) was not given explicitly, and this is still an open problem, we constructed a family of ε -penalized absolutely continuous/switching optimal control processes { ( ξ ε n , ∗ , ς ε n , ∗ ) } n ≥ 1 ; see (4.6)-(4.13), such that the limit of their value functions V ε n (as ε n → 0) agrees with the value function V .

There are some extensions to be considered and directions for future research. Some of them could be:

1. To study the value function V given in (2.8) when the infinitesimal generator of the process X ξ,ς , without the influence of the singular control ξ in X ξ,ς , within the regime ℓ , is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

2. To analyze the problem given in (1.1)-(1.3) on the whole space CA d . In this direction, a technically involved problem could be studied when the controlled process can switch between m -regimes which are governed by Brownian motions with different drifts.

CA where ν is a Radon measure on CA d ∗ := CA d \ { 0 } satisfying ∫ CA d ∗ [ | z | 2 ∧ 1] ν (d z ) &lt; ∞ , and s ℓ : O× CA d -→ [0 , 1] is such that ∫ CA d ∗ s ℓ ( x, z ) BD { x + z / ∈O} ν (d z ) &lt; ∞ for x ∈ O . In this case, the main difficulty lies in obtaining some ` a priori estimates of ∫ {| z |∈ (0 , 1) } [ ∫ 1 0 | D 2 u ε ( · + tz ) | d t ] | z | 2 s ℓ ( · , z ) ν (d z ) that are independent of ε .

## A Appendix

Recall that Lemma 3.2 and Proposition 3.3 are under assumptions (H1)-(H4). Let us first show (3.2) and (3.3) of Lemma 3.2, which helps to verify the existence of the classic solution u ε,δ to the NPDS (3.1). Afterwards, to finalize the proof of Proposition 3.3, we shall prove (3.4) of Lemma 3.2. From now on, for simplicity of notation, we replace u ε,δ by u in the proofs.

## A.1 Verification of (3.2) and (3.3)

Proof of Lemma 3.2. Eq. (3.2) . Let ( x 0 , ℓ 0 ) ∈ O× I be such that u ℓ 0 ( x 0 ) = min x ∈O ,ℓ ∈ I u ℓ ( x ). If x 0 ∈ ∂ O , it follows easily that u ℓ ( x ) ≥ u ℓ 0 ( x 0 ) = 0 for all ( x, ℓ ) ∈ O × I . Suppose that x 0 ∈ O . Since u ℓ 0 = 0 in ∂ O , we have that u ℓ 0 ( x 0 ) ≤ 0. On the other hand, we know that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, using (H3), (3.1) and (A.1), 0 ≤ tr[ a ℓ 0 D 2 u ℓ 0 ] = c ℓ 0 u ℓ 0 -h ℓ 0 ≤ c ℓ 0 u ℓ 0 , at x 0 . Since c ℓ 0 &gt; 0 on O , it follows that u ℓ 0 ( x 0 ) ≥ 0. Therefore u ℓ ( x ) ≥ u ℓ 0 ( x 0 ) = 0, for all x ∈ O and ℓ ∈ I .

For each ℓ ∈ I , consider ˜ v ℓ as the unique solution to the Dirichlet problem [ c ℓ -L ℓ ]˜ v ℓ = h ℓ in O , s.t ˜ v ℓ = 0, on ∂ O . By Theorem 1.2.10 of [8], it is well know that ˜ v ℓ ∈ C 2 ,α ′ ( O ) and || ˜ v ℓ || C 2 ,α ′ ( O ) ≤ K 2 || h ℓ || C 0 ,α ′ ( O ) ≤ K 2 Λ =: C 1 , where K 2 = K 2 ( d, Λ , α ′ ), since (H2)-(H4) hold. Meanwhile, from Eq. (3.1), it can been seen that for each ℓ ∈ I , [ c ℓ -L ℓ ] u ℓ ≤ h ℓ in O . Then, taking η ℓ := u ℓ -˜ v ℓ , we get for each ℓ ∈ I ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let x ∗ ℓ ∈ O be a maximum point of η ℓ . If x ∗ ℓ ∈ ∂ O , trivially we have u ℓ -˜ v ℓ ≤ 0 in O . Suppose that x ∗ ℓ ∈ O . Note η ℓ ( x ∗ ℓ ) ≥ 0 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, using (A.2)-(A.3), 0 ≥ tr[ a ℓ D 2 η ℓ ] ≥ c ℓ η ℓ , at x ∗ ℓ . Hence, η ℓ ≤ 0 at x ∗ ℓ , since c ℓ &gt; 0 on O . We conclude [ u ℓ -v ℓ ]( x ) ≤ [ u ℓ -v ℓ ]( x ∗ ℓ ) = 0 for x ∈ O . Therefore, for each ℓ ∈ I , 0 ≤ u ℓ ≤ C 1 on O .

Proof of Lemma 3.2. Eq. (3.3) . For each ℓ ∈ I , consider the auxiliary function w ℓ := | D 1 u ℓ | 2 -λA ε,δ u ℓ , on O , where A ε,δ : = max ( x,ℓ ) ∈O× I | D 1 u ℓ ( x ) | and λ ≥ 1 a constant that shall be selected later on. Observe that if A ε,δ ≤ 1, we obtain a bound for A ε,δ that is independent of ε, δ . Hence, we obtain the statement given in the lemma above. We assume henceforth that A ε,δ &gt; 1. Taking first and second derivatives to w ℓ , it can be checked that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Meanwhile, from (2.3) and (3.1),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ψ ε,ℓ ( · ), ψ δ,ℓ,κ ( · ) denote ψ ε ( | D 1 u ℓ | 2 -g 2 ℓ ), ψ δ ( u ℓ -u κ -ϑ ℓ,κ ), respectively, and ˜ D 1 u ℓ := 〈 b ℓ , D 1 u ℓ 〉 + c ℓ u ℓ -h ℓ . Now, differentiating (3.1), multiplying by 2 ∂ i u and taking summation over all i 's, we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

Then, from (A.4)-(A.6), it can be shown that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (H3), (H4) and (3.2), notice that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by (A.8) and using convexity property of ψ · , i.e. ψ · ( r ) ≤ ψ ′ · ( r ) r , for all r ∈ CA , we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some K 3 = K 3 ( d, Λ , α ′ ). Let ( x λ , ℓ λ ) ∈ O × I (depending on λ ) be such that w ℓ λ ( x λ ) = max ( x,ℓ ) ∈O× I w ℓ ( x ). From here, (3.2) and by definition of w ℓ , we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So, it suffices to bound | D 1 u ℓ λ ( x λ ) | 2 by a positive constant C = C ( d, Λ , α ′ ). If x λ ∈ ∂ O , by (3.2), it can be verified that | D 1 u ℓ λ | ≤ d 1 2 C 1 on ∂ O . Then, from (A.10),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, observe that for each ̺ &gt; 0, there exists x ̺ ∈ O such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using (A.11) in (A.12) and letting ̺ → 0,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Multiplying by 1 /A ε,δ in (A.13) and since A ε,δ &gt; 1, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this case, considering λ &gt; 1 fixed and C 2 : = C 1 [ dC 1 + λ ], we obtain the result that is proposed in the lemma. Let x λ be in O . It is known that ∂ i | D 1 u ℓ λ | 2 -λA ε,δ ∂ i u ℓ λ = 0 at x λ . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also, since ϑ ℓ λ ,κ ≥ 0 and w ℓ λ ( x λ ) -w κ ( x λ ) ≥ 0, for each κ ∈ I , and | y 1 | 2 -| y 2 | 2 = 2[ | y 1 | 2 -〈 y 1 , y 2 〉 ] -| y 1 -y 2 | 2 ≤ 2[ | y 1 | 2 -〈 y 1 , y 2 〉 ], for y 1 , y 2 ∈ d , it implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (A.9), (A.15),(A.16) and since tr[ a ℓ λ ( x λ ) D 2 w ℓ λ ( x λ )] ≤ 0, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, notice that either ψ ′ ε,ℓ λ ( · ) &lt; 1 ε or ψ ′ ε,ℓ λ ( · ) = 1 ε at x λ . If ψ ′ ε,ℓ λ ( · ) &lt; 1 ε at x λ , by definition of ψ ε , given in (2.16), it follows that | D 2 u ε ( x λ ) | 2 -g ℓ ( x λ ) 2 ≤ 2 ε . It implies that | D 1 u ℓ λ ( x λ ) | 2 ≤ Λ 2 + 2. Then, by (A.10) and arguing as in (A.14), we obtain | D 1 u ℓ ( x ) | ≤ A ε,δ ≤ 2 + Λ 2 + λC 1 , for each ( x, ℓ ) ∈ O × I . For λ &gt; 1 fixed, it is obtained the result given in the lemma. Now, assume that ψ ′ ε,ℓ λ ( · ) = 1 ε . Then, taking λ &gt; max { 1 , K 3 } fixed, using (A.17) and proceeding of a similar way than (A.14), we get 0 ≤ [ K 3 -λ ] | D 1 u ℓ λ | 2 + K 3 [2 + λ ] | D 1 u ℓ λ | + λK 3 , at x λ . From here, it yields that | D 1 u ℓ λ ( x λ ) | &lt; K 4 , for some K 4 = K 4 ( d, Λ , α ′ ). Using (A.10) and by similar arguments that (A.13), we conclude that there exists C 2 = C 2 ( d, Λ , α ′ ) such that | D 1 u ℓ | ≤ A ε,δ ≤ C 2 on O .

## A.2 Existence and uniqueness of the solution to the NPDS

Let C k , C k,α ′ be the sets given by (C k ( O )) m , (C k,α ′ ( O )) m , respectively, with k ∈  and α ′ ∈ (0 , 1). Defining || w || C k,α ′ = max i ∈ I {|| w i || C k,α ′ ( O ) } for each w = ( w 1 , . . . , w m ) ∈ C k,α ′ , the reader can verify that || · || C k,α ′ is a norm on C k,α ′ and ( C k,α ′ , || · || C k,α ′ ) is a Banach space.

Notice that for each w ∈ C 1 ,α ′ fixed, there exists a unique solution u ∈ C 2 ,α ′ to the following Linear Dirichlet partial system (LPDS)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since (H2)-(H4) hold and h ℓ -ψ ε ( | D 1 w ℓ | 2 -g 2 ℓ ) -∑ κ ∈ I \{ ℓ } ψ δ ( w ℓ -w κ -ϑ ℓ,κ ) ∈ C 0 ,α ′ ( O ) (see [8, Thm. 6.14, p. 107 ]). Additionally, by [7, Eq. (6.73), p. 126] (or [7, Thm. 1.2.10]), it is known

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some K 5 = K 5 ( d, Λ , α ′ ). Also, using [1, Thm. 4.12, p. 85] and [7, Thm. 1.2.19], it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some K 6 = K 6 ( d, Λ , α ′ ), where p ′ ∈ ( d, ∞ ) is such that α ′ = 1 -d/p ′ . We proceed to give the proof of Proposition 3.3.

Proof of Proposition 3.3. Existence. Define the mapping T : ( C 1 ,α ′ , || · || C 1 ,α ′ ) -→ ( C 1 ,α ′ , || · || C 1 ,α ′ ) as T [ w ] = u for each w ∈ C 1 ,α ′ , where u is the unique solution to the LDPS (A.18). To use Schaefer's fixed point theorem (see i.e. [6, Thm. 4 p. 539]), we only need to verify that: (i) the mapping T is continuous and compact; (ii) and the set A := { w ∈ C 1 ,α ′ : w = ̺T [ w ] , for some ̺ ∈ [0 , 1] } is bounded uniformly, i.e. || w || C 1 ,α ′ ≤ C , for each w ∈ A , where C is some positive constant that is independent of w and ̺ .

To verify the first item above, notice that, by (A.19), T maps bounded sets in C 1 ,α ′ into bounded sets in C 2 ,α ′ that are precompact in C 2 and C 1 ,α ′ . With this remark and by the uniqueness of the solution to the LPDS (A.18), the reader can verify T is a continuous and compact mapping from C 1 ,α ′ to C 2 ,α ′ ⊂ C 1 ,α ′ . Let us prove the second item above. Consider now w ∈ A . Observe that if ̺ = 0, it follows immediately that w ≡ 0 ∈ C 1 ,α ′ , where 0 is the null function. Assume that w ∈ C 1 ,α ′ is such that T [ w ] = 1 ̺ w = ( 1 ̺ w 1 , . . . , 1 ̺ w m ) for some ̺ ∈ (0 , 1], or, in other words, w ∈ C 2 ,α ′ and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where f ℓ := ̺ [ h ℓ -ψ ε ( | D 1 w ℓ | 2 -g 2 ℓ ) -∑ κ ∈ I \{ ℓ } ψ δ ( w ℓ -w κ -ϑ ℓ,κ ) ] . By Theorems 6.14 and 9.19 of [8], it yields that w ∈ C 3 ,α ′ , since (H2)-(H4) hold and f ℓ ∈ C 1 ,α ′ ( O ). Then, A ⊂ C 3 ,α ′ .

Applying the same arguments seen in proofs of (3.2) and (3.3) (Subsection A.1), it can be verified that the components of the function vector w = ( w 1 , . . . , w m ) ∈ A satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C 1 , C 2 are positive constant as in Lemma 3.2. Notice that these constants are independent of w and ̺ . Applying (A.21) in (A.20), it follows that A , is bounded uniformly. with that, we see that the items above, (i) and (ii), are true and by Schaefer's fixed point theorem, there exists a fixed point u = ( u 1 , . . . , u m ) ∈ C 1 ,α ′ to the problem T [ u ] = u which satisfies the NPDS (3.1). In addition, we have u = T [ u ] ∈ C 2 ,α ′ and by similar arguments seen previously, it can be shown that u is non-negative and belongs to C 3 ,α ′ ( O ). Again, repeating the same arguments seen above, we can conclude that u ∈ C 4 ,α ′ ( O ).

Proof of Proposition 3.3. Uniqueness. The uniqueness of the solution u to the NPDS (3.1) is obtained by contradiction. Assume that there are two solutions u, v ∈ C 4 ,α ′ to the NPDS (3.1). Let ν = ( ν 1 , . . . , ν m ) ∈ C 4 ,α ′ such that ν ℓ := u ℓ -v ℓ for ℓ ∈ I . Let ( x ◦ , ℓ ◦ ) be in O × I such that ν ℓ ◦ ( x ◦ ) = max ( x,ℓ ) ∈O× I ν ℓ ( x ). If x ◦ ∈ ∂ O , trivially we have u ℓ -v ℓ ≤ 0 in O , for ℓ ∈ I . Suppose that x ◦ ∈ O . Then,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, from (3.1) and (A.22),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

because of 0 ≤ ψ δ ( u ℓ ◦ -u κ -ϑ ℓ ◦ ,κ ) -ψ δ ( v ℓ ◦ -v κ -ϑ ℓ ◦ ,κ ) at x ◦ , for κ ∈ I . From (A.23) and since c ℓ ◦ &gt; 0, we have that u ℓ ( x ) -v ℓ ( x ) ≤ u ℓ ◦ ( x ◦ ) -v ℓ ◦ ( x ◦ ) ≤ 0 for ( x, ℓ ) ∈ O × I . Taking now ν := v -u and proceeding the same way than before, it follows immediately that v -u ≥ 0. Therefore u = v and from here we conclude that the NPDS (3.1) has a unique solution u , whose components belong to C 4 ,α ′ ( O ).

## A.3 Verification of (3.4)

Let us define the auxiliary function φ ℓ as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with A 1 ε,δ := max ( x,ℓ ) ∈O× I ω ( x ) | D 2 u ℓ ( x ) | , λ ≥ max { 1 , 2 /θ } , µ ≥ 1 fixed, and α ℓ 0 = ( α ℓ 0 ij ) d × d be such that α ℓ 0 ij := a ℓ 0 ij ( x 0 ), where ( x 0 , ℓ 0 ) ∈ O× I fixed. Recall that ω is a cut-off function as in Remark 3.1. We shall show that φ ℓ satisfies (A.25). In particular, (A.25) holds when φ ℓ is evaluated at its maximum x µ ∈ O , which helps to see that (3.4) is true.

Lemma A.1. Let φ ℓ be the auxiliary function given by (A.24) . Then, there exists a positive constant C 7 = C 7 ( d, Λ , α ′ , K 1 ) such that on ( x, ℓ ) ∈ O × I ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Before providing the verification of the lemma above, let us first proceed to proving (3.4).

Proof of Lemma 3.2. Eq. (3.4) . Let φ ℓ be as in (A.24), where λ ≥ max { 1 , 2 /θ } is fixed and µ ≥ 1 will be determined later on, and ( x 0 , ℓ 0 ) ∈ O × I satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that if x 0 ∈ O \ B β ′ r , by Remark 3.1 and (A.26), we obtain ∂ ij u ℓ ( x ) ≡ 0, for each ( x, ℓ ) ×O× I . From here, (3.4) is trivially true. So, assume that x 0 is in B β ′ r . Without loss of generality we also assume that A 1 ε,δ &gt; 1, since if A 1 ε,δ ≤ 1, we get that ω ( x ) | D 2 u ℓ ( x ) | ≤ A 1 ε,δ ≤ 1 for ( x, ℓ ) ∈ O× I . Taking C 3 = 1, we obtain the result in (3.4). Let ( x µ , ℓ µ ) ∈ O× I be such that φ ℓ µ ( x µ ) = max ( x,ℓ ) ∈O× I φ ℓ ( x ). If x µ ∈ O \ B β ′ r , from (3.3) and (A.24), it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Evaluating ( x 0 , l 0 ) in (A.27) and by (2.3), (H3), (2.16), (3.1) and (3.3), it can be verified that [ A 1 ε,δ ] 2 ≤ λ Λ[1 + C 2 ] A 1 ε,δ + µC 2 2 . From here and due to A 1 ε,δ &gt; 1, we conclude that ω ( x ) | D 2 u ℓ ( x ) | ≤ A 1 ε,δ ≤ λ Λ[1 + C 2 ] + µC 2 2 =: C 3 , for ( x, ℓ ) ∈ O × I . From now, assume that x µ ∈ B β ′ r . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Noting that 2 θω 4 | D 3 u ℓ | 2 -2 λC 7 A 1 ε,δ ω 2 | D 3 u ℓ | ≥ -λ 2 C 2 7 θ [ A 1 ε,δ ] 2 , with C 7 &gt; 0 as in Lemma A.1, and using (A.25) and (A.28), it yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From here, we have that at least one of the next two inequalities is true:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose that (A.29) holds. Then, evaluating ( x µ , ℓ µ ) in (A.24), it follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Meanwhile, evaluating ( x 0 , ℓ 0 ) in (A.24) and using (2.3) and (3.1), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, taking µ large enough such that K ( λ ) 7 µ ≤ [ 1 λ Λ [ 1 -K ( λ ) 7 µ ]] 2 , with K ( λ ) 7 : = λ 2 C 7 2 θ [ 1 + C 7 θ ] , using (A.31)-(A.32) and since φ ℓ 0 ( x 0 ) ≤ φ ℓ µ ( x µ ) and λ, A 1 ε,δ &gt; 1, we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with K ( µ ) 8 := C 7 2 θ Λ [ 1 µ +1 ] + C 7 2 θ + µC 2 . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From here, we conclude there exists a constant C 3 = C 3 ( d, Λ , α ′ , K 3 ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, assume that (A.30) holds. Then, 2 ω 2 [ λθ -2] | D 2 u ℓ µ | 2 ≤ 2 λC 7 ω | D 2 u ℓ µ | +( λ + µ ) C 7 at x µ due to ψ ′ ε ≥ 0 and ω ≤ 1. From here, we have that ω | D 2 u ℓ µ | ≤ K ( λ,µ ) 9 at x µ , where K ( λ,µ ) 9 is a positive constant independent of A 1 ε,δ . Therefore, [ A 1 ε,δ ] 2 -λ Λ A 1 ε,δ [ C 2 +1] ≤ φ ℓ 0 ( x 0 ) ≤ φ ℓ µ ( x µ ) ≤ [ K ( λ,µ ) 9 ] 2 + λ Λ A 1 ε,δ K ( λ,µ ) 9 + µC 2 2 . From here, we conclude there exists a constant C 3 = C 3 ( d, Λ , α ′ , K 1 ) such that ω | D 2 u ℓ | ≤ A 1 ε,δ ≤ C 3 for all ( x, ℓ ) ∈ O × I .

Proof of Lemma A.1. Taking first and second derivatives of φ ℓ on B β ′ r , it can be verified that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From here and noticing that from (2.11),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Meanwhile, differentiating twice in (3.1), we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ¯ η ℓ = (¯ η (1) ℓ , . . . , ¯ η ( d ) ℓ ) and ¯ η ℓ,κ = (¯ η (1) ℓ,κ , . . . , ¯ η ( d ) ℓ,κ ) with ¯ η ( i ) ℓ : = ∂ i [ | D 1 u ℓ | 2 -g 2 ℓ ] and ¯ η ( i ) ℓ,κ : = ∂ i [ u ℓ -u κ ] . From (A.6) and (A.33)-(A.34), it follows that

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall that ˜ D 2 u ℓ is given in (A.7). To obtain the next inequalities, we shall recurrently use (H3), (H4), Remark 3.1, (3.2), (3.3) and λ, µ ≥ 1. Then, and by (2.11),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, since λ ≥ 2 θ and using (2.11), we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for γ ∈ d . From here and since ψ ′′ ε,ℓ ( · ) ≥ 0 and ψ ′′ δ,ℓ,κ ( · ) ≥ 0, it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is easy to verify that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

due to ∂ i φ ℓ = | D 2 u ℓ | 2 ∂ i ω 2 + ω 2 ∂ i | D 2 u ℓ | 2 + λA 1 ε,δ tr[ α ℓ 0 D 2 u ℓ ] ∂ i ω + λA 1 ε,δ ω tr[ α ℓ 0 D 2 ∂ i u ℓ ] + µ∂ i | D 1 u ℓ | 2 on B βr . Then, by (A.38) and (A.40),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the following properties | A | 2 -2 tr[ AB ] + | B | 2 = ∑ ij ( A ij -B ij ) 2 ≥ 0 and | y 1 | 2 -2 〈 y 1 , y 2 〉 + | y | 2 = ∑ i ( y 1 ,i -y 2 ,i ) 2 ≥ 0, where A = ( A ij ) d × d , B = ( B ij ) d × d and y 1 = ( y 1 , 2 , . . . , y 1 ,d ) , y 2 = ( y 2 , 1 , . . . , y 2 ,d ) belong S ( d ) and CA d , respectively, and by definition of φ ℓ , it is easy to corroborate the following identity

̸

Applying (A.39)-(A.42) in (A.35) and considering that all constants that appear in those inequalities (i.e. (A.39)-(A.42)) are bounded by an universal constant C 7 = C 7 ( d, Λ , α ′ , K 1 ), we obtain the desired result in the lemma above. With this remark, the proof is concluded.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## References

- [1] R. Adams and J. Fournier, Sobolev Spaces , second ed., Pure and Applied Mathematics, vol. 140, Amsterdam, Elsevier/Academic Press, 2003.

- [2] P. Azcue and N. Muler. Optimal dividend payment and regime switching in a compound Poisson risk model , SIAM J. Control Optim. 53 (2015), no. 5, 3270-3298.
- [3] E. Chevalier, V. Ly Vath, and S. Scotti, An optimal dividend and investment control problem under debt constraints , SIAM J. Financial Math. 4 (2013), no. 1, 297-326.
- [4] E. Chevalier, M. Ga¨ ıgi and V. Ly Vath, Liquidity risk and optimal dividend/investment strategies , Math. Financ. Econ. 11 (2017), no. 1, 111-135.
- [5] G. Csat´ o, B. Dacorogna and O. Kneuss, The pullback equation for differential forms , Progress in Nonlinear Differential Equations and their Applications, 83, New York, Birkh¨ auser/Springer, 2012.
- [6] L. Evans, Partial Differential Equations, second ed., Graduate Studies in Mathematics, vol. 19, American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2010.
- [7] M. Garroni and J. Menaldi, Second Order Elliptic Integro-differential Problems, Chapman &amp; Hall/CRC Research Notes in Mathematics, vol. 430, Boca Raton, FL, 2002.
- [8] D. Gilbarg and N. Trudinger, Elliptic Partial Differential Equations of Second Order, Classics in Mathematics , Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 2001, Reprint of the 1998 edition.
- [9] X. Guo and P. Tomecek, Connections between singular control and optimal switching , SIAM J. Control Optim. 47 (2008), no. 1, 421-443.
- [10] M. Kelbert, and H. A. Moreno-Franco HJB equations with gradient constraint associated with controlled jump-diffusion processes , SIAM J. Control Optim. 57 (2019), no. 3, 21852213.
- [11] S. Lenhart and S. Belbas, A system of nonlinear partial differential equations arising in the optimal control of stochastic systems with switching costs , SIAM J. Appl. Math. 43 (1983), no. 3, 465-475.
- [12] P. Lions, A remark on Bony maximum principle , Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 88 (1983), no. 3, 503-508.
- [13] V. Ly Vath, H. Pham and S. Villeneuve, A mixed singular/switching control problem for a dividend policy with reversible technology investment , Ann. Appl. Probab. 18 (2008), no. 3, 1164-1200.
- [14] H. Pham, Continuous-time Stochastic Control and Optimization with Financial Applications , vol. 61, Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 2009.
- [15] P. Protter, Stochastic Integration and Differential Equations , Stochastic Modelling and Applied Probability, vol. 21, Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 2005, Second edition.
- [16] N. Yamada, The Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation with a gradient constraint , J. Differential Equations 71 (1988), no. 1, 185-199.