## Optimal control of multiple Markov switching stochastic system with application to portfolio decision

## Jianmin Shi

Haitong Securities Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China. School of mathematics and statistics, Wuhan University, Hubei, China;

Abstract In  this  paper  we  set  up  an  optimal  control  framework  for  a  hybrid  stochastic system  with  dual  or  multiple  Markov  switching  diffusion  processes,  while  Markov  chains governing these switching diffusions are not identical as assumed by the existing literature. As an application and illustration of this model, we solve a portfolio choice problem for an investor facing financial and labor markets that are both regime switching. In continuous time context we combine two separate Markov chains into one synthetic Markov chain and derive its  corresponding  generator  matrix,  then  state  the  HJB  equations  for  the  optimal  control problem  with  the  newly  synthesized  Markov  switching  diffusion.  Furthermore,  we  derive explicit solutions and value functions under some reasonable specifications.

Keywords: dynamic programming; compound Markov chains; copula; stock market; labor income

JEL Classification:

C610; G110; E320

Mathematics subject classification

:

35Q93; 37N35; 49L20; 60J25; 91G10.

Address  correspondence  to  Jianmin  Shi,  689  Guangdong  Rd.,  Huangpu  District,  Haitong Securities Co., Ltd., Shanghai, CHINA; e-mail: shijm@htsec.com.

## 1.Introduction

In this paper, we will consider optimal control problems subject to an underlying stochastic  system  with  dual  or  multiple  regime  switching  diffusions  following different Markov chains, as illustrated by an application to portfolio decision under regime switching financial and labor market.

In a real world, we learn that the properties of many natural or social systems is nonlinear or semi-linear rather than pure linear. For example, many practical systems may  experience  abrupt  changes  in  their  structure  and  parameters  caused  by  such phenomena as component failures or repairs, changing subsystem interconnections in an electric control system, or abrupt environmental disturbances in an ecological or economic  system,  etc.  An  appropriate  way  to  express  this  dynamics  is  stochastic hybrid control systems, which combines a part of the state that is driven by classic Brownian motion and another part of the state that takes discrete values. One of the important classes of the hybrid systems is the stochastic differential equations(SDE) with Markov switching. In this setting, the system will switch from one mode or state to another in a random way, and the switching between the modes is governed by a Markov chain. Optimal control or dynamic programming for such a hybrid stochastic system has been studied in different application fields(e.g. [39] [9] [45]).

A  prominent  feature  of  these  existing  research  is  that  the  structural  or  regime changes  of  the  state  variable  dynamics  are  assumed  to  be  single-sourcing,  and therefore regime or structural changes of all parameters are uniformly represented by one common Markov chain. However, in real world, the sources of state or regime changes of stochastic systems are usually not the same but diverse. For instance, in an ecological system the size of prey populations is influenced by both availability of resources and predation pressure, which both show cyclical change pattern([40][40]). Obviously, characterizing these two cyclical changes of different sources by just one same Markov chain is unreasonable, though they may be interacted. Similarly, in an economic control system, the evolution of state variables (e.g. household's wealth, producer's profits etc.) depends on both business cycles and financial cycles, which have different  generating  mechanisms and are unsuitable to be  represented by one common  Markov  chain  (about  interaction  and  differences  between  business  and financial  cycle,  see  [11]  or  [6]).  Despite  its  significance  from  both  theoretic  and practical point of view, relaxing the assumption that all structural or regime changes of  stochastic  control  system  follow  one  same  Markov  chain  is  not  a  trivial  or marginal task but technically challenging. Directly expanding the number of Markov chains  in  the  control  system  will  complicate  the  related  optimization  problem substantially  and  make  existing  dynamic  programming  techniques  intractable. 1 In order to circumvent this difficulty, in this paper, we will seek a new way to set up a flexible and analytically tractable optimal control framework for stochastic systems with dual or multiple Markov-modulated  diffusions,  applying  to  an  portfolio optimization problem with both regime switching financial and labor markets.

1 Someone may think it's unnecessary or easy combining two or more separate Markov chains into a single chain, if a single Markov chain with an enlarged state space can play an equivalent role or two Markov chains can be combined into a single chain just by taking the Kronecker product of these processes. However, these methods still leave core problems unsolved, such as how to get the enlarged or combined chain's transition rates or generators out of its initial component chains.

Classic  portfolio  optimization  model  in  continuous-time  context  was  firstly established by the seminal work of Merton ([30][31]). In recent years one significant generalization  of  Merton  model  was  characterizing  structural  or  cyclical  state changes driving  by  relative  long-term  factors  in  the  financial  markets  with  regime switching  model  originally  proposed  by  Hamilton  ([18][19]).  Maximization  of expected utility from consumption and/or terminal wealth in financial markets with regime switching has been studied, such as [24][47][39][27] etc. Another significant adaption of the Merton model to the real life is introducing stochastic stream of labor income  as  an  important  flow  of  the  agent's  wealth  in  additional  to  an  initial endowment. [22] find that wage income is the most important source of wealth for the  typical  household.  [13][26][23]  and  [32]  successively  propose  the  portfolio choice problem for an investor facing imperfectly hedgeable stochastic income. The above two significant generalizations have greatly enriched the classic Merton model. However, up to  our  knowledge,  these  generalizations  are  developed  isolately.  The regime switching models generally ignores the effect of stochastic labor income or labor  markets.  Similarly,  the  optimal  investment  models  incorporating  the  labor income  usually  overlook  the  cyclical  or  structural  regime  changes  of  financial markets. In fact, not only financial markets but also labor markets are characterized by  such  a  regime  switching  feature([10]  [41]  [36]).  Therefore  our  aforementioned proposal  of  optimal  control  framework  for  dual  or  multiple  Markov-modulated stochastic  systems  is  well  suited  for  solving  an  investor's  portfolio  optimization problem under two or more different regime switching markets.

In  summary,  in  this  paper  we  will  set  up  a  finite  horizon  optimal  control framework for stochastic systems with dual or multiple different Markov-modulated diffusions and apply it to a portfolio optimization problem with dual regime-switching  dynamics,  i.e.  how  an  agent  who  receiving  income  from  a regime-switching labor market dynamically allocate her wealth under a regime-switching financial market. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the section 2,we present the optimization problem and formulate the model we are working with. Section 3 develops the methodology and presents the associated HJB equations. The application to portfolio choice is constructed in section 4, including explicit solution and related economic analysis of the results. Section 5 concludes.

## 2. Problem formulation and model setup

Through  this  paper  we  denote  by a  deterministic  finite  horizon  and  let be a complete filtered probability space with filtration satisfying the usual conditions, i.e., is an increasing, right-continuous filtration and contains all P-null sets. Now we consider the following stochastic processes: (i) a m-dimensional standard Brownian motion defined on the probability space . (ii) two continuous time stationary Markov chains and with finite space states and respectively, where m and n are the number of regimes. Assume that the Markov  chain has strongly irreducible generator

,  where and for every regime ; the

Markov  chain has  a strongly  irreducible  generator ,  where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that the Markov processes and are independent of the Brownian motion B.

For our aim, we firstly make the following standard technical assumptions:

Assumption 2.1. The maps , are such that: (i) for each fixed , are  uniformly  continuous;  (ii)    for each fixed ,there exists such that for , we have , .

Let U be a separate metric space, for a control variable u, we consider a stochastic controlled system with dual Markovian switching, for

together with the following objective functional

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where denotes  the  state  trajectory  associated  with  a control trajectory and starting from when t =0.

The  control  process is  said  to  be  a  admissible  control  if is measurable and -adapted, the stochastic differential equation (2.1) has a unique solution and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote the set f all admissible controls by .

Under the assumption 2.1, for any , Eq.(2.1) admits a unique solution(see , e.g.[35][15][2]),and  the  objective  functional  in  Eq.(2.2)  is  well-defined.  So  the optimal control problem can be stated as follows:

Problem  2.2. Select  an  admissible  control that  maximizes and find a value function V defined by (2.3). The control is regarded as an optimal control.

The above optimal control problem is specified with particular initial time t =0. We can  proceed  to  generalize  it  to  any  initial  time .  For  any ,consider the state equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where denotes the state trajectory  associated  with a control trajectory and starting from when t =s.

The value function is defined by (2.6).

In  the  next  section,  we  will  discuss  how  to  apply  the  dynamic  programming principle for the above value function V and obtain the corresponding Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman(HJB) equations associated with the optimal control problem under consideration.

## 3.Dynamic programming principle and HJB equation

In the existing literature(e.g.[39][2][27]), how to apply dynamic programming(DP) principle  and  derive  the  associated  HJB  equation  to  a  stochastic  system  with  state variable  dynamics  given  by  Markov  switching  SDE  has  been  studied.  All  these studies  assume  that  the  structural  or  cyclical  switching  of  the  system  or  model parameters is governed by one single Markov chain. However, in our optimal control problem  in  above  section(Eq.  2.1-3  or  Eq.  2.4-6)  switching  SDE  of  state  variable dynamics  is  governed  by  two  different  Markov  chains.  Because  of  complicated interactive relationship between different switching sources and curse of dimensionality, directly extending the optimal control framework of stochastic system governed by only one Markov chain to a dual or multiple Markov-modulated system is  technically  unpractical.  In  this  followings,  instead  of  applying  mechanically  the existing  DP  toolkits  for  single  Markov-modulated  systems,  we  will  firstly  combine two  (or  more)  individual  Markov  chains  into  one  compound  Markov  chain  in continuous  time  context.  Based  on  the  newly  combined  continuous  time  Markov chain, we can then tackle with the relevant optimal control problem without obstacle.

Suppose that within a stochastic control system structural or regime changes of the state  variable  dynamics  is  not  single-sourcing  but  stem  from  two  different  sources, which can be represented by two distinct finite state continuous time Markov chain respectively.  Without  loss  of  generality,  we  assume  both  Markov  chains take  2  states: .  Referring  to  the  discrete  time  model  of  [20]  ,we  can construct  a  new  4-state  continuous  time  Markov  chain from  two  2-state continuous time Markov chains and as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- and =0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the discrete time version, [20] show that the transition matrix of the new Markov chain composed of two independent Markov chains can be written as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where , , are the transition matrix of discrete Markov chain , , respectively.

Under the continuous time circumstance, the corresponding core parameters, which should  be  derived  from  those  of  the  original  Markov  chain and are  the generator matrix Q of the newly synthesized or combined 4-state Markov chain :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here is  the  transition  rate  of  state  or  regime i (i.e.  the  parameter  of  the exponential holding time for state or regime i ) for Markov chain . denotes the transition probability of embedded discrete-time Marko chain from regime i to regime j for .

In general, we may seek for the generator of the new compound Markov chain from its  components via copula methods. A copula is a function that represents the joint distribution in terms of its marginals, and hence can be used to couple any discrete and/or  continuous  distributions.  Following  celebrated  Sklar's  theorem,  Let X,  Y be continuous r.v.'s, and let be their joint distribution function with marginals and . Then there exists a unique copula C such that for all real x, y . Conversely, if C is a copula and and are distribution functions, then is a joint distribution function with marginals and . For detailed and standard reference of copulas, see [25]; [33].

Conventionally  we  construct  a  continuous  time  Markov  chain(CTMC)  with infinitesimal  generator as  following:  at  each  state i ,  wait  for  a  sample time  of  an  exponential  distribution  with  rate ,  and  then  jump  to  the  next  state according  to  the  transition  probability  matrix of  its  embedded  discrete  time Markov  chain(DTMC),which  can  be  computed  out  of : . Alternatively, a continuous time Markov chain(CTMC) with m states or regimes and generator matrix can also be constructed as independent m(m-1) Poisson

processes,  each  with  parameters corresponding  to  the  events that  the  current  state  is j meanwhile the  last  state  is i respectively,  i.e.  jumps  from state i to  state j (see  [8];[21]).  Based  on  the  latter  way  of  construction,  we  can combine  two  separate  CTMCs  by  choosing  a  suitable  copula  that  has  Poisson distributions  as  its  marginals.  Gaussian  copulas  are  a  natural  choice  for  connecting individual  marginal  distributions  of  counting  data  processes,  such  as  binomial  or  Poisson distributions  ([34] ) .  A  Gaussian  copula  distribution  with  Poisson  marginal  distributions  is defined simply as:

Where represents  a  multivariate  standard  normal  cumulative  distribution  function (CDF), denotes  copula  parameters, is  the  Poisson  cumulative  distribution function with mean parameter ,  here equal to corresponding transition rates of individual univariate  CTMCs  before  combination.  Differentiating gives  the joint density or likelihood function with a correlation matrix K as follows:

where . denotes standard  normal  PDF, represents  a  multivariate  standard  normal  CDF.  Here  the density of copula is defined as: .

When the marginal distributions are discrete such as Poisson distributions, we can obtain joint probability mass function using Gaussian copula as follows([38]):

where , is the Gaussian copula with association  matrix . , here is  the  left-hand limit  of at ,  for  count-valued  random  variables, .  Taking derivative  of  joint  probability  mass  function  at  time  0  we  will  obtain  the  transition rates or generator matrix of the newly combined Markov chain.

In case of independence between and , taking advantage of the memoryless  property  of  Poisson  process,  we  can  yield  the  elements  of  generator matrix  of  newly  synthesized  Markov  chain rical estimation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here denote the transition rates of state or regime i for  Markov chain and respectively.

Following  the  same  derivation,  we  can  obtain similarly  and therefore the whole generator matrix Q:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now  we  have  a  newly  synthesized  Markov  chain ,which  takes  4  states and has  strongly  irreducible  generator ,  where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  derived .  With  the  newly we can reshape the optimal control problem(2.1-3) or

demonstrated  above,  the  generator  of  the  compound  Markov  chain from  those  of  two  original  Markov  chains  composing  of synthesized Markov chain (2.4-6) as follows:

For any , consider the state equation:

Where , .

The corresponding objective functional is

and the corresponding value function is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where denotes the state trajectory associated with a control trajectory and starting from when t =s.

The  optimal  control  problem  under  consideration  is  then  stated  as:  For  any , find such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  the  following,  we  will  deduce  the  Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman(HJB)  equation associated  with  the  above  dynamic  optimization  problem.  The  HJB  approach  will apply the so-called Bellman optimality principle, which states that an optimal policy has the property that whatever the initial state and initial decision are, the remaining decisions must constitute an optimal policy with regard to the state resulting from the first decision ([4]). This is formally expressed in the following equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We  will  now  use  the  principle  of  optimality  to  derive  the  corresponding  HJB equation, a sequence of partial differential equation(PDE),whose solution is the value function of the optimal control problem under consideration  here.  Let denote all functions on that are continuously differentiable in t, continuously twice differentiable in x for each Corresponding to we firstly define an operator for each by

.

In what follows, we give the equation of optimality for the optimal policy.

Theorem 3.1 For each , V(., i) is a solution of the following terminal problem of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman(HJB) equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the terminal condition

Proof.

. See Appendix.

## 4. Application to portfolio choice problem

## 4.1 regime switching financial and labor market set-up

In the application part, we will consider dynamic portfolio selection problem of a representative economic agent(an investor) who receives a stream of stochastic labor income  and  faces  financial  markets  consisting  of  a  riskless  asset(bond)  and  a  risk asset(stock). The information structure of the financial markets can be described by a probability space ,on which a standard Brown motion and a continuous-time finite-state Markov chain are defined and we assume that they are independent.  The  filtration is  generated  by  both  the  Brownian  motion and the Markov chain .

In  the  financial  markets,  it  is  assumed  that  two  assets  are  traded:  a  risky  asset (which we refer to as stock ) with price P , and a riskless bond with price at time t where r is a constant rate of interest. The stock price follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with initial price and initial state .

Here the expected rate of return and volatility of the stock respectively. B is a standard Brownian motion. , represents the state or regime of the stock market at time t. is an continuous-time, stationary, finite-state Markov chain(for simplicity, we  assume  2  states  or  regimes,  'bullish'  and  'bearish',  in  the  stock  market,  see [16]).Furthermore,  we  assume  that  the  Markov  chain  has  a  strongly  irreducible

generator

,where and for every regime

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In additional to invest in the financial markets, the agent also receives labor income over time, the income rate following

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with initial price and initial state . Similarly, here the expected mean and volatility of the stochastic income rate respectively.

The correlation between and is where it is convenient to write Z as where W is  a  standard Brownian

motion independent of B. , represents the state or regime of the labor market at time t. is an continuous-time, stationary, finite-state Markov chain(for simplicity, we assume 2 states or regimes, 'boom' and 'recession', in the labor market).Furthermore,  we  assume  that  the  Markov  chain  has  a  strongly  irreducible

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As  discussed  in  section  3,  we  know  that  characterizing  the  regime  switching financial markets and labor market by two different Markov chains respectively will complicate  the  related  optimization  problem  substantially  and  make  the  dynamic programming technique in the existing literature intractable. So in the following we will firstly  use  the  method  described in section  3 to combine two different Markov chains into one compound Markov chain. With the newly compound continuous time Markov chain, we can then tackle with the relevant optimal control problem without a hitch.

Suppose two finite state continuous time Markov chain ,which represent the phases or  regimes of financial  market( )  and  labor  market( )respectively. Without loss of generality, we assume both Markov chains take 2 states , i.e. there are 'bull' and 'bear' two regimes in stock market, and the labor market shifts between 2 states of 'boom'  and  'recession'.  Based  on  these  setting,  we  can  construct  a  new  4-state Markov chain from and as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The generator Q of the newly synthesized or combined 4-state Markov chain can be derived by the approach as described in section 3.

Underlying  the  newly  synthesized  Markov  chain ,  the  stock  price  and  labor income variable process in (4.1) and (4.2) will satisfy the following Markov-modulated stochastic differential equations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  agent  chooses  a  portfolio ,  representing  the  fraction(not ratio) of wealth invested in the risky asset. The fraction of wealth invested in the riskless asset at time is then .Here a technical condition need to be satisfied: A portfolio vector process is an uncertain stochastic vector process π such

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The agent's wealth process determined by his specific portfolio holding and the inflow of stochastic income, can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with initial wealth and initial state .

Here  it  should  be  noted  that  we  assume  no  consumption  in  the  agent's  wealth process. Its exclusion from optimal portfolio choice problem is not without precedent( see [46][23] etc.). Such consumption would not change the nature of our results.  If  consumption  is  involved,  it  is  unlikely  that  we  could  obtain  closed  form solution to our problem. Portfolio choice models incorporating both consumption and incomplete income process have to be solved numerically( see [44]).

Next we introduce the utility functions of terminal wealth, which are assumed to be twice differentiable, strictly  increasing,  and  concave.  Moreover, .  It  is  easily  to  see  that  there  exists  a  constant  K  such  that

For ,  we  consider  the  problem  of  an  investor with  expected  utility  over terminal  wealth  which  can  be  maximized  by  the  selection  of  portfolio .  The objective function in defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  for ,the  wealth  X(s)  process  follows  (4.6)  with  initial  X(t)= x , Y(t)= y and initial state . The control process which is a portfolio process satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

will be called an admissible control process. Here we denote and for  every .The  set  of  all  admissible  controls  will  be denoted by Ӓ.

Based on the objective function, the value function is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In summary, the agent wants to solve the following problem:

Problem 4.1. Select an admissible control Ӓ that maximizes (4.7) and find the value  function  defined  by  (4.9).  The  control is  called  an  optimal  control  or  an optimal policy.

## 4.2 The HJB Equation

In this subsection, we will derive the corresponding HJB equation, a sequence of partial differential equation(PDE),whose solution is the value function of the optimal control problem  under consideration here. Let denote all functions on that are continuously differentiable in t, continuously  twice  differentiable  in  x  for  each .  Corresponding  to  (3.10),  we firstly define an operator for each by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here  subscripts  on  V  denote  partial  derivatives,  and  we  have  suppressed  the arguments of the functions for notational simplicity.

Applying theorem 3.1, we have the equation of optimality for the optimal policy as follows:

Theorem 4.2 For each , V(., i) is a solution of the following terminal problem of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman(HJB) equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the terminal condition .

Note that from (4.11),we will need to solve a system of coupled partial differential equations(PDE),instead  of  dealing  with  only  one  PDE  as  in  the  case  with  classical non-Markov-modulated diffusions.

Differentiating the left of (4.11) with respect to gives the first-order condition(FOCs):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We can observe that the optimal portfolio in the risk asset(stock), given in (4.12)

is comprised of two components: the first part is similar to the form of the

classic Merton mean-variance portfolio strategy followed in the absence of stochastic income. The main difference is that stock returns and volatilities( are shifting with different regimes of financial market, whereas in the Merton's classic model they are constant. Furthermore , the value function V here ,which is also affected indirectly by  the  switching  regimes,  may  not  necessarily  be  identical  to  that  of  the  Merton mean-variance strategy. The second part of our optimal portfolio strategy

, in which measures the sensitivity of the marginal utility of wealth

to  the  stochastic  income  or  the  attitude  to  changes  in  stochastic  income,  can  be interpreted as an intertemporal hedging against the variations of stochastic income. It depends on the volatilities of both financial market and the labor market as well as the value function V under different regimes. It's noteworthy that the hedging term will disappear if ,  in  this  case where the stock returns and income are uncorrelated the  stochastic  income  can't  be  hedged  with  the  traded  asset.  However,  even  in  this case,  the  stochastic  income  still  affect  the  optimal  portfolio  strategy  via  the  value function.

The expression of optimal control in (4.12) may partially shed some light on the intuitive  interpretation  of  the  optimal  portfolio  strategy.  For  example,  one  can speculate that the volatility of the risky asset and market price of risk under different market regimes should have impact on the optimal portfolio weights in stock, as these factors influence the attractiveness of the risk asset to the investor. Nevertheless, the representation in (4.12) indicates that thorough understandings of the optimal strategy require detailed knowledge about the value function, which will be the focus in the following.

## 4.3 Construction of the solution and optimal strategies

Given the HJB equation (4.11),in this section we will attempt to derive the solution and  optimal  policies  for  the  stochastic  control  problem  with  regime-switching financial  and  labor  market.  As  we  know,  for  optimal  control  problem,  analytical solutions  allowing  for  robust  comparative  static  analysis  take  advantage  over  the numerical  solutions  in  many  aspects.  However,  generally  explicit  solutions  to dynamic optimization problems with nonlinear parameters are rarely available. As far as  we  know,  a  few  papers([48][39][28])  study  the  portfolio  selection  problem  in regime  switching  models  and  derived  explicit  solutions  for  the  corresponding  HJB equations  and  optimal  policies.  Even  in  these  papers,  the  portfolio  optimization models don't consider stochastic  income,  which  is  another  nontrivial  and  uncertain driver of the investor's wealth besides financial assets. To the best our knowledge, our paper is  the  first  attempt  to  solve  the  Markov-modulated  optimal  portfolio  problem facing an investor with both stochastic financial revenue and income flow.

Let's  start  our  journey  by  specifying  the  investor's  utility  function.  The  optimal strategy characterized  by  (4.12)  is  expressed  in  terms  of  derivatives  of  the  value function solving HJB equation, which generally depends on investor preferences and the investment horizon. As a result, solution of the optimal investment problem (4.9) is determined by these variables and the market parameters in an indirect way. So, to gain  more  insightful  and  interpretable  results  we  need  to  specialize  to  a  particular utility for the agent.

In this paper we will assume the negative exponential utility function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We prefer to this utility function because there are evidence from option prices that exponential utility provides a better representation of preferences than other forms of utility([6]). Given the negative exponential utility, we conjecture the following form for the value function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  some  unknown  function ,which  to  be  derived  in  the  next  step. Plugging the corresponding computed , , , , together into  the  equation (4.12),we then get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As described earlier, the first part of has the same structure as the Merton([30]) optimal portfolio under each regime as if stochastic income inflows were ignored. The second hedging term is independent of the investor's initial wealth but depend on the  investor's  risk  aversion ,  the  correlation  between  financial  market  and  labor market and stochastic income. However, deeper understanding of the hedging term in (4.15) requires additional knowledge of the function g or the value function V.

In order to get the solution function, we substitute equation(4.14) and (4.15) into equation  (4.11)  and  obtain  the  following  system  of  nonlinear  partial  differential equations(PDEs) of the value function g ( or V )satisfying the HJB equation:

with the terminal condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Obviously  the  above  systems  (4.16-17)  are  highly  non-linear  and  difficulty  to obtain close form analytic solutions because of regime switching and the coupling of the  equations.  In  fact  for  such  a  nonlinear  and  Markov  modulated  diffusion  system even  if  finding  numerical  solutions  is  challenging.  Up  to  our  knowledge,  in  the literature there are few efficient numerical methods for stochastic control problem of regime  switching  systems.  [37]  may  be  an  exception,  which  develops  numerical algorithms  for  regime  switching  controlled  diffusions  and  regime-switching  jump diffusions.  Even  feasible,  this  numerical  methods  is  still  formidable  because  of computation  intensive.  Fortunately,  under  reasonable  specifications  some  special forms of HJB equations in (4.16) can obtain  explicit expressions that can be easily computed numerically. In the following we will present such special models. The first one  is  the  case  of ,which  means  the  Brownian  motions  of  stock  returns  and stochastic  income  process  are  uncorrelated.  Another  special  case  doesn't  put  the constraint ,but  instead  of  assuming  that  the  income  are  normally  distributed under different  regimes,  which means the Markov-switching mean and volatility of the labor come process are independent of the income level.

## 4.3.1 Dual Markov-modulated models with independent Brownian motions

In this subsection, we set in the general model(4.3-6),which states that the Brownian  motions  of  stock  returns  and  stochastic  income  process  do  not  exhibit instantaneous correlation. However,  this doesn't mean  the two processes are independent at all, as they can be additionally correlated by the joint Markov chain .

It's evident that if ,the system of PDEs (4.16) for function g collapse to:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(4.18)

with the terminal condition (4.19)

Under regular conditions for process Y and function g , applying the Feynman-Kac formula for Markov switching diffusions, the solution to (4.18) is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (4.14) ,(4.15)and (4.20), we can obtain the following result:

Proposition 4.3. The investor's value function for the optimal portfolio allocation problem 4.1 with dual Markov switching diffusion and independent Brownian motions is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the corresponding optimal investment strategy is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. See Appendix.

So in the case of the optimal strategy consists only on the mean-variance portfolio just as the Merton investment strategy, the hedging term disappears and the income  diffusion  has  no  effect  on  the  optimal  portfolio.  This  mean-variance  term, which is proportional to the risk premium and reciprocal of the coefficient of absolute risk  aversion,  is  intuitively  clear,  as  higher  excess  return  of  the  risky  asset  lead  to higher  investment,  whereas  higher  variance  or  risk  reduces  the  position  in  the corresponding  asset. Consistent with the Merton  model,  the  optimal  portfolio expressed in units of time T money is constant in every regime of the market, which also  does  not  depend  on  the  investor's  wealth.  Although  the  optimal  portfolio  is constant under constant market coefficients with just one regime of the markets, the situation will change with the switching of market regimes and the optimal portfolio does depend on the regime of the market: it is positively proportional to the expected excess return on the stock in such regime

, and inversely proportional to the

variance of the stock return in such regime , which means that the investor prefers to invest a smaller fraction of wealth in the risky asset when the market presents weak conditions  or  'bearish'  regime.  If  market  conditions  are  strong  or  in  'bullish' regime(means positive and large market risk premium , the investor will

assign  a  greater  fraction  of  his  wealth  to  invest  in  the  stock.  So  once  the  markets change its regime, the optimal portfolio will vary and isn't constant any more. From equation  (4.22),  we  see  that  when  the  investor  has  low  risk  tolerance(high  risk aversion ),  the  fraction  of  wealth  invested  in  the  stock  is  even  smaller  in  each regime.  However,  no  matter  how  the  investor's  risk  attitudes  change,  the  relation that of  'bearish'  regime  always  less  than  that  of  'bullish'  regime  remain  the same. In other words, every investor (independent of the level of risk aversion) should allocate a higher proportion of his wealth in a risky asset during a bull market than during a bear market.

Equation (4.22) indicates that the stochastic income cannot be hedged against in the  case  where  the  diffusions  of  stock  returns  and  income  are  uncorrelated( and  the  hedging  term  disappears  and  the  nontraded  income  has  no  effect  on  the optimal portfolio. Even so, however, from (4.21) we can see that the existence of the income still impacts on the value function.

## 4.3.2 Normally distributed income process under different regimes

In this special case, some constraint is put on the labor income process instead of the  correlation  between  the  Brown  motions  of  the  stock  return  process  and  income flow  process.  In  the  literature  opinions  about  the  distribution  of  income  earnings process is inconclusive. Besides normal distribution, another popular point of view is log-normality like that of asset prices. Nevertheless, this assumption isn't indisputable. For example, as documented by [1] and [17], the earnings shocks experienced by US workers  display  important  deviations  from  the  assumptions  of  log-normality  and independence  from  age  and  earnings  realizations  ([12]).  Our  assumption  of  normal distribution isn't only for tractability. In fact, prior research by [14], [42] and [43] also treats  normally  distributed  income  as  return  of  non-traded  asset,  differing  because their income is received at the investment horizon ([23])

Under  our  normal  distribution  assumption,  the  model  parameters  of  income earnings process are specified as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where and are different constants under different regime respectively.

Further, in order to find the solution, we assume separability of function in y and i ， i.e. the following ansatz is considered:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some function and .

From (4.24) we can derive the following expressions(subscripts denote corresponding partial derivatives):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting above expressions (4.24),(4.25-27) into HJB equations (4.16), we can get the following system of equations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In order for (4.28) to hold for any ,    we assume that the undetermined make the coefficient on y to be zero, which imply the following ODE for :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further (4.28) and (4.29) jointly lead to the following system of PDEs for function :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  general,  equations  (4.30)  can't  be  solved  in  a  closed  form,  however,we  can provide the probabilistic representation for function .  And then compute it in general  numerically.  Based  on  the  application  of  the  Feynman-Kac  theorem  with Markov switching, we can obtain the probabilistic representation for function in (4.30) as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (4.14) ,(4.15)and (4.24),(4.31),(4.32), we can obtain the following investor's value function and corresponding optimal investment strategy:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where functions , are given as in the equation (4.31) and (4.32) respectively.

(4.34)

In the following proposition we summarize what we have just derived:

Proposition 4.4. The investor's value function for the optimal portfolio allocation problem 4.1 with dual Markov switching diffusion and normally distributed income process is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where functions , are given as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the corresponding optimal investment strategy is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(The proof is similar to that of Proposition 4.3)

Equation (4.34) or (4.38) gives optimal investment in the risky assets in this case of normally  distributed  income  process.  As  mentioned  before,  the  first  term  in  the equation just corresponds to the classic Merton strategy or the standard mean-variance optimal  portfolio  without  stochastic  income.  The  excess  return  of  the  risky  asset influences positively the positions in the corresponding risky asset. The contrary holds for the volatility term. The only point different from classic Merton model is the role the Markov chain plays in the portfolio selection, i.e. once the markets shift its regime, the optimal mean-variance portfolio will vary and isn't constant any more ,since the risky asset's excess return and volatility vary with switching regimes.

The  second  term  of  the  optimal  strategy  is  a  portfolio  that  hedges  against unexpected changes of stochastic labor income.  Besides the riskless rate and the remaining time to the investment horizon the hedge demand depends on the ratio  of  volatility  of  labor  market  and  financial  market  under  the  corresponding switching regime ,  the correlation between Brown motions of financial market and labor market .  The income hedge is not investor specific, and is not influenced by the investor's risk preference. This contrasts to the first mean-variance term which depends  on  the  stock's  risk  premium  and  investor's  risk  aversion.  The  sign  of  the hedge demand is determined by the correlation between financial market and labor market .  The  reason  is  intuitive.  The  hedge  demand  is  negative  when  financial market and labor market is positively correlated, which means intuitively the investor shorts more or holds less of the stock overall, since income replaces holdings of the stock.  As  to  the  absolute  amount  of  stock  shorting,  three  factors  have  effects  on  in additional  to riskless  rate ,the  remaining  time  to  the  investment  horizon the  ratio  of  volatility  of  labor  market  and  financial  market  under  the corresponding switching regime i.e. the hedge demand is larger in magnitude if the risk rate is higher, volatility of income larger, volatility of stock smaller, and the investment horizon is further away.

Overall  the  optimal  portfolio  choice  including  the  Merton  component  plus  the hedge  demand  is  determined  by  the  signs  of  the  risk  premium  and  the  correlation between financial market and labor market. If the risk premium and correlation have opposite signs, the optimal portfolio in the risky asset is decreasing in magnitude with the investor's risk aversion, increasing in magnitude with the ratio of volatility of labor  market  and  financial  market.  That  is,  if  the  correlation  between  stock  returns and the income flow is negative, and risk premium positive, the optimal portfolio in the stock is positive, decreasing with the investor's risk aversion ,the volatility of stock  market  and  increasing  in  magnitude  with  the  volatility  of  labor  market. Likewise, if the correlation between stock returns and the income flow is positive, and risk  premium negative, the optimal portfolio in the stock is  negative  ,decreasing with  the  investor's  risk  aversion  ,the  volatility  of  stock  market  and  increasing  in magnitude with the volatility of labor market.

On the contrary, if correlation and risk premium are of the same sign, the Merton component and the hedge demand will have opposite signs. In this case, the sign of the optimal portfolio could be either positive or negative and the investor may prefer to  be  either  long  or  short  the  risky  asset.  For  example,  if  both  correlation  and  risk premium positive, the Merton component will be positive while the hedge term has negative sign. Thus overall the sign of optimal portfolio(longing or shorting the risky asset by the investor) is determined by the relative strength of the Merton component and the hedge demand. By analogy similar results can be reached if both correlation and risk premium are negative.

Furthermore,  the  regime  switching  plays  an  indispensable  role  in  the  portfolio choice.  On  the  one  hand,  the  switching  parameters  drive  the  risky  asset's  excess return and volatility, which have an impact on the Merton component of the optimal portfolio. On the other hand, as an important factor influencing the hedge part of the optimal portfolio, the ratio  of  volatility  of  labor  market  and  financial  market  varies with different regimes.

## 5.Concluding remarks

In  this  paper, we  set  up  a  flexible  and  analytically  tractable  dynamic  optimization model with dual Markov modulated diffusion processes, while the underlying Markov chains are not the same but distinct from each other. As an application and illustration of our model, we consider the optimal portfolio problem of an investor who wants to maximize his expected discounted utility of terminal wealth, which changes with the regime-switching  financial  market  and  labor  market.  After  combining  two  single continuous  time  Markov  chains  into  a  composite  Markov  chain,  we  stated  the corresponding  HJB  equations  and  obtain  explicit  solutions  for  the  optimal  control under some reasonable specifications and derived the corresponding value function up to  an  expectation  over  the  Markov  chain.  We  believe  these  establishment  and solutions  of  stochastic  control  problems  with  dual  Markov  modulated  diffusion processes constitute main contributions of this paper. We found out that the optimal portfolio  consists  of  two  parts:  the  first  one  corresponds  to  the  solution  of  the Merton's classic mean-variance optimization problem and the second one corrects it for the additional risk coming from the stochastic labor income. We showed that both parts of the optimal portfolio depend on the state of the Markov chain. We observed that the investor hold a higher proportion of his wealth in the risky asset during a bull market regime than during  a  bear  market  regime,  but  the  difference  of  the  optimal stock position between the two states in absolute terms is reduced when the investor's risk tolerance goes down and enlarged with rising risk tolerance. The Markov chains have impact on the hedging part of the optimal policy in absolute terms via relative volatility of the stock market and the labor market under different regimes. However, the sign of the hedging term ,i.e. long or short of the risky asset out of consideration of  hedging, is determined by the correlation  between the Brownian motions for the stock price and the stochastic income processes.

## Appendix

## Proof of Theorem 3.1

proof. Let  a  and  b  satisfy .  We  define , , and . For ,using the formula for Markov-modulated processes(see, for instance, [29] [3] or [2]),we obtain

where is  a  real-valued,  square  integrable martingale, so we easily  know (A.2)

Also  note  that  u  is  admissible  and  that is  bounded  for  every

(for each , V(., i) is concave and ,where  M  is  a  finite  constant).Then, (A.3)    because

for all by assumption 2.1.

Taking the expectation with respect to (A.1),together with (A.2) and (A.3),we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining the principle of optimality(3.9) and (A.4),we get

Letting , we  get . Therefore,  applying  the  Monotone Convergence Theorem, we have that

(A.5)

Letting ,  we obtain the equation (3.11). The terminal condition of (3.11) holds obviously. Thus, the proof is done.

## Proof of Proposition 4.3

Proof. Firstly  given  each  state and  function ,  define  an operator by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Meanwhile in order to simplify notation, let

According to the generalized Ito's lemma for Markov-modulated diffusion(see, e.g. [29][3][2]),for each state and function ,we have

where is a local martingale.

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying Ito's formula to the switching process , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Noting the boundary conditions, we obtain

substitute  into  (4.14)  and  (4.15),we  get  (4.21)  and  (4.22)  respectively.  The  proof  is completed.

## References

- [1]. Arellano, M., Blundell, R., &amp; Bonhomme, S. (2017). Earnings and consumption dynamics: a nonlinear panel data framework. Econometrica , 85(3), 693-734.
- [2]. Azevedo, N., Pinheiro, D., &amp;  Weber,  G. W. (2014). Dynamic  programming  for a Markov-switching jump-diffusion. Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics , 267, 1-19.
- [3]. Baran, N. A., Yin, G.,  &amp;  Zhu,  C.  (2013).  Feynman-Kac  formula  for  switching  diffusions: connections of systems of partial differential equations and stochastic differential equations. Advances in Difference Equations , 2013(1), 315.
- [4]. Bellman, &amp; R. (1966). Dynamic programming . Science , 153 (3731), 34-37.
- [5]. Bielecki,  T.  R.,  Jakubowski,  J.,  &amp;  Niewęgłowski,  M.  (2010).  Dynamic  modeling  of dependence  in  finance  via  copulae  between  stochastic  processes.  In Copula  theory  and  its applications (pp. 33-76). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
- [6]. Bliss,  R.  R.,  &amp;  Panigirtzoglou,  N.  (2004).  Option-implied  risk  aversion  estimates. The journal of finance , 59(1), 407-446.
- [7]. Borio, C. (2014). The financial cycle and macroeconomics: What have we learnt?. Journal of Banking &amp; Finance , 45, 182-198.
- [8]. Bré maud, P. (2013). Markov chains: Gibbs fields, Monte Carlo simulation, and queues (Vol. 31). Springer Science &amp; Business Media.
- [9]. Cadenillas,  A.,  Lakner,  P.,  &amp;  Pinedo,  M.  (2013).  Optimal  production  management  when demand depends on the business cycle. Operations Research , 61(4), 1046-1062.
- [10]. Carroll, C. D., &amp; Dunn, W. E. (1997). Unemployment expectations, jumping (S, s) triggers, and household balance sheets. NBER macroeconomics annual , 12, 165-217.
- [11]. Claessens, S., Kose, M. A., &amp; Terrones, M. E. (2012). How do business and financial cycles interact?. Journal of International economics , 87(1), 178-190.
- [12]. De Nardi, M., Fella, G., &amp; Pardo, G. P. (2016). The implications of richer earnings dynamics

for consumption and wealth (No. w21917). National Bureau of Economic Research .

- [13]. Duffie, D., Fleming, W., Soner, H. M., &amp; Zariphopoulou, T.   (1997). Hedging in incomplete markets with HARA utility. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 21(4-5), 753-782.
- [14]. Duffie, D., &amp; Jackson, M. O. (1990). Optimal hedging and equilibrium in a dynamic futures market. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 14(1), 21-33.
- [15]. Fei, W.  (2013). Optimal consumption and portfolio under inflation and  Markovian switching. Stochastics An International Journal of Probability and Stochastic Processes , 85(2), 272-285.
- [16]. Guidolin,  M.,  &amp;  Timmermann,  A.  (2008).  International  asset  allocation  under  regime switching, skew, and kurtosis preferences. The Review of Financial Studies, 21(2), 889-935.
- [17]. Guvenen, F.,  Karahan,  F.,  Ozkan,  S.,  &amp;  Song,  J.  (2015). What  do  data  on  millions  of  US workers reveal about life-cycle earnings risk? (No. w20913). National Bureau of Economic Research .
- [18]. Hamilton, J. D. (1989). A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and the business cycle. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , 357-384.
- [19]. Hamilton, J. D. (1994), Time Series Analysis , Princeton University Press .
- [20]. Hamilton, J. D., &amp; Lin, G. (1996). Stock market volatility and the business cycle. Journal of applied econometrics , 573-593.
- [21]. He, Q. M. (2010). Construction of continuous time markovian arrival processes. Journal of Systems Science and Systems Engineering , 19 (3), 351-366.
- [22]. Heaton,  J.,  &amp;  Lucas,  D.  (2000).  Portfolio  choice  and  asset  prices:  The  importance  of entrepreneurial risk. The journal of finance , 55(3), 1163-1198.
- [23]. Henderson,  V.  (2005).  Explicit  solutions  to  an  optimal  portfolio  choice  problem  with stochastic income. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 29(7), 1237-1266.
- [24]. Honda,  T.  (2003).  Optimal  portfolio  choice  for  unobservable  and  regime-switching  mean returns. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control , 28(1), 45-78.
- [25]. Joe, H. (1997). Multivariate Models and Dependence Concepts; Chapman &amp; Hall: New York, NY, USA.
- [26]. Koo,  H.  K.  (1998).  Consumption  and  portfolio  selection  with  labor  income:  a  continuous time approach. Mathematical Finance , 8(1), 49-65.

- [27]. Lee,  S.  &amp;  Shim,  G.  (2015),  Optimal  consumption/investment  and  life  insurance  with regime-switching financial market parameters. Journal of the Korean Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics , 19(4), 429-441.
- [28]. Liu,  R.  H.  (2014).  A  finite-horizon  optimal  investment  and  consumption  problem  using regime-switching models. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance , 17(04), 1450027.
- [29]. Mao,  X.,  &amp;  Yuan,  C.  (2006). Stochastic  differential  equations  with  Markovian  switching . Imperial College Press.
- [30]. Merton, Robert C. (1969). Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The continuous-time case. The review of Economics and Statistics , 247-257.
- [31]. Merton,  Robert  C. (1971). Optimum consumption and  portfolio  rules  in  a  continuous-time model, Journal of Economic Theory 3,373-413.
- [32]. Munk,  C.,  &amp;  Sø rensen,  C.  (2010).  Dynamic  asset  allocation  with  stochastic  income  and interest rates. Journal of Financial economics , 96(3), 433-462.
- [33]. Nelsen, R.B.(2006) An Introduction to Copulas, 2nd ed.; Springer Verlag: Berlin, Germany.
- [34]. Nikoloulopoulos, A. K. (2013). Copula-based models for multivariate discrete response data. In Copulae  in  Mathematical  and  Quantitative  Finance (pp.  231-249).  Springer,  Berlin, Heidelberg.
- [35]. Protter, P. (2005). Stochastic Integration and Differential Equations ,  Springer-Verlag, New York, second edition,2005.
- [36]. Schwartz, J. (2012). Labor market dynamics over the business cycle: evidence from Markov switching models. Empirical Economics , 43(1), 271-289.
- [37]. Song, Q. S., Yin, G., &amp; Zhang, Z. (2006). Numerical methods for controlled regime-switching diffusions and regime-switching jump diffusions. Automatica , 42(7), 1147-1157.
- [38]. Song, P. X. K., Li, M., &amp; Yuan, Y. (2009). Joint regression analysis of correlated data using Gaussian copulas. Biometrics, 65(1), 60-68.
- [39]. Sotomayor,  L.  R.,  &amp;  Cadenillas,  A.  (2009).  Explicit  solutions  of  consumption-investment problems in financial markets with regime switching. Mathematical Finance , 19(2), 251-279.
- [40]. Stevens, A. (2012). Dynamics of predation. Nature Education Knowledge , 3(10), 46-48.

- [41]. Storesletten, K., Telmer, C. I., &amp; Yaron, A.   (2004). Cyclical dynamics in idiosyncratic labor market risk. Journal of Political Economy , 112(3), 695-717.
- [42]. Svensson, L. E., &amp; Werner, I. M. (1993). Nontraded assets in incomplete markets: Pricing and portfolio choice. European Economic Review, 37(5), 1149-1168.
- [43]. Teplå , L. (2000). Optimal hedging and valuation of nontraded assets. Review of Finance , 4(3), 231-251.
- [44]. Viceira, L. M. (2001). Optimal portfolio choice for long -horizon investors with nontradable labor income. The Journal of Finance , 56(2), 433-470.
- [45]. Yao,  H.,  Chen,  P.,  &amp;  Li,  X.  (2016).  Multi-period  defined  contribution  pension  funds investment management with regime-switching and mortality  risk. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 71, 103-113.
- [46]. Zariphopoulou, T. (2001). A solution approach to valuation with unhedgeable risks. Finance and stochastics, 5(1), 61-82.
- [47]. Zhang,  Q.,  &amp;  Yin,  G.  (2004).  Nearly-optimal  asset  allocation  in  hybrid  stock  investment models. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 121(2), 419-444.
- [48]. Zhou, X. Y., &amp; Yin, G. (2003). Markowitz's mean-variance portfolio selection with regime switching:  A  continuous-time  model. SIAM  Journal  on  Control  and  Optimization , 42(4), 1466-1482.
- [49]. Zhu,  C.,  Yin,  G.,  &amp;  Baran,  N.  A.   (2015).  Feynman-Kac  formulas  for  regime-switching jump diffusions  and  their  applications. Stochastics  An  International  Journal  of  Probability and Stochastic Processes , 87(6), 1000-1032.