## Fundamental limits for learning hidden Markov model parameters

Kweku Abraham, Elisabeth Gassiat and Zacharie Naulet

Abstract -We study the frontier between learnable and unlearnable hidden Markov models (HMMs). HMMs are flexible tools for clustering dependent data coming from unknown populations. The model parameters are known to be fully identifiable (up to label-switching) without any modelling assumption on the distributions of the populations as soon as the clusters are distinct and the hidden chain is ergodic with a full rank transition matrix. In the limit as any one of these conditions fails, it becomes impossible in general to identify parameters. For a chain with two hidden states we prove nonasymptotic minimax upper and lower bounds, matching up to constants, which exhibit thresholds at which the parameters become learnable. We also provide an upper bound on the relative entropy rate for parameters in a neighbourhood of the unlearnable region which may have interest in itself.

Index Terms -Hidden Markov Models; Minimax estimation; Sample complexity.

## I. INTRODUCTION

## A. Context and motivation

Finite state space hidden Markov models (HMMs) are widely used in applications to model observations coming from different populations. HMMs can be viewed as particular mixture models. In the latter, given a latent sequence of cluster labels ( X n ) n ∈ N taking values in a finite set, the observed data ( Y n ) n ∈ N is a sequence of independent random variables with, for each n , the distribution of Y n depending only on X n . When the X n are independent, a mixture model is not identifiable: various convex combinations of population probability distributions can lead to the same distribution for the observations. This is true even for observations taking values in a finite alphabet: one cannot recover two different multinomial distributions from a convex combination of them.

For a HMM, one adds the extra structure that ( X n ) n ∈ N forms a Markov chain. In sharp contrast to the independent setting, with hidden Markov structure one can recover the distribution of data for each population absent virtually any constraint on these distributions (known in this context as the emission distributions). This fact had been observed in applied papers, and a theoretical proof that parameters can be identified with minimal assumptions is relatively recent, given for HMMs taking values in a finite set in [1], [2], [3] and extended to allow for emission distributions modelled nonparametrically (but still with the underlying Markov chain having finite state space) in [4], [5]. HMMs therefore form a

0 ©2022 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

tractable class of models nevertheless rich enough to model many practical clustering settings well: see for instance [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. In this context note that given good estimates of the model parameters one can almost match the optimal clustering and testing behaviour of the Bayes classifier (e.g. see [12], [13]); let us emphasise once more that this is possible essentially absent any constraint on the emission distributions, in contrast to typical clustering algorithms which may require parametric modelling or separation of clusters.

In drawing a contrast between the independent and dependent cases, we have so far omitted to mention that of course an independent model is a degenerate subcase of a Markov model. There are three ways in which the data ( Y n ) n ∈ N can fail to exhibit dependence: when the population labels themselves are in reality independently distributed; when the emission distributions are identical; or when only one population is observed. Without extra modelling assumption on the populations distributions, learnability of the parameters with a finite number of observations becomes difficult near the independent case. This occurs when one of the populations is sparse, which is a typical setting for multiple testing. It also occurs when the two populations have close distributions; knowing how far separated the populations have to be for clustering to be possible without further structural assumptions is of interest. Finally, this occurs when the cluster labels have very weak dependence. It has also been observed empirically in [14] that the EM algorithm can exhibit bad behavior in some regions of the parameter space. It is thus of theoretical and practical importance to understand quantitatively what happens when these limiting situations are approached in the setting of finitely many observations of the HMM sequence.

The present work initiates an exploration of the limits of learnability of the hidden Markov parameters as the independent subcase is approached. We focus on the setting of two hidden states and multinomial data, and exhibit principles which should generalise to much wider settings.

## B. Contribution

Our main result, Theorem 1, gives upper and lower bounds showing the minimax estimation rate for the model parameters, exhibiting that these parameters can be learned if and only if the sample size n is large enough compared to a suitable measure of the closeness of the data to the independent subcase.

Important steps to get the main result are as follows. We introduce a reparametrisation of the model leading to a statistical distance which appears to be a key tool for the understanding of the fundamental limits of learning the HMM

parameters near the independent subcase. This statistical distance is proved in Proposition 1 to be equivalent to the distance between the distribution of three consecutive observations, and leads to an explicit upper bound of the relative entropy rate for a specific part of parameters domain, see Proposition 2, which we believe could have interest in itself. Upper bounds for the learning of the new parameters are proved in Theorem 2 while (almost) matching lower bounds are proved in Theorem 3.

## C. Related work

Theoretical justification of a range of learning methods for HMMs with emission distributions modelled parametrically or nonparametrically have been developed in recent years: moment and tensor methods in [3], [15], and model selection using penalized least squares estimation in [16], [17], using penalized likelihood methods in [18], or using other techniques in [19]. These works all give both asymptotic and nonasymptotic upper bounds controlling the distance between estimators and the unknown parameters. All require the data to truly be dependent, but none quantify explicitly how their sample complexity results depend on the 'distance' to independence. Indeed, quantifying this dependence requires a sharp understanding of how the distances between distributions evolve with respect to the distances between parameters, as done for particular parametric finite mixture models in [20], [21], [22].

Results in [15] control the propagation of errors from parameter estimation to the posterior probabilities when calculating the latter via plug-in, implying that good control on the risk of the estimators will ensure the performance of the empirical Bayes classifier is close to that of the true Bayes classifier (whose optimality for clustering is a standard result in decision theory [23]).

A topic closely related to binary classification/clustering is multiple testing, in which one aims to identify within some large data set a collection of data points which come from a 'discovery' hypothesis, rather than from the conservative null hypothesis. In this setting control of the false discovery rate has been obtained recently for a knockoffs-based method in [24] and for an empirical Bayes method in [12], [13]; in each case estimation of the HMM parameters is an essential first step. Modelling the proportion of non-null signals as vanishingly small, as our results permit, would allow for further links to the setting of sparse multiple testing, considered for example (with independent data) in [25], [26].

Relative entropy rate, or equivalently Kullback-Leibler rate, between HMMs can be expressed using Blackwell's invariant measure [27], but no explicit formulation exists [28]. Providing useful or meaningful upper and lower bounds is a subject of ongoing research [29], [30], [31]. In Proposition 2 we obtain a new bound on the Kullback-Leibler rate between HMMs which, compared to the aforementioned works, does a better job at capturing the effects of the underlying Markov dependency structure, at the expense of holding only for a restricted subspace of parameters.

To the best of our knowledge no prior theoretical result exists addressing the learning of parameters of a HMM when approaching the independent case. By experimentally studying the EM algorithm when the multinomial emission distributions approach each other, the authors in [14] found a range of parameters for which the EM algorithm behaves badly. Their results provided some of the inspiration for the work herein, which we believe shows that such behaviour is primarily a result of the investigated region approaching the limit where the parameters become unlearnable, not of a limitation of the EM algorithm specifically.

Finally, let us mention that departure from the independence assumption has been noted to allow for better learning also in HMM settings free from the assumption that the Markov chain has a finite state space [32], [33] (at the expense of stricter assumptions on the emission distributions), and also in other problems including dynamic networks [34], [35], image denoising [36], and deconvolution [37].

## D. Organisation of the paper

We describe the setting in Section II and state our main result in Section III. The key reparametrisation is given in Section IV where we state the basic propositions involving the statistical distance we define. Intermediate upper bound results are given in Section V while lower bounds are in Section VI. In Section VII we discuss our results and possible further work. All proofs are deferred to Section VIII.

## E. Notation

We write ‖ f ‖ = 〈 f, f 〉 1 / 2 for the usual Euclidean norm and inner product. We write a ∨ b := max( a, b ) and a ∧ b := min( a, b ) . We write KL for the Kullback-Leibler divergence between densities p, q or between the corresponding distribution P, Q , KL ( p, q ) ≡ KL ( P, Q ) = E p (log( p/q )) .

## II. SETTING

Consider a two-state HMM with multinomial emissions, in which we observe the first n entries of a sequence Y = ( Y 1 , Y 2 , . . . ) ∈ { 1 , . . . , K } N which, under a parameter θ = ( p, q, f 0 , f 1 ) , satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the Y j , j ∈ N conditionally independent given X . The vector X of 'hidden states' takes values in { 0 , 1 } N and the transition matrix of the chain is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the convention that for j ≥ 1 , P θ ( X j +1 = 0 | X j = 0) = 1 -p &lt; 1 and P θ ( X j +1 = 0 | X j = 1) = q &gt; 0 . The densities f 0 , f 1 are the 'emission densities' with respect to counting measure on { 1 , . . . , K } . Note that any function g on { 1 , . . . , K } (such as f 0 and f 1 ) may be identified with a vector ( g ( a )) 1 ≤ a ≤ K in R K . Grant also that X 1 is drawn from the stationary distribution of the chain, i.e. P θ ( X 1 = 1) = p/ ( p + q ) . We throughout use P θ to denote the law of ( X , Y ) , and all induced marginal and conditional laws.

In the limit where the sequence Y becomes independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.), learning the parameters becomes impossible due to standard identifiability issues for mixture models: the distribution of Y 1 may be decomposed in many ways as a convex combination of multinomials. This i.i.d. limit can be approached in three ways:

- 1) p ≈ 0 or q ≈ 0 , and thus the chain X passes long periods of time in one of the two states;
- 2) the transition matrix Q is nearly singular, so that X itself is almost i.i.d; this is the case if | 1 -p -q | ≈ 0 ;

We adopt a minimax point of view and encapsulate all the above scenarios within the class of parameters defined, for some δ, ǫ ∈ (0 , 1) and some ζ &gt; 0 , by

- 3) the emission distributions are close to each other: ‖ f 0 -f 1 ‖ ≈ 0 , where ‖·‖ denotes the usual Euclidean norm, ‖ f ‖ 2 = ∑ | f ( k ) | 2 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Introduce also the subset

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 1. Note that 1 -| 1 -p -q | is the absolute spectral gap of the chain X , and hence the mixing time of the chain can be upper bounded uniformly in Θ L since the state space has size 2 (so the chain is automatically reversible). Here L may be arbitrarily small but we think of it as fi xed , in contrast to δ , ǫ and ζ which are allowed to depend on n . With the introduction of this lower bound we still allow one of p, q to be vanishingly small (or arbitrarily close - even equal - to 1), but not both.

## III. MAIN RESULTS

To avoid a label-switching issue discussed in the next section we assume that f 0 -f 1 lies in some specified halfplane. Our main result is the following. The estimator ˆ θ is built via plug-in from those constructed later in Theorem 2.

Theorem 1. There exist an estimator ˆ θ = (ˆ p, ˆ q, ˆ f 0 , ˆ f 1 ) and a constant C = C ( K,L ) &gt; 0 such that for all 1 ≤ x 2 ≤ nδ 2 ǫ 4 ζ 6 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, there exist constants c = c ( K ) &gt; 0 , ǫ 1 &gt; 0 and ζ 1 &gt; 0 such that for δ ≤ 1 / 6 , ǫ ≤ ǫ 1 , ζ ≤ ζ 1 , L ≤ 1 / 3 and nδ 2 ǫ 4 ζ 6 ≥ 1 ,

where the infima are over all estimators ˇ θ = (ˇ p, ˇ q, ˇ f 0 , ˇ f 1 ) .

The particular value 1 / 4 on the right sides is not essential: what is important is that the probabilities are bounded away from zero.

We deduce immediately the sample complexity for learning the parameters. We do not seek sharp dependence on K in the bounds because we believe our results can be extended to the nonparametric setting, which we leave for further work.

Corollary 1. Fix a target error magnitude E &gt; 0 and a probability level α &gt; 0 . For the same estimators as in Theorem 1, there exists a constant C = C ( K,L ) such that for any θ ∈ Θ L we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Conversely there exists a constant c = c ( K ) &gt; 0 such that for all 0 &lt; E ≤ c ( K ) and for any estimator ˇ θ = (ˇ p, ˇ q, ˇ f 0 , ˇ f 1 ) there exists θ ∈ Θ L such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that to apply Theorem 1 for the lower bounds we would initially also need n ≥ ( δ 2 ǫ 4 ζ 6 ) -1 but by monotonicity - i.e. the fact that any measurable function of ( Y 1 , . . . , Y n ) is also a measurable function of ( Y 1 , . . . , Y N ) for N ≥ n -the restriction can be removed.

Let us sketch the main ideas behind the proof of Theorem 1. The full proof is deferred to Section VIII, along with all other proofs for this article.

The minimax upper bounds are obtained by producing an estimator that attains the bounds. Building on the work of [3], [4] we know that θ is identifiable from the law of three consecutive observations, and we propose a reparametrisation of the model to simplify the analysis. Let us denote by p (3) θ the density of three consecutive observations. Motivated by a desire to simplify the expression for p (3) θ (see equations (8) and (9) in Section IV), we introduce new parameters φ, ψ and we show in Proposition 1 that ‖ p (3) θ ( φ,ψ ) -p (3) θ ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ‖ is equivalent to ρ ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) , where ρ is defined in the proposition and can be seen as an adequate statistical distance of the problem (see also the discussion after Proposition 2). Then, we leverage that p (3) θ can be estimated in Euclidean distance at the parametric rate n -1 / 2 by the empirical estimator ˆ p (3) n defined in Section V, Lemma 1. This suggests that solving for ( ˆ φ, ˆ ψ ) ∈ arg min φ,ψ ‖ p (3) θ ( φ,ψ ) -ˆ p (3) n ‖ will give a good estimator ( ˆ φ, ˆ ψ ) for ( φ, ψ ). By standard calculations and using the equivalence between ‖ p (3) θ ( φ,ψ ) -p (3) θ ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ‖ and ρ ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) derived in Proposition 1, we obtain bounds on maximum risk of such ( ˆ φ, ˆ ψ ) for estimating ( φ, ψ ) in Theorem 2. Finally, the upper bounds for the original parameters in Theorem 1 are obtained by taking ˆ θ = θ ( ˆ φ, ˆ ψ ) .

Incidentally, we remark that the parametrisation ( φ, ψ ) turns out to be of special interest: the components of φ determine how close the sequence Y is to being i.i.d in an interpretable way (see Section IV), and the parameter ψ is related to the stationary distribution of the sequence Y . For this reason, we also establish minimax bounds for the estimation of φ and ψ themselves in Theorems 2 and 3.

The minimax lower bounds are obtained by an argument ` a la Le Cam. In particular, it is a famous result of Le Cam [38], [39] that the minimax rate (under quadratic loss) of estimating a functional g : Θ → R is always greater than the maximum value that | g ( θ ) -g ( ˜ θ ) | 2 can take for θ, ˜ θ ∈ Θ under the constraint that KL ( p ( n ) θ ; p ( n ) ˜ θ ) ≤ c , where KL ( p ( n ) θ ; p ( n ) ˜ θ ) denotes the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence between the laws of ( Y 1 , . . . , Y n ) under parameters θ and ˜ θ , and 0 &lt; c &lt; 1 is a small positive constant (see Lemma 2 for the precise formulation we use). Understanding bounds on | g ( θ ) -g ( ˜ θ ) | in terms of bounds on KL ( p ( n ) θ ; p ( n ) ˜ θ ) is also sufficient for obtaining an upper bound on the minimax estimation rate. Since we have dependent observations, the main difficulty of the proof is to relate KL ( p ( n ) θ ; p ( n ) ˜ θ ) to a suitable notion of distance between θ and ˜ θ . A key result is Proposition 2 showing that under mild assumptions KL ( p ( n ) θ ( φ,ψ ) ; p ( n ) θ ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ) is upper bounded by a constant times nρ 2 ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) . Then the lower bounds for φ (respectively ψ ) in Theorem 3 are obtained by lower bounding the value of the optimisation problems max | φ j -˜ φ j | 2 (respectively max | ψ j -˜ ψ j | 2 ) subject to nρ 2 ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ≤ c and θ ( φ, ψ ) , θ ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ∈ Θ for a small enough constant c &gt; 0 . Finally, the lower bounds for the original parameters in the Theorem 1 are essentially deduced from the bounds for ( φ, ψ ) and inversion of the parametrisation.

## IV. CHANGE OF PARAMETRISATION

We reparametrise the model in such a way that the i.i.d. limiting cases are highlighted, by changing variables to φ = ( φ 1 , φ 2 , φ 3 ) and ψ = ( ψ 1 , ψ 2 ) defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here we have separated the scalar parameters φ from the vector parameters ψ . Defining

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

it follows from the discussion in Section II that the data Y is close to i.i.d. exactly when r ( φ ) ≈ 0 . [This is of course true also of other combinations of the components of φ , but as equation (9) will show, r ( φ ) is the appropriate combination measuring the 'distance' to the i.i.d. case.]

Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and note that for ( φ, ψ ) ∈ Φ we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

while for ( φ, ψ ) ∈ Φ L we additionally have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2. When K = 2 , in view of identifiability issues discussed in the next subsection, ψ 2 is not needed in the parametrisation, since we may universally make the choice

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 3. The parametrisation θ ↦→ ( φ, ψ ) is invertible: we calculate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 4. Suppose ψ 1 is a probability density function with respect to counting measure on { 1 , . . . , K } , ψ 2 is a function satisfying ‖ ψ 2 ‖ = 1 and ∑ k ψ 2 ( k ) = 0 , and φ satisfies | φ 1 | ≤ 1 , | φ 2 | ≤ 1 and φ 3 ≥ 0 . Then ( φ, ψ ) lies in Φ( δ, ǫ, ζ ) if and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The model (1) is identifiable for the parameter set Θ only up to 'label-switching', since Y has the same distribution under the parameters ( p, q, f 0 , f 1 ) and ( q, p, f 1 , f 0 ) ; in the parametrisation ( φ, ψ ) , the distribution of Y is the same under ( φ 1 , φ 2 , φ 3 , ψ 1 , ψ 2 ) and under ( -φ 1 , φ 2 , φ 3 , ψ 1 , -ψ 2 ) . However, it was proved in [3] that aside from this labelswitching, the model parameters can be identified from the law of just three consecutive observations. To that end, for any integer m denoting by P ( m ) θ the law of ( Y 1 , . . . , Y m ) under parameter θ ∈ Θ , and by p ( m ) θ the corresponding density with respect to counting measure on { 1 , . . . , K } m , we calculate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where g = (1 -p ) f 0 + pf 1 and h = qf 0 + (1 -q ) f 1 , and where ⊗ denotes the tensor product so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the ( φ, ψ ) parametrisation, writing just p (3) φ,ψ for p (3) θ ( φ,ψ ) in a slight abuse of notation, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we recall the notation r ( φ ) = 1 4 (1 -φ 2 1 ) φ 2 φ 2 3 .

̸

Proposition 1. For r as in equation (3) define m by

We define a statistical distance ρ directly on the parameter space Φ which is equivalent to the Euclidean distance between the densities p (3) φ,ψ and p (3) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ . The function ρ is not a true metric because it may not satisfy the triangle inequality and because, due to the identifiability issues reflected by the appearance of factors of sgn( 〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉 ) in its definition, we may have ρ ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) = 0 with ( φ, ψ ) = ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) . Here 〈· , ·〉 denotes the Euclidean inner product on R K , 〈 f, g 〉 = ∑ K i =1 f ( k ) g ( k ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and define ρ ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) =

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There exist constants c 1 , c 2 &gt; 0 (which depend on K ) such that for all ( φ, ψ ) , ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ∈ ⋃ δ,ǫ,ζ Φ( δ, ǫ, ζ ) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Optimal estimation rates can be obtained if we adequately understand the Kullback-Leibler divergence between distributions with different parameters. The Kullback-Leibler divergence between P ( n ) θ ( φ,ψ ) and P ( n ) θ ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) can be related to the statistical distance ρ ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) in a neighbourhood of the independent subcase.

Proposition 2. Assume there exists c ∈ (0 , 1) such that min( f 0 , f 1 , ˜ f 0 , ˜ f 1 ) ≥ c . There exist constants C, ǫ 0 &gt; 0 depending only on c such that if max( | φ 2 | , | ˜ φ 2 | ) ≤ ǫ 0 , then with ρ as in equation (11) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We note that only the lower bound on ‖ p (3) φ,ψ -p (3) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ‖ in Proposition 1 is used in our paper (it is used in proving Theorem 2). The upper bound on ‖ p (3) φ,ψ -p (3) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ‖ is still of interest as it establishes the tightness (up to constants) of the corresponding lower bound, thereby proving the equivalence between ‖ p (3) φ,ψ -p (3) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ‖ and ρ ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) and showing that ρ is an adequate statistical metric for this problem. Furthermore, in combination with Proposition 2, Pinsker's inequality, and the fact that all norms on the set { 1 , . . . , K } 3 are equivalent, it shows that whenever max( | φ 2 | , | ˜ φ 2 | ) is small enough,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for constants C ′ , C ′′ &gt; 0 , once again highlighting the prominent role of the law of 3 consecutive observations in HMM modelling, and illustrating that optimal estimators (up to numerical constants) can be built solely on the basis of the empirical distribution of blocks of 3 consecutive observations. This shows that as long as the chain Y is not 'too dependent', it behaves almost as if we had observed i.i.d. blocks of 3 consecutive observations (in which case we would have that KL ( P ( n ) θ ( φ,ψ ) , P ( n ) θ ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ) = ( n/ 3) KL ( P (3) θ ( φ,ψ ) , P (3) θ ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ) , for all n divisible by 3 ).

## V. UPPER BOUNDS

We obtain the following upper bounds for estimating φ and ψ . Since we are studying limits as the quantities of interest become small, the relative risk may be of as much interest as the absolute risk, and we provide bounds for both quantities. The bounds demonstrate that learning model parameters is possible in the regime where n is large enough in relation to δ , ǫ and ζ . Observe firstly that estimation of p (3) is possible at a parametric rate.

Lemma 1. Define the empirical estimator

ˆ p (3) n : { 1 , . . . , K } n → [0 , 1] by

Then for some constant C = C ( K,L ) and any x ≥ 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 2. Assume Φ L is non-empty and let ˆ φ, ˆ ψ be any measurable functions satisfying, for ˆ p (3) n as in equation (12) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There exists a constant C = C ( K,L ) &gt; 0 such that the following hold.

1) Assume 1 ≤ x 2 ≤ nδ 2 ǫ 4 ζ 6 . Then

2) Assume 1 ≤ x 2 ≤ nδ 2 ǫ 2 ζ 4 . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

3) Assume 1 ≤ x 2 ≤ nδ 2 ǫ 4 ζ 6 . Then

4) Assume 1 ≤ x 2 ≤ n . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

5) Assume 1 ≤ x 2 ≤ nδ 2 ǫ 2 ζ 4 and K &gt; 2 . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall that estimating ψ 2 is unnecessary when K = 2 (see Remark 2). Note that the absolute loss in each case is bounded, and one can deduce that the bounds for φ 2 and for ψ hold without an upper bound on x , with e -x 2 on the right replaced by zero (for C large enough).

The estimator proposed in Theorem 2 is an approximate solution to an optimisation problem which (by taking squares) is a multivariate polynomial function with 2 K unknowns. There are several methods in the literature about finding the global optimum of multivariate polynomials, see e.g. [40]. As mentioned in Section VII, the issue of finding computationally efficient estimation methods requires further investigation.

## VI. LOWER BOUNDS

We prove lower bounds, matching the previous upper bounds in a suitable regime and demonstrating the impossibility of learning model parameters when n is not large enough in relation to δ , ǫ and ζ .

Theorem 3. There exist constants c = c ( K ) &gt; 0 , and ǫ 0 , ζ 0 &gt; 0 such that whenever ǫ ≤ ǫ 0 , ζ ≤ ζ 0 , δ ≤ 1 / 6 and L ≤ 1 / 3 the following hold. [The infima are over all estimators, i.e. all measurable functions of the data ( Y 1 , . . . , Y n ) .]

- 1) Assume nδ 2 ǫ 4 ζ 6 ≥ 1 . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

2) Assume nδ 2 ǫ 4 ζ 4 ≥ 1 . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 3) Assume nδ 2 ǫ 4 ζ 6 ≥ 1 . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 4) For any n, δ , ǫ and ζ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

5) Assume nδ 2 ǫ 2 ζ 4 ≥ 1 and K &gt; 2 . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

In this work we have quantified the impact on learnability of approaching the i.i.d. boundary within the set of parameters of a hidden Markov model. The limiting cases occur when one hidden state is absorbing, when the underlying Markov chain becomes a sequence of independent variables, or when the emission distributions are equal. We have proved both upper and lower bounds for the estimation rates of the parameters in a hidden Markov model with two hidden states and finitely many possible outcomes. Our results characterize the frontier in the parameter space between learnable and unlearnable parameters and quantify how large the sample has to be in order to get estimators with prescribed error with high probability.

Some tricky regions of the parameter space are not fully captured in the upper and lower bounds. Specifically, the condition on n in the lower bound for estimating φ 2 differs by a factor of ǫ 2 from the corresponding condition in the upper bound. Also, in the upper bound for φ 1 , we do not describe the precise estimation behaviour in the region nδ 2 ǫ 4 ζ 6 &lt; x 2 &lt; nǫ 4 ζ 6 : in this range we can obtain something by applying the bound with y 2 = min( x 2 , nδ 2 ǫ 4 ζ 6 ) but we cannot expect that this gives the correct dependence on x . [There is no issue in the region x 2 ≥ nǫ 4 ζ 6 since we may replace the bound e -x 2 with zero, similarly to the comment after the theorem regarding φ 2 and ψ .] A similar gap exists for estimating φ 3 . The reason for those gaps is that the inversion formulas given in Proposition 3 are only local; finding global inversion formulas, which would allow the remaining regions to be covered, remains an open problem. Our results already work for a wide range of parameters, and extending to the few remaining cases is an interesting issue for future research.

Regarding the upper bounds, our proof method relies on the fact that the two steps of estimating p (3) and of estimating, given p (3) , the HMM parameters themselves, decouple. This is because, with good mixing properties for the Markov chain, estimation of p (3) can be done uniformly at a rate not depending on the HMM parameters (Lemma 1). When the spectral gap is small the underlying Markov chain mixes slowly, spending long periods remaining in whichever of the two states it is in, so that estimation of p (3) becomes hard for parameters for which there is small spectral gap. These are not the same parameters for which recovering the HMM parameters given p (3) is most difficult, and so to obtain accurate rates without a spectral gap requires carefully addressing the two steps simultaneously, which is beyond the scope of the paper (we could obtain a suboptimal rate using the current methods just with careful tracking of the spectral gap, since it is lower bounded by 1 -2 δ , but upper and lower bounds obtained in this way mismatch by a factor of δ ). Note the above arguments explain the requirement for a spectral gap, not an absolute spectral gap; we believe our results will in fact hold in the near-periodic case when the spectral gap is close to 2 and the absolute spectral gap is close to zero, but this would require some extra technical calculations in the proof of Lemma 1.

We believe similar results hold with more than two hidden states and with arbitrary nonparametric emission distributions. Investigation of the fundamental limits for learning more general HMMs and misspecified modelling will be the object of further work. Developments of our findings for clustering, multiple testing and sparse settings will also be the object of further work, and all will depend fundamentally on the results obtained here.

We analysed a minimum distance estimator for theoretical convenience, and it is possible that the same upper bounds hold for more practical estimators (for example empirical least squares estimators and tensor-based methods). On the practical side, usual estimation algorithms can be expected to exhibit bad computational behaviour when the unknown true parameters lie near the learning frontier, as shown in [14] for the EM algorithm. We have not tackled this issue here and we believe it merits substantive investigation, both in building robust algorithms and in detecting the poor performance in the problematic region. This last question is interesting both from a practical and a theoretical point of view.

## VIII. PROOFS

## A. Proof of Proposition 1

Recall the definition (10) of m as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We write ˜ m = m ( ˜ φ ) , and we write ψ ijk for ψ i ⊗ ψ j ⊗ ψ k and ˜ ψ ijk for ˜ ψ i ⊗ ˜ ψ j ⊗ ˜ ψ k . Then from equation (9) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recalling that 〈· , ·〉 denotes the Euclidean inner product on R K , we have 〈 ψ 1 , 1 〉 = 1 , 〈 ψ 2 , 1 〉 = 0 , ‖ ψ 2 ‖ = 1 and ‖ 1 ‖ = K 1 / 2 . Let 〈· , ·〉 also denote the Euclidean inner product on R K × K × K , wherein for functions f i , ˜ f i : { 1 , . . . , K } → R , i ≤ 3 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a) Lower bounding ‖ p (3) φ,ψ -p (3) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ‖ : For any function f : { 1 , . . . , K } → R , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and similarly,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Choosing f = ψ 2 + sgn( 〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉 ) · ˜ ψ 2 (with the convention that sgn(0) = +1 ), we observe that

.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular we note that 〈 ψ 2 , f 〉 2 = 〈 ˜ ψ 2 , f 〉 2 = (1 + |〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉| ) 2 ≥ 1 . Since also ‖ f ‖ 2 = 2 + 2 |〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉| ≤ 4 , returning to (15) we observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where for the last line we have used equation (14) and the fact that ‖ p (3) φ,ψ -p (3) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ‖ 2 ≤ K 3 . We continue by considering the expression f ⊗ 1 ⊗ f , for which we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recognising symmetry with equation (15), we again choose f = ψ 2 +sgn( 〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉 ) · ˜ ψ 2 to obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, considering the expression f ⊗ f ⊗ f , we observe that 〈 p (3) φ,ψ -p (3) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ , f ⊗ f ⊗ f 〉 is equal to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In other words, 〈 p (3) φ,ψ -p (3) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ , f ⊗ f ⊗ f 〉 equals

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Once more choosing f = ψ 2 +sgn( 〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉 ) · ˜ ψ 2 , we obtain (recall that by construction ‖ f ‖ ≤ 2 , 1 ≤ 〈 ψ 2 , f 〉 2 = 〈 ˜ ψ 2 , f 〉 2 ≤ 4 , and also sgn( 〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉 ) 〈 ψ 2 , f 〉 = 〈 ˜ ψ 2 , f 〉 )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For some constant C = C ( K ) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where for the last line we have used equations (14) and (16) and that ‖ ψ 1 ‖ ≤ K 1 / 2 and | ˜ m 1 | ≤ ˜ φ 2 3 / 4 ≤ ‖ ˜ f 0 -˜ f 1 ‖ 2 / 4 ≤ K/ 4 .

Similarly, using equation (17) and the fact that | ˜ m 2 | is suitably bounded, we have for some C = C ( K )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We deduce for some different constant C = C ( K ) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, for ψ 2 we show that for some C we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

If ψ 2 = ˜ ψ 2 there is nothing to prove, so we assume without loss of generality that ψ 2 = ˜ ψ 2 . Also assume that | m 1 | ≥ | ˜ m 1 | , the final bound then following by symmetry. Returning to equation (15) with f to be chosen, we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since 〈 ψ 2 , f 〉 2 - 〈 ˜ ψ 2 , f 〉 2 = 〈 ψ 2 -˜ ψ 2 , f 〉〈 ψ 2 + ˜ ψ 2 , f 〉 we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observe that ψ 2 + ˜ ψ 2 is orthogonal to ψ 2 -˜ ψ 2 (this arises from the fact that ψ 2 and ˜ ψ 2 have unit norms) and choose

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since also ‖ f ‖ ≤ 2 and |〈 ˜ ψ 2 , f 〉| ≤ 2 , continuing from equation (20) and using equations (14) and (16) we see that for a constant C = C ( K )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observing that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and recalling we assumed that | m 1 | ≥ | ˜ m 1 | , equation (19) follows.

b) Upper bounding ‖ p (3) φ,ψ -p (3) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ‖ : From equation (13),

The proof that ‖ p (3) φ,ψ -p (3) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ‖ is lower bounded up to a constant by ρ ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) follows by combining equations (14) and (16)-(19)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the bound remains valid if we replace the final two terms by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As used already in proving the lower bound on ‖ p (3) φ,ψ -p (3) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ‖ , we note that

we focus on the case where sgn( 〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉 ) = +1 for which the original decomposition yields suitable bounds, but the proof in the other case is similar using the alternative decomposition.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some C = C ( K ) . To conclude the proof it thus suffices to bound the tensor product terms ‖ ψ ijk -˜ ψ ijk ‖ in terms of the differences ‖ ψ 1 -˜ ψ 1 ‖ , ‖ ψ 2 -˜ ψ 2 ‖ . First we decompose

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also note, recalling that ψ 2 and ˜ ψ 2 have unit norms, that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Observe that

and hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## We deduce that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By symmetry, the same bound holds for ‖ ψ 122 -˜ ψ 122 ‖ and for ‖ ψ 212 -˜ ψ 212 ‖ . Furthermore ‖ ψ 222 ‖ = 1 , and using (23),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The claim follows from inserting equations (22), (24) and (25) into equation (21).

## B. Proof of Proposition 2

Write X 1: k and Y 1: k for the vectors ( X 1 , . . . , X k ) and ( Y 1 , . . . , Y k ) respectively, and recall that P ( n ) θ denotes the law of Y 1: n for parameter θ . Without loss of generality we may assume that sgn( 〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉 ) = +1 , since one may substitute ˜ φ ′ = ( -˜ φ 1 , ˜ φ 2 , ˜ φ 3 ) and ˜ ψ ′ = ( ˜ ψ 1 , -˜ ψ 2 ) for ˜ φ and ˜ ψ and obtain P ( n ) ˜ θ = P ( n ) ˜ θ ′ , hence KL ( P ( n ) θ ; P ( n ) ˜ θ ) = KL ( P ( n ) θ ; P ( n ) ˜ θ ′ ) , but sgn( 〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ ′ 2 〉 ) = -sgn( 〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉 ) . Recall that KL ( P ; Q ) is upper bounded by the chi-square distance χ 2 ( P, Q ) = E Q [(d P/ d Q -1) 2 ] (e.g. [39, Lemma 2.7]). Then using that P θ ( Y 1 = · ) = ψ 1 ( · ) and P ˜ θ ( Y 1 = · ) = ˜ ψ 1 ( · ) ≥ c , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This yields the case n = 1 since the definition (11) implies that ρ ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ≥ ‖ ψ 1 -˜ ψ 1 ‖ 2 .

Now assume that n ≥ 2 . By the chain rule for relative divergence (used inductively), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The first term was addressed above, and we now consider the remaining terms. Again bounding the KL divergence by the chi-square distance, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

But, for any k ≥ 1 , noting that P θ ( Y k +1 = y | Y 1: k , X 1: k +1 = x ) = f x k +1 ( y ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we have used that Y k +1 | ( Y 1: k , X 1: k +1 ) has the same law as Y k +1 | X k +1 . Therefore when min( ˜ f 0 , ˜ f 1 ) ≥ c we must have, for all Y 1: k and all k ≥ 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence we have established that, for all Y 1: k and all k ≥ 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us now rewrite P θ ( Y k +1 = y | Y 1: k ) in the parametrisation ( φ, ψ ) . For convenience we introduce the notation P k ( x ) := P θ ( X k +1 = x | Y 1: k ) for the prediction filters, and we similarly write ˜ P k ( x ) := P ˜ θ ( X k +1 = x | Y 1: k ) . By equation (28) and Remark 3,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For k ≥ 1 , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then combining equations (26), (27) and (29), we obtain that KL ( P ( n ) θ ; P ( n ) ˜ θ ) is bounded above by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is in turn bounded above by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that in the end, using that ‖ ˜ ψ 2 ‖ 2 = 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us now find an inductive formula for V k . Let us define P k ( x ) := P θ ( X k +1 = x | Y 1: k ) . First we observe that for any k ≥ 2 , since P θ ( X k +1 = x | Y 1: k , X k = x ′ ) = P θ ( X k +1 = x | X k = x ′ ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we further calculate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, for k = 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To summarise, we have proved the recursive formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore when k ≥ 2 , V k equals

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which rewrites as so that V k = N k /D k . We rewrite the previous expressions solely in terms of the parameters ( φ, ψ ) [recall the inversion formulae in Remark 3]. First, D k is equal to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the last three displays and the fact that 2 φ 3 P k -1 (1) = -V k -1 + φ 3 -φ 1 φ 3 , we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Grouping together the terms proportional to V k -1 and the others, N k equals

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We remark that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

(1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We write for convenience

and, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

-

φ

1

)

φ

3

-

φ

3

(1

-

φ

1

)(1

-

φ

2

)

-

φ

3

(1

-

φ

3

)

φ

2

= 0

,

That is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which means that for k ≥ 2 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For k = 1 , recalling that Y 1 ∼ ψ 1 and P θ ( X 1 = 1) = p/ ( p + q ) , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where to go from the third to fourth line we have used the expressions derived in Remark 3 for f 1 , p and q . Letting m 1 = r ( φ ) , m 2 = r ( φ ) φ 2 , and m 3 = r ( φ ) φ 1 φ 2 φ 3 , we have obtained the inductive formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The strategy is now to bound V k -˜ V k for k ≥ 2 in terms of V 1 -˜ V 1 using the above inductive formula. To do so, we will need an upper bound for V k (respectively ˜ V k ) which we establish now. We claim that | V k | ≤ 4 | m 1 | /c for all k ≥ 1 provided ǫ 0 is taken small enough. Indeed, | ψ 2 ( Y 1 ) | ≤ ‖ ψ 2 ‖ = 1 and c ≤ ψ 1 ( Y 1 ) ≤ 1 , hence | V 1 | ≤ 2 | m 1 | /c ≤ 4 | m 1 | /c . Now suppose that | V k -1 | ≤ 4 | m 1 | /c ; then, under the assumptions of the proposition with for ǫ 0 = ǫ 0 ( c ) small enough, using equation (4) to see that | m 1 | ≤ | φ 2 | ≤ ǫ 0 , | φ 1 φ 2 φ 3 | ≤ √ 2 | φ 2 | ≤ √ 2 ǫ 0 , we have

Similarly | ˜ V k | ≤ 4 | ˜ m 1 | /c for all k ≥ 1 . We are now in position to bound V k -˜ V k for k ≥ 2 . Recall V k = N k /D k and similarly write ˜ V k = ˜ N k / ˜ D k . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As when bounding | V k | , we can assume that ǫ 0 is small enough to have D k ≥ c/ 2 and ˜ D k ≥ c/ 2 , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

But, recalling the definition (11) of ρ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the difference N k -˜ N k is equal to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from which we deduce that | N k -˜ N k | is upper bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which, for ǫ 0 &gt; 0 small enough, is further upper bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Inserting these bounds into equation (32), we find that there is a constant B depending solely on c such that for all k ≥ 2

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

again when ǫ 0 is small enough. Hence for k ≥ 2 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To finish the proof, it is enough to show that | V 1 -˜ V 1 | is bounded by a constant multiple of ρ ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) , which follows from its definition and the same arguments as above. Thus for some constant B ′ &gt; 0 depending only on c

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The conclusion follows by combining equations (30), (31) and (33).

## C. Proof of Theorem 2

We start with the proof of Lemma 1, that p (3) can be estimated at a parametric rate.

Proof of Lemma 1. We use a Markov chain concentration result from [41]. Theorem 3.4 therein (but note there is an updated version of the paper on arXiv) tells us that for any stationary Markov chain Z = ( Z (1) , Z (2) , . . . ) of pseudospectral gap γ ps (defined as in [41]) and any function h satisfying E [ h ( Z (1) ) 2 ] ≤ σ 2 and ‖ h ‖ ∞ ≤ b ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We apply to the chain Z defined by Z ( n ) = ( X n , X n +1 , X n +2 , Y n , Y n +1 , Y n +2 ) ; we begin by showing the pseudo-spectral gap of this chain is bounded from below. Proposition 3.4 of the same reference shows that the reciprocal of the pseudo-spectral gap of any chain is bounded above by twice the mixing time t Z mix of the chain, defined as the first time that the law of Z , regardless of the starting distribution, is within 1/4 of its invariant distribution in total variation distance. We note that t Z mix is equal to the mixing time t X (3) mix of the chain (( X n , X n +1 , X n +2 ) n ≥ 0 ) . This latter quantity is upper bounded by t X mix +2 where t X mix denotes the mixing time of the chain X itself. Finally, the matrix Q has eigenvalues 1 and φ 2 , and an explicit computation yields that max ij | Q n ij -π j | = max i ( π i ) | φ 2 | n so that the mixing time of X is at most

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is a constant since L is fixed. The pseudo-spectral gap of the chain Z is thus lower bounded by some constant γ = γ ( L ) .

Applying equation (34) with h ( Z ) = BD { Z 4 = a, Z 5 = b, Z 6 = c } , which satisfies E h 2 ≤ 1 and ‖ h ‖ ∞ ≤ 1 , we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

hence for some constant c ′ &gt; 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using that ‖ ˆ p (3) -p (3) ‖ ≤ K 3 max a,b,c | ˆ p (3) ( a, b, c ) -p (3) ( a, b, c ) | and a union bound, we deduce for some C = C ( K,L ) and for x ≤ √ n that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For x ≥ 1 we may absorb the factor 2 K 3 into the exponential by changing the constant C , and by replacing x with C ′ x we can remove this constant, yielding the result in the case where C ′ x ≤ √ n . In the other case, since ‖ ˆ p (3) -p (3) ‖ is bounded (by K 3 / 2 ), by increasing the constant C ′ if necessary we have C ′ x/ √ n ≥ K 3 / 2 so that the probability in question is equal to 0 ≤ e -x 2 .

To prove Theorem 2, observe that by Lemma 1 there exist events A n of probability at least e -x 2 on which

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The true parameter ( φ, ψ ) lies in Φ L so that any estimators constructed in Theorem 2 satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and hence on the event A n further satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Proposition 1 we deduce for a constant C ′ that ρ ( ˆ φ, ˆ ψ ; φ, ψ ) ≤ C ′ x/ √ n on A n . For estimating ψ , observe that ‖ ˆ ψ 1 -ψ 1 ‖ ≤ ρ ( ˆ φ, ˆ ψ ; φ, ψ ) and | r ( φ ) | min( ‖ ˆ ψ 2 -ψ 2 ‖ , ‖ ˆ ψ 2 + ψ 2 ‖ ) ≤ ρ ( ˆ φ, ˆ ψ ; φ, ψ ) . The upper bound for estimating ψ 1 is immediate and, recalling from equation (4) that | r ( φ ) | ≥ δǫζ 2 / 4 , we also deduce the bound for ψ 2 .

For the bounds on φ , observe firstly that it suffices to prove the upper bounds on the absolute risk since, taking φ 2 as an example, for ( φ, ψ ) ∈ Φ L ( δ, ǫ, ζ ) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(See also after equation (36) for a similar argument with φ 1 .) Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and for j = 2 , 3

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have the following.

Proposition 3. Let η ∈ [0 , 1] . There exist constants c, C for which the following hold. i.e. equal to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The conditions of Theorem 2 ensure that on the event A n we may apply Proposition 3 with η = C ′ x/ √ n . We deduce the upper bounds for estimating the components of φ immediately upon replacing φ 1 , φ 2 and φ 3 on the right sides in Proposition 3 by their lower bounds [for φ 1 we note that min( | ˆ φ 1 -φ 1 | , | ˆ φ 1 + φ 1 | ) ≤ | φ 1 -sgn( 〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉 ) · ˜ φ 1 | ].

̸

Proof of Proposition 3. Recall that m ( φ ) = ( r ( φ ) , φ 2 r ( φ ) , φ 1 φ 2 φ 3 r ( φ )) with r ( φ ) = 1 4 (1 -φ 2 1 ) φ 2 φ 2 3 . If r ( φ ) = 0 then in each case no η ∈ [0 , 1] satisfies the conditions and so there is nothing to prove. Otherwise, note that m is invertible when restricted to { φ : r ( φ ) = 0 } ⊃ Φ( δ, ǫ, ζ ) and its inverse is given by φ ( m ) defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For arbitrary ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) satisfying ρ ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ≤ η , we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define also

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, for ∆ = (∆ 1 , ∆ 2 , ∆ 3 ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a) Bounding ω 1 : We decompose,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is in turn equal to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we observe that m 3 ( φ ) / √ g ( φ ) is equal to φ 1 , so indeed

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Call the numerator of this last fraction N and call its denominator D . Writing h φ (∆) as h φ (∆) = ξ φ (∆) + γ φ (∆) , where γ φ (∆) := 2 m 3 ( φ )∆ 3 +∆ 2 3 , we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In order to obtain the optimal upper bound, we need to do a fine analysis of this expression. To this end, we calculate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last line follows because φ 1 m 3 ( φ ) = φ 2 1 g ( φ ) 1 / 2 . We now focus on the middle term of the last display, which we will express as a function of A .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from which we deduce that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since m 2 ( φ ) ≥ 0 , we see that ξ φ (∆) has maximal amplitude when ∆ 1 = sgn( m 1 ( φ )) η and when ∆ 2 = η , in which case we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last line follows since m 2 ( φ ) ≤ | m 1 ( φ ) | . Now we observe that under the condition of the lemma, we have η ≲ | m 1 ( φ ) | , and so we can find a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also, we have that | γ φ (∆) | ≤ 2 | m 3 ( φ ) | η + η 2 , and so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Noting that φ 3 ≤ √ K , for c 0 = c 0 ( K ) sufficiently small in the assumption of the proposition we have | h φ (∆) | ≤ g ( φ ) / 2 . Consequently, noting also that | ∆ 3 | ≤ η and η ≤ 4 c 0 g 1 / 2 , we find that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

b) Bounding ω 2 : We rewrite,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under the assumptions of the theorem, we have that η ≤ m 1 ( φ ) / 2 , and thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

c) Bounding ω 3 : We rewrite,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us call the numerator of the fraction on the right of the last display N , and the denominator D . We further decompose h φ (∆) as h φ (∆) = ξ φ (∆) + γ φ (∆) , where γ φ (∆) := 4 m 1 ( φ ) 2 ∆ 2 . We see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last line follows because m 1 ( φ ) 2 = 1 4 (1 -φ 2 1 ) φ 3 g 1 / 2 . Since m 2 ( φ ) ≥ 0 , we see that ξ φ (∆) has maximal amplitude when ∆ 1 = sgn( m 1 ( φ )) η and when ∆ 2 = η , in which case we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the second line follows because under the assumptions of the proposition we have that m 2 ( φ ) ≲ | m 1 ( φ ) | and η ≤ m 2 ( φ ) / 2 (note that φ 3 ≤ K 1 / 2 ). Since h φ (∆) = ξ φ (∆) + 4 m 1 ( φ ) 2 ∆ 2 , we also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

But by assumption η ≲ (1 -φ 2 1 ) φ 2 2 φ 3 3 , and 4 g 1 / 2 = (1 -φ 2 1 ) φ 2 2 φ 2 3 , thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that max( φ 3 , | φ | 1 ) ≤ √ K . Moreover, under the assumptions of the proposition and using that φ 3 ≤ √ K , it is the case that | ∆ 2 | ≤ η ≲ m 2 ( φ ) . Therefore | D | ≳ m 2 ( φ ) √ g ( φ ) , and

Finally, since have assumed that η &lt; (1 -φ 2 1 ) φ 2 2 φ 2 3 8 , we see that the second term is at most a constant times the first, so that it can be absorbed by increasing the constant C .

## D. Proof of Theorem 3

We give a standard two-point testing lower bound, summarising ideas that can be found for example in Chapter 2 of [39].

Lemma 2. Given data X ( n ) ∼ p ( n ) u for parameter u ∈ U , the following lower bounds hold for estimating u .

Suppose U ⊆ R and for some r ≤ 1 / 2 assume that there exist parameters u 0 , u 1 satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we recall KL denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the infimum is over all estimators ˆ u based on the data X ( n ) .

If instead ( U , d ) is a pseudo-metric space and for some r ≥ 0 there exist parameters u 0 , u 1 satisfying

then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. In the case U ⊆ R , given an estimator ˆ u we may construct a test T of u = u 0 vs u = u 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observe that

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where for the last line we have used that 4 r/ (2 + 4 r ) ≥ r for r ≤ 1 / 2 . Also note that on the event { T = 1 }∩{| ˆ u/u 0 -1 | &lt; r } we have also | ˆ u/u 1 -1 | &lt; r and hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that | u 1 /u 0 -1 | &lt; 2 r/ (1 -r ) on this event. Having assumed r ≤ 1 / 2 and | u 1 /u 0 -1 | ≥ 4 r we deduce that { T = 1 } ∩ {| ˆ u/u 0 -1 | &lt; r } = ∅ so that { T = 1 } ⊆ {| ˆ u/u 0 -1 | ≥ r } , and hence we have shown

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the latter infimum is over all tests T . In the pseudometric case a reduction considering the test T = BD { d (ˆ u, u 0 ) &gt; d (ˆ u, u 1 ) } and directly using the triangle inequality likewise yields

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It remains to lower bound the maximum probability of testing error by 1 / 4 . Introducing the event A = { p ( n ) u 0 p ( n ) u 1 ≥ 1 / 2 } , we see

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

The infimum is attained when 1 2 ( p -P u 1 ( A c )) = 1 -p and takes the value 1 3 P u 1 ( A ) , so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Next observe

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we have used Markov's inequality to attain the final expression. By the second Pinsker inequality (e.g. Proposition 6.1.7b in [42]), using the upper bound on the Kullback-Leibler divergence we can continue the chain of inequalities to see

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any c &lt; 1 / 3 , we may choose µ = µ ( c ) small enough that the testing error satisfies

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and in particular a numerical calculation shows that µ = 1 + 1 4 log 2 -√ 1 + 1 2 log 2 &gt; 1 / 100 works for c = 1 / 4 .

In view of Proposition 2, for any ( φ, ψ ) , ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ∈ Φ corresponding to strictly positive emission densities, we have for φ 2 and ˜ φ 2 small enough that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C &gt; 0 is a constant depending only on K and a lower bound for the emission densities. We remark that for all the hypotheses we will exhibit below, we will have that φ 2 and ˜ φ 2 are of order ǫ , which is upper bounded by ǫ 1 by assumption, so that choosing the latter small enough the above bound on KL ( p ( n ) φ,ψ , p ( n ) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) will apply. Then, to prove Item (1), it suffices to apply Lemma 2 to u = 1 -φ 2 1 and prove the existence of parameters ( φ, ψ ) , ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ∈ Φ L ( δ, ǫ, ζ ) satisfying for small enough c 1 &gt; 0 and some c 2 &gt; 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which will give the lower bound on the absolute risk. Regarding the relative risk, we then note that for any a ≥ 0 , since | φ 1 | ≤ 1 and 1 -φ 2 1 ≥ δ, so that we may assume the same of ˆ φ 1 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(See also equation (35) for a similar calculation with φ 2 .)

Similar conditions to (36) suffice for proving the other parts of Theorem 3 and we proceed now to verifying the existence of suitable parameters ( φ, ψ ) and ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) , with the help of the following lemma.

Lemma 3. For a given φ , assume conditions (5) and (6) and assume that φ 3 ≤ √ 2 ⌊ K/ 2 ⌋ / (2 K ) . Then there exists ψ such that ( φ, ψ ) lies in Φ L and the corresponding emission densities f 0 , f 1 are bounded below by some constant c = c ( K ) &gt; 0 .

In particular, for | φ 1 | ≤ 1 -3 δ , ǫ ≤ φ 2 ≤ min(1 / 3 , 1 -L ) , ζ ≤ φ 3 ≤ 2 ζ , such a ψ exists under the condition ζ ≤ √ 2 ⌊ K/ 2 ⌋ / (4 K ) .

Proof. For k ≤ K , set ψ 1 ( k ) = 1 /K and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

BD BD [Or, similarly, ψ 2 ( k ) = (2 ⌊ K/ 2 ⌋ ) -1 / 2 ( BD { k &lt; ( K +1) / 2 } -BD { k &gt; ( K +1) / 2 } ) .] Under the assumed condition on φ 3 and recalling that | φ 1 | ≤ 1 by assumption, we observe from the expressions for f 0 , f 1 given in Remark 3 that these are lower bounded by 1 / (2 K ) . In the particular case, one simply notes that all the conditions hold for such φ .

a) Proof of Items (1) and (3): We prove the lower bounds for estimating φ 1 and φ 3 together. For some small constant c &gt; 0 , set R = cǫ -2 ζ -3 n -1 / 2 and, writing S = (2 -6 δ -R ) R/ (6 δ -9 δ 2 ) , set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recalling the definition r ( φ ) = (1 -φ 2 1 ) φ 2 φ 2 3 / 4 , the choice of φ 3 ensures that r ( φ ) = r ( ˜ φ ) , and we note that under the assumptions of the theorem we have R ≤ δ ≤ 1 / 6 so that S ≤ R/δ ≤ 1 and ζ ≤ φ 3 ≤ 2 ζ . By Lemma 3 there exists some ψ = ˜ ψ such that ( φ, ψ ) , ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ∈ Φ L and for this ψ = ˜ ψ we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using that √ 1 + t ≤ 1 + t for t ≥ 0 we have

hence since r ( φ ) = (6 δ -9 δ 2 ) ǫζ 2 (1 + S ) / 4 ≤ 3 δǫζ 2 , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recalling that R ≤ δ ≤ 1 / 6 and that r ( φ ) = r ( ˜ φ ) one calculates

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For c small enough we see that the conditions in equation (36) are satisfied, yielding the claimed bound for estimating φ 1 .

To prove the lower bound for estimating φ 3 it suffices to lower bound | φ 3 / ˜ φ 3 -1 | . Here we use the bound √ 1 + x -1 ≥ x/ (2 √ 1 + x ) ≥ x/ (2 √ 2) for 0 ≤ x ≤ 1 to see for a constant c ′ &gt; 0 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The bound for φ 3 follows from applying Lemma 2.

b) Proof of Item (2): For a constant c &gt; 0 , define R = cδ -1 ǫ -1 ζ -2 n -1 / 2 , define φ, ˜ φ by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next observe, using that (1 + x ) 1 / 2 ≤ 1 + x ,

and observe that by construction r ( φ ) = r ( ˜ φ ) . Noting that φ 2 ≤ 2 ǫ ≤ 1 -L and φ 3 ≤ 2 ζ because the assumptions of Theorem 3 ensure that R ≤ ǫ ≤ 1 / 3 , we deduce using Lemma 3 that there exists some ψ = ˜ ψ such that ( φ, ψ ) , ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ∈ Φ L ( δ, ǫ, ζ ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the last inequality holding if ζ ≤ ζ 0 ≤ 1 / 2 . We deduce

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Again using that φ 3 ≤ 2 ζ and noting also that (1 -φ 2 1 ) = 6 δ -9 δ 2 ≤ 6 δ , we see that for some C ′ &gt; 0 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As with Items (1) and (3), for c small enough in the definition of R we may apply Lemma 2 to deduce the claimed lower bound since | ˜ φ 2 /φ 2 -1 | = R/ǫ .

c) Proof of Item (4): Set φ = ˜ φ = (0 , ǫ, ζ ) . For k ≤ K , as in Lemma 3 define ψ 1 ( k ) = 1 /K and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

BD BD and set ˜ ψ 1 = ψ 1 + cn -1 / 2 ψ 2 . Note that for the upper bound ζ 0 small enough we have ( φ, ψ ) , ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ∈ Φ L for n larger than some C = C ( K,c ) , or for all n ≥ 1 if c is small enough. Then

and we apply Lemma 2 to deduce the result.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

d) Proof of Item (5): Set φ = ˜ φ = (1 -3 δ, ǫ, ζ ) , choose ψ 1 = ˜ ψ 1 to be the uniform density on { 1 , . . . , K } . As with the previous parts, an application of Lemma 2 will yield the theorem if we can exhibit ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 such that the induced emission densities are bounded below by some c ′ = c ′ ( K ) &gt; 0 , ‖ ψ 2 -˜ ψ 2 ‖ = R := c ( nδ 2 ǫ 2 ζ 4 ) -1 / 2 for some c &gt; 0 , sgn( 〈 ψ 2 , ˜ ψ 2 〉 ) = +1 , and ρ ( φ, ψ ; ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ≤ c 1 n -1 / 2 for a small constant c 1 . Such a choice is possible if the constants c and ζ 0 are small enough constants, for nδ 2 ǫ 2 ζ 4 ≥ 1 with ζ ≤ ζ 0 ; for example, define ψ 2 ( k ) , k ≤ K as in Lemma 3 by

BD BD and, for h defined by h (1) = 2 -1 / 2 , h (3) = -2 -1 / 2 and h ( k ) = 0 for all other k , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This satisfies ‖ ˜ ψ 2 -ψ 2 ‖ = R , ‖ ˜ ψ 2 ‖ = 1 , 〈 ˜ ψ 2 , 1 〉 = 0 and 〈 ˜ ψ 2 , ψ 2 〉 ≥ 0 . For k ̸∈ { 1 , 3 } the condition (7) of Remark 4 holds with 1 / (2 K ) in place of 0 on the right, and for k ∈ { 1 , 3 } a direct calculation shows that the condition with 1 / (4 K ) in on the right if R is upper bounded by some c ′ = c ′ ( K ) , which is the case for c = c ( K ) sufficiently small. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## E. Proofs for Section III

Proof of Theorem 1. We begin with the upper bounds. From the inversion formulae in Remark 3 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recalling that | ˆ φ 1 | ≤ 1 , that 0 ≤ φ 3 ≤ K 1 / 2 and that ‖ ψ 2 ‖ = ‖ ˆ ψ 2 ‖ = 1 , we decompose the second term on the right, with an implicit decomposition of the third term included:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows that for some constant C we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying Proposition 3 as in the proof of Theorem 2, one can show that for some C &gt; 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The upper bounds for estimating f 0 and f 1 then follow from Theorem 2.

Similarly, Remark 3 and the fact that | φ 2 | ≤ 1 give

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The upper bounds then again follow from Theorem 2.

For the lower bounds, writing θ ( φ, ψ ) = ( p, q, f 0 , f 1 ) and θ ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) = (˜ p, ˜ q, ˜ f 0 , ˜ f 1 ) , observe by Lemma 2 that it suffices to lower bound max( | p -˜ p | , | q -˜ q | ) and max( ‖ f 0 -˜ f 0 ‖ , ‖ f 1 -˜ f 1 ‖ ) corresponding to choices of ( φ, ψ ) , ( ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) made in the proof of Theorem 3.

From the inversion formulae in Remark 3 we calculate, for any φ, ˜ φ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If δ &gt; ǫζ set φ = (1 -3 δ, ǫ, ζ (1 + S ) 1 / 2 ) and ˜ φ = (1 -3 δ -R,ǫ, ζ ) , where R = c ( nǫ 4 ζ 6 ) -1 / 2 for some c &gt; 0 and where S ∈ [ R/ (12 δ ) , R/δ ] is, as in the proof of Theorem 3 Item (1), such that r ( φ ) = r ( ˜ φ ) . If δ ≤ ǫζ instead set φ = (1 -3 δ, ǫ, ζ (1 + R/ǫ ) 1 / 2 ) , ˜ φ = (1 -3 δ, ǫ +

R,ζ ) with R = c ( nǫ 2 δ 2 ζ 4 ) -1 / 2 . In either case the proof of Theorem 3 demonstrates that for suitable ψ = ˜ ψ we have KL ( p ( n ) φ,ψ , p ( n ) ˜ φ, ˜ ψ ) ≤ 1 / 100 for c small enough hence by Lemma 2

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Inserting from equation (37) we conclude the bound in either case.

For ( f 0 , f 1 ) , again set φ = (1 -3 δ, ǫ, ζ (1 + S ) 1 / 2 ) , ˜ φ = (1 -3 δ -R,ǫ, ζ ) where R = cǫ -2 ζ -3 n -1 / 2 , and choose ψ = ˜ ψ by Lemma 3. As with p and q we deduce that for some c ′ &gt; 0 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the inversion formulae in Remark 3 and the fact that ψ = ˜ ψ and ‖ ψ 2 ‖ = 1 , one calculates

For the current choice of φ, ˜ φ , calculating as in proving Theorem 3 Item (3), we have | φ 3 -˜ φ 3 | ≥ CζR/δ for some C &gt; 0 and we deduce the lower bound.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Corollary 1. It suffices to substitute α = e -x 2 into Theorem 1 and solve for error equal to E , while ensuring that x 2 = log(1 /α ) is suitably bounded.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by a public grant as part of the Investissement d'avenir project, reference ANR-11-LABX0056-LMH, LabEx LMH, by Institut Universitaire de France, and by the EPSRC Programme Grant on the Mathematics of Deep Learning, under the project: EP/V026259/1.

## REFERENCES

- [1] E. S. Allman, C. Matias, and J. A. Rhodes, 'Identifiability of parameters in latent structure models with many observed variables,' Ann. Statist. , vol. 37, no. 6A, pp. 3099-3132, 2009.
- [2] D. Hsu, S. M. Kakade, and T. Zhang, 'A spectral algorithm for learning hidden Markov models,' J. Comput. System Sci. , vol. 78, no. 5, pp. 1460-1480, 2012.
- [3] A. Anandumar, R. Ge, D. Hsu, S. M. Kakade, and M. Telgarsky, 'Tensor decompositions for learning latent variable models,' J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 15, pp. 2773-2832, 2014.
- [4] ´ E. Gassiat, A. Cleynen, and S. Robin, 'Inference in finite state space non parametric hidden Markov models and applications,' Stat. Comput. , vol. 26, no. 1-2, pp. 61-71, 2016.
- [5] G. Alexandrovich, H. Holzmann, and A. Leister, 'Nonparametric identification and maximum likelihood estimation for hidden Markov models,' Biometrika , vol. 103, no. 2, pp. 423-434, 2016.
- [6] L. Couvreur and C. Couvreur, 'Wavelet based non-parametric HMMs: theory and methods,' in ICASSP '00 Proceedings , 2000, pp. 604-607.
- [7] F. Lef` evre, 'Non-parametric probability estimation for HMM-based automatic speech recognition,' Computer Speach and Language , vol. 17, pp. 113-136, 2003.
- [8] M. F. Lambert, J. P. Whiting, and A. V. Metcalfe, 'A non-parametric hidden Markov model for climate state identification,' Hydrology and Earth System Sciences , vol. 7 (5), pp. 652-667, 2003.
- [9] L. Shang and K. Chan, 'Nonparametric discriminant HMM and application to facial expression recognition,' in 2009 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops , 2009, pp. 2090-2096.
- [10] C. Yau, O. Papaspiliopoulos, G. O. Roberts, and C. Holmes, 'Bayesian non-parametric hidden Markov models with applications in genomics,' J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B Stat. Methodol. , vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 37-57, 2011. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9868.2010.00756.x
- [11] S. Volant, C. B´ erard, M.-L. Martin-Magniette, and S. Robin, 'Hidden Markov Models with mixtures as emission distributions,' Statistics and Computing , pp. 1-12, 2013.
- [12] W. Sun and T. T. Cai, 'Large-scale multiple testing under dependence,' Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) , vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 393-424, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://rss.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1467-9868.2008.00694.x
- [13] K. Abraham, I. Castillo, and ´ E. Gassiat, 'Multiple testing in nonparametric hidden Markov models: An empirical Bayes approach,' J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 23, pp. 1-57, 2022.
- [14] N. Rau, J. Lucke, and A. K. Hartmann, 'Phase transition for parameter learning of Hidden Markov Models,' Physical Review E , vol. 104, 2021.
- [15] Y. De Castro, E. Gassiat, and S. Le Corff, 'Consistent estimation of the filtering and marginal smoothing distributions in nonparametric hidden Markov models,' IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory , vol. 63, no. 8, pp. 47584777, 2017.
- [16] Y. De Castro, ´ E. Gassiat, and C. Lacour, 'Minimax adaptive estimation of nonparametric hidden Markov models,' J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 17, pp. Paper No. 111, 43, 2016.
- [17] L. Leh´ ericy, 'Consistent order estimation for nonparametric hidden Markov models,' Bernoulli , vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 464-498, 2019.
- [18] L. Leh´ ericy, 'Nonasymptotic control of the MLE for misspecified nonparametric hidden Markov models,' Electronic Journal of Statistics , vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 4916 -4965, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1214/21-EJS1890
- [19] L. Leh´ ericy, 'State-by-state minimax adaptive estimation for nonparametric hidden Markov models,' J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 19, pp. Paper No. 39, 46, 2018.
- [20] ´ E. Gassiat and R. van Handel, 'The local geometry of finite mixtures,' Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. , vol. 366, no. 2, pp. 1047-1072, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.revues.math.u-psud.fr/10.1090/S0002-9947-2013-06041-2
- [21] P. Heinrich and J. Kahn, 'Strong identifiability and optimal minimax rates for finite mixture estimation,' Ann. Statist. , vol. 46, no. 6A, pp. 2844-2870, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.revues.math.u-psud.fr/10.1214/17-AOS1641
- [22] N. Doss, Y. Wu, P. Yang, and H. H. Zhou, 'Optimal estimation of highdimensional Gaussian mixtures,' arXiv:2002.05818 , 2020.
- [23] L. Devroye, L. Gy¨ orfi, and G. Lugosi, A probabilistic theory of pattern recognition . Springer Science &amp; Business Media, 2013, vol. 31.
- [24] M. Sesia, C. Sabatti, and E. J. Cand` es, 'Gene hunting with hidden Markov model knockoffs,' Biometrika , vol. 106, no. 1, pp. 1-18, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.revues.math.u-psud.fr/10.1093/biomet/asy033
- [25] F. Abramovich, Y. Benjamini, D. L. Donoho, and I. M. Johnstone, 'Adapting to unknown sparsity by controlling the false discovery rate,' Ann. Statist. , vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 584-653, 2006. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.revues.math.u-psud.fr/10.1214/009053606000000074
- [26] I. Castillo and E. Roquain, 'On spike and slab empirical Bayes multiple testing,' Ann. Statist. , vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 2548-2574, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.revues.math.u-psud.fr/10.1214/19-AOS1897
- [27] D. Blackwell, 'The entropy of functions of finite-state Markov chains,' in Transactions of the first Prague conference on information theory, Statistical decision functions, random processes held at Liblice near Prague from November 28 to 30, 1956 . Publishing House of the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences, Prague, 1957, pp. 13-20.
- [28] J. Silva and S. Narayanan, 'Upper bound Kullback-Leibler divergence for transient hidden Markov models,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 4176-4188, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.revues.math.u-psud.fr/10.1109/TSP.2008.924137
- [29] M. N. Do, 'Fast approximation of Kullback-Leibler distance for dependence trees and hidden Markov models,' IEEE Signal Process. Lett. , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 115-118, 2003.
- [30] J. Luo and D. Guo, 'On the entropy rate of hidden Markov processes observed through arbitrary memoryless channels,' IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory , vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 1460-1467, 2009. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.revues.math.u-psud.fr/10.1109/TIT.2009.2013030
- [31] C.-D. Fuh and Y. Mei, 'Quickest change detection and Kullback-Leibler divergence for two-state hidden Markov models,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 63, no. 18, pp. 4866-4878, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.revues.math.u-psud.fr/10.1109/TSP.2015.2447506
- [32] ´ E. Gassiat, S. Le Corff, and L. Leh´ ericy, 'Identifiability and consistent estimation of nonparametric translation hidden Markov models with

- general state space,' J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 21, pp. Paper No. 115, 40, 2020.
- [33] P. Andreoletti, D. Loukianova, and C. Matias, 'Hidden Markov model for parameter estimation of a random walk in a Markov environment,' ESAIM Probab. Stat. , vol. 19, pp. 605-625, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.revues.math.u-psud.fr/10.1051/ps/2015008
- [34] C. Matias and V. Miele, 'Statistical clustering of temporal networks through a dynamic stochastic block model,' J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B. Stat. Methodol. , vol. 79, no. 4, pp. 1119-1141, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.revues.math.u-psud.fr/10.1111/rssb.12200
- [35] A. Becker and H. Holzmann, 'Nonparametric identification in the dynamic stochastic block model,' IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory , vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 4335-4344, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.revues.math.u-psud.fr/10.1109/TIT.2019.2893947
- [36] J. Ollion, C. Ollion, ´ E. Gassiat, L. Leh´ ericy, and S. Le Corff, 'Joint selfsupervised blind denoising and noise estimation,' arXiv:2102.08023 , 2021.
- [37] ´ E. Gassiat, S. Le Corff, and L. Leh´ ericy, 'Deconvolution with unknown noise distribution is possible for multivariate signals,' Ann. Statist. , vol. 50(1), pp. 303-323, 2022.
- [38] L. Le Cam, Asymptotic methods in statistical decision theory . SpringerVerlag, New York, 1986.
- [39] A. B. Tsybakov, Introduction to nonparametric estimation . SpringerVerlag, New York, 2009.
- [40] D. Henrion, J.-B. Lasserre, and J. L¨ ofberg, 'GloptiPoly 3: moments, optimization and semidefinite programming,' Optim. Methods Softw. , vol. 24, no. 4-5, pp. 761-779, 2009.
- [41] D. Paulin, 'Concentration inequalities for Markov chains by Marton couplings and spectral methods,' Electron. J. Probab. , vol. 20, pp. no. 79, 32, 2015.
- [42] E. Gin´ e and R. Nickl, Mathematical foundations of infinite-dimensional statistical models , ser. Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics, [40]. Cambridge University Press, New York, 2016.

Kweku Abraham received his PhD at the University of Cambridge in 2020, where he currently works as a researcher on the EPSRC programme grant Maths4DL, after working at Universit´ e Paris-Saclay from 2019-2021 as a Fondation Math´ ematique Jacques Hadamard postdoctoral fellow. His research interests include guarantees for Bayesian and deep learning methods, and latent variable modelling.

Elisabeth Gassiat took her PhD at the Universit´ e Paris-Sud in 1988, and is currently Professor in the Mathematics Department at Universit´ e Paris-Saclay. Her main research interest is in statistical learning, including non-parametric statistics, mixture and hidden Markov modeling, bayesian inference, and coding theory.

Zacharie Naulet received his PhD in Mathematics and Statistics from the University Paris Dauphine in 2016, and is currently an Assistant Professor in the Mathematics Departement at Universit´ e Paris-Saclay. His main research interests are statistical learning, bayesian statistics, network modeling, and mixture modeling.