## Backward stochastic differential equations with regime-switching and sublinear expectations

Engel John C. Dela Vega 1 and Robert J. Elliott ∗1,2

1 UniSA Business, University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA 5000, Australia 2 Haskayne School of Business, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada

## Abstract

This paper introduces a backward stochastic differential equation driven by both Brownian motion and a Markov chain (BSDEBM). Regime-switching is also incorporated through its driver. The existence and uniqueness of the solution of the BSDEBM are proved. A comparison theorem is also derived. Filtration consistent sublinear expectations are defined and characterized as solutions to the BSDEBM. The bid and ask prices are then represented using sublinear expectations.

Key Words: backward stochastic differential equations, regime-switching, Markov chains, Brownian motion, comparison theorem, sublinear expectation, two-price theory

## 1 Introduction

The theory of backward stochastic differential equations (BSDEs) has been broadly studied because of its connections to stochastic control [21, 43, 42, 23, 31] and mathematical finance [13, 14, 20]. Linear BSDEs were first introduced as adjoint equations of a stochastic control problem in [4]. The more general nonlinear BSDEs were then introduced in [29], where the existence and uniqueness of solutions were also discussed and proved. The BSDEs studied in [29] are driven by Brownian motion alone. Jump diffusions were then also considered, such as BSDEs driven by Lévy processes [2, 28], and BSDEs driven by a Brownian motion and a Poisson random measure [3, 39]. BSDEs driven by Markov chains have also been explored [6, 7].

A classic result of the theory of BSDEs is the comparison theorem which was first introduced in [30], where the BSDEs are driven by Brownian motion. As an extension, comparison theorems for BSDEs with jumps have also been discussed [3, 15, 25]. Another result is the connection of BSDEs with the theory of nonlinear expectations [7, 9]. Nonlinear expectations are used mainly in problems dealing with uncertainty [36]. They are related to the theory of G -expectations pioneered by Peng [34, 33, 35]. It was shown in [32] that nonlinear expectations can be represented as a solution to a BSDE if the driver satisfies some conditions.

One type of nonlinear expectation is the sublinear expectation, which satisfies subadditity and positive homogeneity. Sublinear expectations can be represented as a supremum of a family of expectations [36, 17]. The theory of sublinear expectations has been known to provide several tools in finance and hence has been explored in more detail in both theory and in applications [10, 19, 22, 24].

In relation to BSDEs, regime-switching drivers have also been introduced in the literature. A two-time scale associated to weak and strong interactions for the Markov chain is discussed in [40]. A backward doubly stochastic differential equation with regime-switching is investigated in [26]. Singularly perturbed Markov chains incorporated in the driver are discussed in [38]. Regime-switching BSDEs driven by Brownian motion and a Poisson random measure is explored in [37]. Similar results are discussed under the framework of reflected and doubly reflected BSDEs in [11]. Regime-switching is also introduced in the driver and dynamics of a multi-valued BSDE in [12].

In this paper, we introduce a backward stochastic differential equation with a regime-switching driver driven by both a Brownian motion and a Markov chain (BSDEBM). Existence and uniqueness of the solution of the BSDEBM are established by proving the results for a sequence of three BSDEBMs of increasing complexity in the driver. A set of conditions is presented to allow a comparison theorem for the BSDEBM to hold. Filtration consistent sublinear evaluations and expectations are also defined and represented as solutions of the BSDEBM subject to some assumptions. The bid and ask prices are then consequently represented as solutions of the BSDEBM.

∗ Corresponding Author; Email: relliott@ucalgary.ca

Markov jump martingales can be decomposed into sums of marked Poisson processes as discussed in [41]. However, the canonical semimartingale representation of a Markov chain in [18] is used in the results of this paper. The use of the semimartingale representation of the chain is in itself unique since it makes the calculations more tractable and insightful. To highlight the differences between the use of Markov chains as noise instead of Poisson processes, we mention the main differences in the results between this paper and [37]: (1) the technique used in proving the existence and uniqueness of solutions and (2) the condition imposed on the driver for the comparison theorem to hold. In this paper, three stages of a Picard-type iteration are used to prove existence and uniqueness of the solution to the BSDEBM, and the condition on the driver is specific to the Markov chain's rate matrix and associated seminorm. In [37], a contraction mapping theorem is used to prove existence and uniqueness of the solution to their BSDE, and the condition on the driver involves two distinct Markov chains. A similar comparison can be made between Markov chains and Lévy processes.

Furthermore, this paper extends the results of BSDEs driven by Brownian motion such as in [29] and BSDEs driven by a Markov chain as in [7]. Markovian regime-switching is also introduced in the driver since a change in regime should have a corresponding change in the driver. We also impose that the transition rates of the Markov chain are bounded by a specific constant. We also use a special type of nonlinear expectations, which are the sublinear expectations, to represent them as solutions to the BSDEBM and to characterize bid and ask prices.

The paper is organized as follows: the dynamics of the BSDEBM are introduced in Section 2. The existence and uniqueness of the solutions of the BSDEBM are proved in Section 3. A comparison theorem in Section 4 is then derived. Section 5 defines the sublinear expectations and provides a representation of the bid and ask prices.

## 2 Preliminaries

Consider a complete probability space (Ω , F , P ), where P is a real-world probability measure. Let W := { W t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] be a standard Brownian motion on (Ω , F , P ). Assume that states in an economy are modelled by a continuous-time Markov chain X := { X t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] on (Ω , F , P ) with finite state space S := { e 1 , e 2 , . . . , e N } ⊂ R N , where e i ∈ R N and the j th component of e i is the Kronecker delta δ ij for each i, j = 1 , . . . , N . Initially assume that the path of X is known until time T . In addition, we suppose X and W are independent processes.

Consider a filtration F := {F t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] such that F t ⊆ F for all t ∈ [0 , T ] and F T = F . Write F X := {F X t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] and F W := {F W t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] for the P -augmented natural filtrations generated by X and W , respectively. For each t ∈ [0 , T ], we define G t := F X t ∨ F W t , the minimal augmented σ -field generated by the two σ -fields F X t and F W t . Write G := {G t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] .

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let A := [ a ij ] N × N be a time-independent rate matrix of the chain X under P , where for i = j , a ji is the transition rate of the chain jumping from state e i to e j . In [18], the following semimartingale dynamics for X under P are obtained:

̸

where M := { M t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] is an R N -valued, square-integrable, ( F X , P )-martingale. We further assume that there exists c ∈ (0 , 1) such that a ij ∈ [ c, c -1 ] for all i, j with i = j .

Consider a backward stochastic differential equation driven by both Brownian motion and a Markov chain (BSDEBM) of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where, for each t ∈ [0 , T ], F ( · , t, · , · , · , · ) : Ω × R × R × R N × S → R , Q : L 2 ( R ; G T ) → R , and Z 2 ( t ) =

( Z 1 2 ( t ) , . . . , Z N 2 ( t )) ⊤ ∈ R N with Z i 2 ( t ) : Ω × [0 , T ] → R . Furthermore, we suppose the driver F in (2.2) satisfies the following assumptions:

- i. For all ( y, z 1 , z 2 , x ) ∈ R × R × R N ×S , F ( · , y, z 1 , z 2 , x ) ∈ M 2 (0 , T ; R , G t ).
- ii. There exists a constant µ &gt; 0 such that for all ( ω, t, x ) ∈ Ω × [0 , T ] ×S , and triples ( y, z 1 , z 2 ) , ( y ′ , z ′ 1 , z ′ 2 ) ∈ R × R × R N ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ‖ C ‖ 2 X t := C ⊤ ψ t C and ψ t is a nonnegative definite matrix defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Denote the spaces L p ( R K , G t ) be the set of R K -valued G t -measurable, p -integrable random variables, M 2 (0 , T ; R K × N , G t ) be the set of R K × N -valued G t -adapted square-integrable processes over Ω × [0 , T ], and P 2 (0 , T ; R K , G t ) be the set of R K -valued G t -predictable processes { ϕ t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] such that E ( ∫ t 0 ‖ ϕ s ‖ 2 X s -ds ) &lt; ∞ . A solution ( Y, Z 1 , Z 2 ) to the BSDEBM in (2.2) is a triple

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3 Existence and Uniqueness

In this section, the existence and the uniqueness of the solution to the BSDEBM in (2.2) are established. A double martingale representation, which shows that a ( G , P )-local martingale can be represented by unique G -predictable processes, is presented. This representation is used to prove an existence and uniqueness theorem.

̸

Lemma 3.1. For each i = j , let N ij t be the number of jumps from state e i to e j until time t ∈ [0 , T ] . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where M ij := { M ij t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] is an ( F X , P ) -martingale given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since M is an ( F X , P )-martingale, then M ij is also an ( F X , P

)-martingale.

Proof. By definition,

From (2.1), Theorem 3.2. For any ( G , P ) -local martingale R := { R t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] , there exist unique G -predictable processes φ 1 := { φ 1 ( t ) } t ∈ [0 ,T ] and φ 2 := { φ 2 ( t ) } t ∈ [0 ,T ] , where φ 2 ( t ) = [ φ ij 2 ( t )] N × N such that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The proof follows from Theorem 4.15 of [16] or Theorem 2.1 of [5].

Before proving the existence and uniqueness of the solution to the main BSDEBM, we first consider simplified versions of (2.2). The first BSDEBM below has a driver that is dependent only on t and X t .

Proposition 3.3. Consider a simplified version of (2.2) of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then (3.1) has a unique solution ( Y, Z 1 , Z 2 ) .

Proof. Define

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is a square-integrable martingale by the assumptions made on Q and F . It follows from Theorem 3.2 that there exist G -predictable processes Z 1 := { Z 1 ( t ) } t ∈ [0 ,T ] and φ 2 := { φ 2 ( t ) } t ∈ [0 ,T ] such that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Following the proof of Lemma 3.1 in [6], define the predictable matrix process Φ by

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Lemma 3.1, the last term of the right-hand side of (3.2) can be written as

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Z 2 ( t ) = X ⊤ t -Φ t .

By construction, Y T = Q and hence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose the triples ( Y 1 t , Z 1 1 ( t ) , Z 1 2 ( t )) and ( Y 2 t , Z 2 1 ( t ) , Z 2 2 ( t )) both solve (3.1). Then for all t ∈ [0 , T ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

Taking a G t conditional expectation implies that Y 1 t = Y 2 t P -a.s for all t . Uniqueness from Theorem 3.2 implies that Z 1 1 ( t ) = Z 2 1 ( t ) and uniqueness from the martingale representation for the chain in [6] implies that Z 1 2 ( t ) = Z 2 2 ( t ) d 〈 M,M 〉 t × dP -a.s, with 〈 M,M 〉 t defined as the predictable quadratic variation of the chain.

The second BSDEBM below has a driver similar to (2.2), but does not depend on Y t . The remaining results in this section have proofs that are divided into two parts: uniqueness and existence. The uniqueness part utilizes the Lipschitz continuity assumption and the existence part makes use of a Picard-type iteration, similar to the methods used in [6] and [29].

Proposition 3.4. Consider the BSDEBM of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For each ( t, x ) ∈ [0 , T ] ×S , suppose that there exists a µ &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then (3.3) has a unique solution ( Y, Z 1 , Z 2 ) .

Proof. (Uniqueness.) Suppose ( Y 1 , Z 1 1 , Z 1 2 ) and ( Y 2 , Z 2 1 , Z 2 2 ) are both solutions to (3.3). Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Ito's formula,

Taking expectations,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any k ∈ R , ± 2 ab ≤ k -2 a 2 + k 2 b 2 . By the Lipschitz assumption, there exists a µ &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the method of integrating factors,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Set k 2 ≤ 1 /µ . It follows that E ∣ ∣ Y 1 t -Y 2 t ∣ ∣ 2 = 0, which implies that Y 1 t = Y 2 t P -a.s for all t ∈ [0 , T ]. Moreover,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that Z 1 1 ( t ) = Z 2 1 ( t ) P -a.s and Z 1 2 ( t ) = Z 2 2 ( t ) d 〈 M,M 〉 t × dP -a.s for all t ∈ [0 , T ]. Hence, ( Y 1 , Z 1 1 , Z 1 2 ) and ( Y 2 , Z 2 1 , Z 2 2 ) are equivalent and (3.3) has a unique solution.

(Existence.) Define an approximating sequence using a Picard-type iteration. Suppose that the triple ( Y n +1 t , Z n +1 1 ( t ) , Z n +1 2 ( t )) is the solution to the following BSDEBM:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Proposition 3.3, (3.4) has to have a unique solution. For simplicity of notation, we will usually suppress the time variable u below. Using similar methods to those above,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then for k ∈ R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the method of integrating factors,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This implies that { Z n 1 ( t ) } and { Z n 2 ( t ) } are Cauchy sequences under appropriate norms. Using (3.5), Y n t is also a Cauchy sequence. By completeness, the limits exist and thus satisfy (3.3).

The following theorem proves the existence and uniqueness of the solution to the BSDEBM in (2.2). The proof is quite similar to the proposition above.

Theorem 3.5 (Existence and Uniqueness) . There exists a unique triple of G -adapted processes ( Y, Z 1 , Z 2 ) which solves (2.2) .

Proof. (Uniqueness.) Suppose ( Y 1 , Z 1 1 , Z 1 2 ) and ( Y 2 , Z 2 1 , Z 2 2 ) both are solutions to (2.2). Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any k ∈ R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Setting k 2 = (2 µ ) -1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Grönwall's inequality, E ∣ ∣ Y 1 t -Y 2 t ∣ ∣ 2 = 0 which implies that Y 1 t = Y 2 t P -a.s for all t ∈ [0 , T ]. In addition, from (3.6),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, Z 1 1 ( t ) = Z 2 1 ( t ) P -a.s and Z 1 2 ( t ) = Z 2 2 ( t ) d 〈 M,M 〉 t × dP -a.s for all t ∈ [0 , T ]. Hence, ( Y 1 , Z 1 1 , Z 1 2 ) and ( Y 2 , Z 2 1 , Z 2 2 ) are equivalent and (2.2) has a unique solution.

(Existence.) Define an approximating sequence using a Picard-type iteration. Suppose that the triple ( Y n +1 t , Z n +1 1 ( t ) , Z n +1 2 ( t )) is the solution to the following BSDEBM:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Proposition 3.4, (3.7) has a unique solution. Furthermore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then for k ∈ R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Setting k 2 = (2 µ ) -1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define φ n ( t ) = ∫ T t E | Y n u -Y n -1 u | 2 du and µ 0 = (4 µ +1) / 2. Then (3.9) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Iteration of the above inequality yields,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This implies that { Y n t } is a Cauchy sequence. From (3.8),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This implies that { Z n 1 ( t ) } and { Z n 2 ( t ) } are also Cauchy sequences under appropriate norms. By completeness, the limits exist and thus satisfy (2.2).

## 4 Comparison Theorem

This section develops a comparison theorem for the BSDEBM in (2.2). We adapt some methods used in [7].

Definition 4.1 . A pair ( F, Q ) is called standard if it satisfies the following conditions:

- (i) F is P -a.s left continuous in t .
- (ii) There exists a constant µ &gt; 0 such that for all ( ω, t, x ) ∈ Ω × [0 , T ] ×S , and triples ( y, z 1 , z 2 ) , ( y ′ , z ′ 1 , z ′ 2 ) ∈ R × R × R N ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or, equivalently,

and hence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(iii) For all triples ( Y, Z 1 , Z 2 ) such that E ∫ T 0 | Y t | 2 dt &lt; ∞ , E ∫ T 0 | Z 1 ( t ) | 2 dt &lt; ∞ , and E [ ∫ T 0 ‖ Z 2 ( t ) ‖ 2 X t -dt ] &lt; ∞ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(iv)

Q

∈

L

2

(

R

;

G

T

).

Lemma 4.2. Let Z t ∈ R N . Then ‖ Z t ‖ X t -= 0 if and only if Z t = 0 .

Proof. See Lemma 3.6 of [7].

̸

Then Z 2 ( t ) ⊤ ψ t X t -≤ -ϵ ‖ Z 2 ( t ) ‖ X t -.

Proof. See Lemma 3.10 of [7].

Proposition 4.4. Let ( ρ, α, β, γ ) be a dt × P -a.s. bounded ( R , R , R 1 × N , R ) -valued predictable process, φ a predictable R -valued process with E [ ∫ T 0 | φ t | 2 dt ] &lt; ∞ , Q ∈ L 2 ( G T ) . Define ψ + t as the Moore-Penrose inverse of ψ t . Then the linear BSDEBM given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

has a unique square integrable solution ( Y, Z 1 , Z 2 ) that can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where E ( · ) is the Doleans-Dade exponential function and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. This follows from Theorem 19.2.2 of [8] and Theorem 3.11 of [7].

Lemma 4.5. Suppose for u ∈ ( t, T ] , γ u β u ψ + u ( e j -X u -) &gt; -1 for all j such that e ⊤ j AX u -&gt; 0 . Then Γ u ≥ 0 for all u ∈ ( t, T ] .

Proof. See Theorem 3.16 of [7].

Lemma 4.6. For all t ∈ [0 , T ] and j such that e ⊤ j AX t -= 0 ,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 4.3. Let Z 2 ∈ R N be a solution to a standard BSDEBM of the form (2.2) . Suppose that for a given t , ‖ Z 2 ( t ) ‖ X t -= 0 and that for some 0 &lt; ϵ &lt; c 3 / 2 N -3 / 2 , we have for all j = 1 , . . . , N

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. See Lemma 3.4 of [7].

Lemma 4.7. Let ψ t be the nonnegative definite matrix defined in (2.3) . Then for all j

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. From (2.3),

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If e j = X t -, the second term becomes 0 which proves the first case. If e j = X t -, the first and third term cancel each other out. Furthermore, diag( X t -) X t -= X t -, which proves the second case.

Theorem 4.8 (Comparison Theorem) . Suppose that we have two BSDEBMs corresponding to two standard pairs ( F 1 , Q 1 ) and ( F 2 , Q 2 ) . Let ( Y 1 , Z 1 1 , Z 1 2 ) and ( Y 2 , Z 2 1 , Z 2 2 ) be the associated solutions. Suppose further that the following conditions hold:

- (1) Q 1 ≥ Q 2 P -a.s.
- (2) F 1 ( t, Y 2 t , Z 2 1 ( t ) , Z 2 2 ( t ) , X t ) ≥ F 2 ( t, Y 2 t , Z 2 1 ( t ) , Z 2 2 ( t ) , X t ) dt × P -a.s.
- (3) For all Z 1 2 ( t ) , Z 2 2 ( t ) , there exists an ϵ &gt; 0 such that if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all j = 1 , . . . , N , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with equality only if ‖ Z 1 2 ( t ) -Z 2 2 ( t ) ‖ X t -= 0 .

Then Y 1 ≥ Y 2 P -a.s.

Proof. Given the two solutions ( Y 1 , Z 1 1 , Z 1 2 ) and ( Y 2 , Z 2 1 , Z 2 2 ), we can write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume that ϵ &lt; c -3 / 2 N 3 / 2 . With the convention 0 / 0 := 0, we consider the following cases:

0. Then define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, 0 ∈ R 1 × N . Since φ t can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then by assumption (2), φ t ≥ 0.

(Case 2) Suppose F 1 ( t, Y 2 t , Z 2 1 ( t ) , Z 1 2 ( t ) , X t ) -F 1 ( t, Y 2 t , Z 2 1 ( t ) , Z 2 2 ( t ) , X t ) &lt; 0 and there exists some j = 1 , . . . , N such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then define

Hence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that β t is bounded by Lipschitz continuity.

̸

In Case 3, since F 1 ( t, Y 2 t , Z 2 1 ( t ) , Z 1 2 ( t ) , X t ) = F 1 ( t, Y 2 t , Z 2 1 ( t ) , Z 2 2 ( t ) , X t ) by assumption, then Z 1 2 ( t ) = Z 2 2 ( t ). By Lemma 4.2, ‖ Z 1 2 ( t ) -Z 2 2 ( t ) ‖ X t -= 0. In addition, by Lemma 4.3,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, β t in this case is also bounded by Lipschitz continuity.

By Lemma 4.5, it suffices to show that β u ψ + u ( e k -X u -) &gt; -1 for all k such that e ⊤ k AX u -&gt; 0. In Case 1, γ u β u ψ + u ( e k -X u -) = 0 &gt; -1.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows directly from assumption (2) that φ t ≥ 0.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It also follows directly from assumption (2) that φ t ≥ 0.

Write δY = Y 1 -Y 2 , δZ 1 = Z 1 1 -Z 2 1 , and δZ 2 = Z 1 2 -Z 2 2 . Then for all three cases, we can write (4.1) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since F i is standard for i = 1 , 2, then E [ ∫ T 0 | φ t | 2 dt ] &lt; ∞ for all three cases. In addition, ρ t and α t are dt × P -a.s. bounded by Lipschitz continuity, and trivially γ t is bounded for all three cases.

In Case 1, β t = 0 and hence β t is bounded. In Case 2, by assumption,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

In Case 2, by Lemma 4.6,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

If k = j , then e ⊤ j ( e k -X t -) = 0. Otherwise, e ⊤ j ( e k -X t -) = 1. By assumption,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, β t ψ + t ( e k -X t -) ≥ 0.

In Case 3, by Lemma 4.6, Lemma 4.7, and assumption (3),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since Q 1 -Q 2 ≥ 0, it then follows from Lemma 4.5 that Y 1 -Y 2 = δY ≥

t t t 0.

## 5 Sublinear Expectations and Bid-Ask Pricing

In this section, we define filtration consistent sublinear evaluations and expectations. Sublinear expectations are then shown to be solutions of the BSDEBM in (2.2). Representations for the bid and ask prices are also presented.

Definition 5.1 (Sublinear Evaluations) . A system of operators

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is called an F t -consistent sublinear evaluation for {Q s,t ⊂ L 2 ( F t ) | 0 ≤ s ≤ t ≤ T } if it satisfies the following properties:

1. For Q 1 , Q 2 ∈ Q s,t , if Q 1 ≥ Q 2 P -a.s., then E s,t ( Q 1 ) ≥ E s,t ( Q 2 ) P -a.s., with equality iff Q 1 = Q 2 P -a.s.
2. E t,t ( Q ) = Q P -a.s.
3. For r ≤ s ≤ t , E r,s ( E s,t ( Q )) = E r,t ( Q ) P -a.s.
4. For any A ∈ F s , 1 A E s,t ( Q ) = 1 A E s,t (1 A Q ) P -a.s.
5. For Q 1 , Q 2 ∈ Q s,t , E s,t ( Q 1 + Q 2 ) ≤ E s,t ( Q 1 ) + E s,t ( Q 2 ) P -a.s.
6. For 0 ≤ λ ∈ L 2 ( F s ) and λQ ∈ Q s,t , E s,t ( λQ ) = λ E s,t ( Q ) P -a.s.

Definition 5.2 (Balanced Drivers) . Suppose the family of sets {Q s,t ⊂ L 2 ( F t ) } are nondecreasing in s . For a fixed driver F , suppose further that, for all s ≤ t ≤ T , condition (3) of Theorem 4.8 holds on ( s, t ] for all Q 1 , Q 2 ∈ Q s,t . Then F is called a balanced driver on {Q s,t } .

Theorem 5.3. Fix a balanced driver F . Consider a collection of sets {Q s,t ⊂ L 2 ( F t ) } with Q r,s ⊆ Q s,t for all r ≤ s ≤ t . For s ≤ t , define the conditional F -evaluation by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Y s is the solution to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose F satisfies the following assumptions for each ( t, x ) ∈ [0 , T ] ×S :

- i. (Subadditivity)
2. By definition,

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- ii. (Positive Homogeneity) For λ ≥ 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then E F s,t is an F t -consistent sublinear evaluation for {Q s,t } .

Proof. It suffices to show that E F s,t satisfies the six properties of an F t -consistent sublinear evaluation.

1. Suppose Q 1 ≥ Q 2 . Since the driver F is balanced, then by Theorem 4.8,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

3. For any r ≤ s ≤ t , let Y be the solution to the relevant BSDEBM. Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, E F r,s ( Y s ) = Y r . By definition, we then have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

4. Let A ∈ F s . By definition, E F s,t ( Q ) and E F s,t (1 A Q ) are the respective solutions to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Premultiplying the first equation by 1 A yields a BSDEBM with terminal value 1 A Q , solution 1 A E F s,t ( Q ), and driver 1 A F . Doing the same thing to the second equation yields a BSDEBM with terminal value 1 A Q , solution 1 A E F s,t (1 A Q ), and driver 1 A F . Now by Theorem 3.5, the solution of the BSDEBM is unique. That is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

5. Consider two BSDEBMs with terminal conditions Q 1 and Q 2 . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We can then say that the above BSDEBM has terminal condition Q 1 + Q 2 , solution E F s,t ( Q 1 ) + E F s,t ( Q 2 ), and driver F ( t, Y 1 t -, Z 1 1 ( t ) , Z 1 2 ( t ) , X t ) + F ( t, Y 2 t -, Z 2 1 ( t ) , Z 2 2 ( t ) , X t ). Consider another BSDEBM with terminal condition Q 1 + Q 2 and driver F ( t, Y 1 t -+ Y 2 t -, Z 1 1 ( t ) + Z 2 1 ( t ) , Z 1 2 ( t ) + Z 2 2 ( t ) , X t ). Denote the solution to this BSDEBM by E F s,t ( Q 1 + Q 2 ). The three conditions under Theorem 4.8 are satisfied. Condition (1) is trivially satisfied, condition (2) is satisfied by the subadditivity of F , and condition (3) is satisfied by the balanced driver assumption. Thus by Theorem 4.8,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

6. By definition, E F s,t ( Q ) is the solution to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Multiplying by λ ≥ 0, with λ ∈ L 2 ( F s ), and by the positive homogeneity assumption,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We can then say that this BSDEBM has terminal condition λQ and solution λ E F s,t ( Q ). By Theorem 3.5,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 5.4 (Sublinear Expectations) . A system of operators

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is called an F t -consistent sublinear expectation for {Q t ⊂ L 2 ( F T ) | 0 ≤ t ≤ T } if it satisfies the following properties:

1. For Q 1 , Q 2 ∈ Q t , if Q 1 ≥ Q 2 P -a.s., then E ( Q 1 |F t ) ≥ E ( Q 2 |F t ) P -a.s., with equality iff Q 1 = Q 2 P -a.s.

2. For any F t -measurable Q , E ( Q |F t ) = Q P -a.s.
3. For s ≤ t , E ( E ( Q |F t ) |F s ) = E ( Q |F s ) P -a.s.
4. For any A ∈ F t , 1 A E ( Q |F t ) = E (1 A Q |F t ) P -a.s.
5. For Q 1 , Q 2 ∈ Q t , E ( Q 1 + Q 2 |F t ) ≤ E ( Q 1 |F t ) + E ( Q 2 |F t ) P -a.s.
6. For 0 ≤ λ ∈ L 2 ( F t ) and λQ ∈ Q t , E ( λQ |F t ) = λ E ( Q |F t ) P -a.s.

Lemma 5.5. Any sublinear expectation is also a sublinear evaluation.

Proof. Setting E s,t ( · ) = E ( ·|F s ) for s ≤ t

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 5.6. Fix a balanced driver F with F ( t, Y t -, 0 , 0 , x ) = 0 for all x ∈ S dt × P -a.s. Consider a collection of sets {Q t ⊂ L 2 ( F T ) } with Q s ⊆ Q t for all s ≤ t . Define the functional E F ( ·|F t ) for each t by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Y t is the solution to (2.2) . Suppose F satisfies subaddivity and positive homogeneity. Then E F ( ·|F t ) is an F t -consistent sublinear expectation for {Q t } .

Proof. It suffices to show that E F ( ·|F t ) satisfies the six properties of an F t -consistent sublinear expectation. Properties 1, 3, 5, and 6 follow exactly as in Theorem 5.3.

2. If Q is F t -measurable, then taking an F t conditional expectation implies that the solution of (2.2) has Z 1 ( u ) = 0 dt × P -a.s. and Z 2 ( u ) = 0 d 〈 M,M 〉 u × P -a.s. Hence, for all t ≤ u ≤ T ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by assumption and therefore Y t = Q or E F ( Q |F t ) = Q .

4. Let A ∈ F t . By definition, 1 A E F ( Q |F t ) and E F (1 A Q |F t ) are the respective solutions to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking an F t conditional expectation to the second equation yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all t ≤ u ≤ T . In addition, by assumption, F ( t, Y t -, 0 , 0 , x ) = 0 for all x ∈ S and hence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, both equations solve the same BSDEBM, and by Theorem 3.5,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 5.7. Suppose Q t is a linear space of real-valued functions defined on Ω . Then E ( ·|F t ) is a sublinear expectation on {Q t } if and only if there exists a family of linear expectations E θ ( ·|F t ) : Q t ↦→ R . indexed by θ ∈ Θ , such that for Q ∈ Q t ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Conic finance, pioneered in [27], deals with determining the bid and ask prices, which are commonly known as the buying and selling prices, respectively. The formulation is as follows. As in [1], any cone of acceptable claims, denoted by A , can be defined by a convex set of probability measures M equivalent to P . That is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where L 1 (Ω , F , P ) is the set of integrable random variables. The bid price and the ask price of the claim Z at time 0 are then respectively given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The bid and ask prices are formulated above as the infimum and supremum, respectively, of the expected value of a risk or claim over all probability measures equivalent to the real-world probability measure. Given this representation, we have the following characterization of bid and ask prices.

Proposition 5.8. The bid and ask prices can be represented as the solutions to the BSDEBMs with driver F and respective terminal conditions -Q and Q , and solutions -E ( -Q |F t ) and E ( Q |F t ) .

Proof.

The result follows from Theorem 5.7.

## 6 Conclusion

The regime-switching BSDE (2.2) driven by Brownian motion and a Markov chain is shown to have a unique solution given by a triple ( Y, Z 1 , Z 2 ) of G -adapted processes. A comparison theorem also holds, given the assumptions for the driver F and the terminal condition Q . The comparison result is then used to prove that the sublinear expectation of the form E F ( Q |F t ) = Y t is the solution to the BSDE (2.2) provided that the driver further satisfies subadditivity and positive homogeneity conditions. Following from the result that a sublinear expectation is the supremum of a family of linear expectations, the bid and ask prices are then represented as -E ( -Q |F t ) and E ( Q |F t ), respectively.

Since control problems can be solved by considering BSDEs and some risk measures can be expressed as nonlinear expectations, future research could involve providing a connection among the these concepts given a certain set of dynamics for the regime-switching price process. Other dynamics such as regime-switching jump-diffusion systems or Lévy processes could also be explored.

## Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the Australian Research Council and the NSERC for continuing support.

## References

- [1] P. Artzner, F. Delbaen, J.-M. Eber, and D. Heath , Coherent measures of risk , Mathematical Finance, 9 (1999), pp. 203-228.
- [2] K. Bahlali, M. Eddahbi, and E. H. Essaky , BSDE associated with Lévy processes and application to PDIE , Journal of Applied Mathematics and Stochastic Analysis, 16 (2003), pp. 1-17.
- [3] G. Barles, R. Buckdahn, and E. Pardoux , Backward stochastic differential equations and integralpartial differential equations , Stochastics and Stochastics Reports, 60 (1997), pp. 57-83.

and

- [4] J.-M. Bismut , Conjugate convex functions in optimal stochastic control , Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 44 (1973), pp. 384-404.
- [5] R. Boel and M. Kohlmann , Semimartingale models of stochastic optimal control, with applications to double martingales , SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 18 (1980), pp. 511-533.
- [6] S. N. Cohen and R. J. Elliott , Solutions of backward stochastic differential equations on Markov chains , Communications on Stochastic Analysis, 2 (2008), pp. 251-262.
- [7] , Comparisons for backward stochastic differential equations on Markov chains and related noarbitrage conditions , Annals of Applied Probability, 20 (2010), pp. 267-311.
- [8] , Stochastic Calculus and Applications , Springer New York, 2nd ed., 2015.
- [9] S. N. Cohen, R. J. Elliott, and C. E. Pearce , A general comparison theorem for backward stochastic differential equations , Advances in Applied Probability, 42 (2010), pp. 878-898.
- [10] S. N. Cohen, S. Ji, and S. Peng , Sublinear expectations and martingales in discrete time , arXiv:1104.5390, (2018).
- [11] S. Crépey and A. Matoussi , Reflected and doubly reflected BSDEs with jumps: A priori estimates and comparison , Annals of Applied Probability, 18 (2008), pp. 2041-2069.
- [12] R. Deng and Y. Ren , Multi-valued backward stochastic differential equations with regime switching , Advances in Difference Equations, 2019 (2019), pp. 1-21.
- [13] N. El Karoui, S. Peng, and M. C. Quenez , Backward stochastic differential equations in finance , Mathematical Finance, 7 (1997), pp. 1-71.
- [14] N. El Karoui and M. C. Quenez , Non-linear pricing theory and backward stochastic differential equations , in Financial Mathematics, vol. 1656, Springer, New York, 1997, pp. 191-246.
- [15] M. El Otmani , Backward stochastic differential equations associated with Lévy processes and partial integro-differential equations , Communications on Stochastic Analysis, 2 (2008), pp. 277-288.
- [16] R. J. Elliott , Double martingales , Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie verw Gebiete, 34 (1976), pp. 17-28.
- [17] , Filtering with uncertain noise , IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 62 (2017), pp. 876-881.
- [18] R. J. Elliott, L. Aggoun, and J. B. Moore , Hidden Markov Models: Estimation and Control , Springer, 1st ed., 1995.
- [19] R. J. Elliott and T. K. Siu , Stochastic volatility with regime switching and uncertain noise: filtering with sub-linear expectations , Discrete and Continuous Dynamical Systems - Series B, 22 (2017), pp. 59-81.
- [20] A. Eyraud-Loisel , Backward stochastic differential equations with enlarged filtration: Option hedging of an insider trader in a financial market with jumps , Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 115 (2005), pp. 1745-1763.
- [21] S. Hamadéne and J.-P. Lepeltier , Backward equations, stochastic control and zero-sum stochastic differential games , Stochastics and Stochastic Reports, 54 (1995), pp. 221-231.
- [22] Z. C. Hu and L. Zhou , Multi-dimensional central limit theorems and laws of large numbers under sublinear expectations , Acta Mathematica Sinica, English Series, 31 (2015), pp. 305-318.
- [23] N. Li, Y. Wang, and Z. Wu , An indefinite stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problem with delay and related forward-backward stochastic differential equations , Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications, 179 (2018), pp. 722-744.
- [24] X. Li and Y. Lin , Strict comparison theorems under sublinear expectations , Archiv Der Mathematik, 109 (2017), pp. 489-498.
- [25] Q. Q. Lin , Nonlinear Doob-Meyer decomposition with jumps , Acta Mathematica Sinica. English Series, 19 (2003), pp. 69-78.
- [26] N. Ma and Z. Wu , Backward doubly stochastic differential equations with Markov chains and a comparison theorem , Symmetry, 12 (2020), pp. 1-14.

- [27] D. B. Madan and A. Cherny , Markets as a counterparty: An introduction to conic finance , International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance, 13 (2010), pp. 1149-1177.
- [28] D. Nualart and W. Schoutens , Backward stochastic differential equations and Feynman-Kac formula for Lévy processes, with applications in finance , Bernoulli, 7 (2001), pp. 761-776.
- [29] E. Pardoux and S. Peng , Adapted solution of a backward stochastic differential equation , Systems &amp; Control Letters, 14 (1990), pp. 55-61.
- [30] S. Peng , A generalized dynamic programming principle and Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation , Stochastics and Stochastic Reports, 38 (1992), pp. 119-134.
- [31] S. Peng , Backward stochastic differential equations and applications to optimal control , Applied Mathematics and Optimization, 27 (1993), pp. 125-144.
- [32] S. Peng , Dynamically consistent nonlinear evaluations and expectations , arXiv:math/0501415, (2005).
- [33] S. Peng , G -Brownian motion and dynamic risk measure under volatility uncertainty , arXiv:0711.2834, (2007).
- [34] S. Peng , G -expectation, G -Brownian motion and related stochastic calculus of Itô type , in Stochastic Analysis and Applications: The Abel Symposium 2005, Springer, Berlin, 2007, pp. 541-567.
- [35] , Multi-dimensional G -Brownian motion and related stochastic calculus under G -expectation , Stochastic Analysis and Applications, 118 (2008), pp. 2223-2253.
- [36] S. Peng , Nonlinear Expectations and Stochastic Calculus under Uncertainty: with Robust CLT and G-Brownian Motion , Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1st ed., 2019.
- [37] J. Shi and Z. Wu , Backward stochastic differential equations with Markov switching driven by Brownian motion and Poisson random measure , Stochastics, 81 (2015), pp. 1-29.
- [38] H. Tang and Z. Wu , Backward stochastic differential equations with Markov chains and related asymptotic properties , Advances in Difference Equations, 2013 (2013), pp. 1-17.
- [39] S. Tang and X. Li , Necessary conditions for optimal control of stochastic systems with random jumps , SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 32 (1994), pp. 1447-1475.
- [40] R. Tao, Z. Wu, and Q. Zhang , BSDEs with regime switching: Weak convergence and applications , Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 407 (2013), pp. 97-111.
- [41] G. G. Yin and C. Zhu , Hybrid Switching Diffusions: Properties and Applications , Springer: New York, 1st ed., 2010.
- [42] J. Yong and X. Y. Zhou , Stochastic Controls: Hamiltonian Systems and HJB Equations , SpringerVerlag, New York, 1999.
- [43] J. Zhang , Backward Stochastic Differential Equations: From Linear to Fully Nonlinear Theory , Springer: New York, 1st ed., 2017.