## THREE-DIMENSIONAL STOCHASTIC NAVIER-STOKES EQUATIONS WITH MARKOV SWITCHING

PO-HAN HSU ∗ ANDPADMANABHANSUNDAR

ABSTRACT. A finite-state Markov chain is introduced in the noise terms of the threedimensional stochastic Navier-Stokes equations in order to allow for transitions between two types of multiplicative noises. We call such systems as stochastic NavierStokes equations with Markov switching. To solve such a system, a family of regularized stochastic systems is introduced. For each such regularized system, the existence of a unique strong solution (in the sense of stochastic analysis) is established by the method of martingale problems and pathwise uniqueness. The regularization is removed in the limit by obtaining a weakly convergent sequence from the family of regularized solutions, and identifying the limit as a solution of the three-dimensional stochastic Navier-Stokes equation with Markov switching.

## 1. INTRODUCTION

Let G be an open bounded domain in R 3 with a smooth boundary. Let the threedimensional vector-valued function u ( x, t ) and the real-valued function p ( x, t ) denote the velocity and pressure of the fluid at each x ∈ G and time t ∈ [0 , T ] . The motion of viscous incompressible flow on G with no slip at the boundary is described by the Navier-Stokes system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ν &gt; 0 denotes the viscosity coefficient, and the function f ( t ) is an external body force. The equation (1.1) can be written in the abstract evolution form on a suitable space as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A is the Stokes operator and B is the nonlinear inertial operator introduced in Section 2.

A random body force, in the form of a multiplicative noise driven by a Wiener process W ( t ) , is added to the model (see, e.g., [3]) so that one obtains

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Originally, it was Kolmogorov who suggested the introduction of white noise on the right side of equation (1.2) in order to investigate the existence of invariant measures

Date : March 29, 2022.

2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 60H15; Secondary 76D05.

Key words and phrases. Stochastic Navier-Stokes equations, Markov switching, martingale problem. ∗ The author was partially supported by NSF grant DMS-1622026.

(cf. Vishik and Fursikov [28]). From then on, several works on stochastic NavierStokes equations appeared with an additive or more generally, a multiplicative noise driven by a Wiener process.

In addition, if the noise is allowed to be 'discontinuous,' then a term driven by a compensated Poisson random measure ˜ N 1 ( dz, ds ) (which is independent of W ( t ) ) is added so that the equation becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ N 1 ( dz, dt ) := N 1 ( dz, dt ) -ν 1 ( dz ) dt and ν 1 ( dz ) dt is the intensity measure of N 1 ( dz, dt ) . The rationale for the presence of a discontinuous noise (driven by a Poisson random measure) in equation (1.3) is given in Birnir [3]. In short, discontinuities arise from the prevalence of point vorticities in fluid flows in turbulent regime.

Stochastic Navier-Stokes systems have been studied by a number of authors at various levels of generality. Spurred by the works of Bensoussan and Temam [2], and Viot [27], there was an active growth in the area with notable contributions by Flandoli and Gatarek [9], Flandoli and Maslowski [10], Debussche and Da Prato [6], Menaldi and Sritharan [17], Mattingly [16], R¨ ockner and Zhang [21] and Sritharan and Sundar [23], to name a few. The references in the articles by Flandoli as well as Albeverio [1] would provide a more complete list of research work on stochastic Navier-Stokes equations.

A novelty of this paper consists in the introduction of a right continuous Markov chain { r ( t ) : t ∈ R + } in order to allow for transitions in the type of random forces that perturb the Navier-Stokes equation. The equation under study appears as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with initial condition u (0) = u 0 in a specified space. The Markov chain is assumed to be independent of the Wiener process and the Poisson random measure, and it brings transitions between smooth (e.g., laminar) and turbulent flows into stochastic NavierStokes equations. We shall call such equations as stochastic Navier-Stokes equations with Markov switching .

The objective of this article is to construct a weak solution (in the sense of stochastic analysis and partial differential equations) to equation (1.4), and it is achieved by the following steps. First, we regularize the nonlinear term in (1.1) and solve the regularized equation: for each ǫ &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the operator k ǫ is a mollification operator (see equation (2.1) below). The abstract evolution form of equation (1.5) is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the operator B k ǫ will be introduced in Section 2. Thus, its stochastic analog with Markov switching is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with initial condition u (0) = u 0 in a specified space. Our first objective is to show that equation (1.7) admits a unique strong solution (in the sense of stochastic analysis) under suitable growth and Lipschitz conditions on the noise coefficients (listed later as Hypotheses H ):

Theorem 1.1. Assume that E | u (0) | 3 &lt; ∞ and f ∈ L 3 (0 , T ; V ′ ) . Then under Hypotheses H , there exists a unique strong solution to the stochastic system (1.7) for each fixed ǫ &gt; 0 .

Let u ǫ denote the solution to the regularized equation (1.7). The next step is to show that there exists a sequence from the family { u ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 which converges weakly to a limit as ǫ → 0 . Let the limit be denoted by u . This sets up the stage to identify the limit, u , as a solution of the stochastic Navier-Stokes equation with Markov switching (1.4) without regularization. The idea of using a regularization for the nonlinear term in the Navier-Stokes system goes back to Leray (see, e.g., [15, 19]). In its stochastic context, we have

Theorem 1.2. Assume that E | u (0) | 3 &lt; ∞ and f ∈ L 3 (0 , T ; V ′ ) . Then under Hypotheses H , there exists a weak solution u to the three-dimensional stochastic Navier-Stokes equation with Markov switching (1.4) .

Ergodic behavior of the solution of the regularized stochastic Navier-Stokes system with Markov switching and its limit (along a sequence) is being prepared by us as a separate article. Coupling of the stochastic Navier-Stokes sytem and the Markov switching to reflect onset of turbulence is currently under study.

The present article is organized as follows. The background results and the functional analytic setup for the Navier-Stokes system are introduced in Section 2. A priori estimates appear in Section 3. Section 4 is devoted to the proof of Theorem 1.1. In section 5, the proof of Theorem 1.2 is presented.

## 2. PRELIMINARIES AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYTIC SETUP

- 2.1. Basic Results on Convolution. First, we recall some properties on convolution in order to explain regularization. The interested reader may consult, e.g., [7, App. C.5.] for more details. If U ⊂ R 3 is open and ǫ &gt; 0 , we write U ǫ := { x ∈ U : dist ( x, ∂U ) &gt; ǫ } . Define the function η ∈ C ∞ ( R 3 ) by

where the constant C &gt; 0 is selected so that ∫ R 3 ηdx = 1 . For each ǫ &gt; 0 , set η ǫ ( x ) := 1 ǫ 3 η ( x ǫ ) . We call η the standard mollifier; the function η ǫ is a smooth function on R 3 with support in B (0 , ǫ ) and satisfy ∫ R 3 η ǫ dx = 1 . If f : U → R is locally integrable, define the mollification operator by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e., k ǫ f = ∫ U η ǫ ( x -y ) f ( y ) dy = ∫ B (0 ,ǫ ) η ( y ) f ( x -y ) dy for x ∈ U ǫ . The next lemma collects some properties of the mollification operator. The interested reader may consult, e.g., [7, Thm. 7 in App. C.5] or [19, Lem. 6.3] for details.

Lemma 2.1. The mollification operator enjoys the following properties:

- (1) k ǫ f ∈ C ∞ ( U ǫ ) .
- (3) If 1 ≤ p &lt; ∞ and f ∈ L p loc ( U ) , then ‖ k ǫ f ‖ L p loc ( U ) ≤ ‖ f ‖ L p loc ( U ) .
- (2) If 1 ≤ p &lt; ∞ and f ∈ L P loc ( U ) , then k ǫ f → f in L p loc ( U ) .

2.2. Function Space and Operators. Let D ( G ) be the space of C ∞ -functions with compact support contained in G and V := { u ∈ D ( G ) : ∇· u = 0 } . Let H and V be the completion of V in L 2 ( G ) and W 1 , 2 0 ( G ) , respectively. Then it can be shown that (see, e.g., [26, Sec. 1.4, Ch. I])

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we denote the H -norm ( V -norm, resp.) by | · | ( ‖ · ‖ , resp.) and the inner product on H (on V , resp.) by ( · , · ) ( (( · , · )) , resp.). The duality pairing between V ′ and V is denoted by 〈· , ·〉 V , or simply by 〈· , ·〉 when there is no ambiguity. In addition, we have the following inclusion between the spaces: V ֒ → H ֒ → V ′ , and both of the inclusions V ֒ → H and H ֒ → V ′ are dense, compact embeddings ( see, e.g., [25, Lem. 1.5.1 and 1.5.2, Ch. II]).

Let A : V → V ′ be the Stokes operator. The set { e i } ∞ i =1 is reserved for the orthonormal basis in H (orthogonal in V ) that consists of the eigenvector of the Stokes operator A (see, e.g., [5, Thm. IV. 5.5]), and H n := span { e i } n i =1 ; Π n is the orthogonal projection of H on H n . In addition, for all u ∈ D ( A ) , one has (see, e.g., [8, Sec. 6, Ch. II])

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define b ( · , · , · ) : V × V × V → R by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then b is a trilinear form which induces a bilinear form B ( u , v ) by b ( u , v , w ) = 〈 B ( u , v ) , w 〉 V . In addition, b enjoys the following properties (see, e.g., [26, Lem. 1.3, Sec. 1, Ch. II]):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For each ǫ &gt; 0 , define b ( k ǫ · , · , · ) : V × V × V → R by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which induces a bilinear form B k ǫ ( u , v ) by b ( k ǫ u , v , w ) = 〈 B k ǫ ( u , v ) , w 〉 V . The regularization rises the regularity of the first component in b , therefore, one may employ the (generalized) H¨ older inequality and the Young convolution inequality to deduce

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C ′ ǫ = ‖ η ǫ ‖ 6 5 . This together with Sobolev embedding and interpolation inequalities further implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, when u = w , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As shall be seen later, we first work with a fixed ǫ . Therefore, we shall assume that C ǫ = 1 for the sake of simplicity.

## 2.3. Noise Terms.

- (i) Let Q ∈ L ( H ) be a nonnegative, symmetric, trace-class operator. Define H 0 := Q 1 2 ( H ) with the inner product given by ( u, v ) 0 := ( Q -1 2 u, Q -1 2 v ) H for u, v ∈ H 0 , where Q -1 2 is the inverse of Q . Then it follows from [20, Prop. C.0.3 (i)] that ( H 0 , ( · , · ) 0 ) is again a separable Hilbert space. Let L 2 ( H 0 , H ) denote the separable Hilbert space of the Hilbert-Schmidt operators from H 0 to H . Then it can be shown that (see, e.g., [20, p. 27]) ‖ L ‖ L 2 ( H 0 ,H ) = ‖ L ◦ Q 1 2 ‖ L 2 ( H,H ) for each L ∈ L 2 ( H 0 , H ) . Moreover, we write ‖ L ‖ L Q = ‖ L ‖ L 2 ( H 0 ,H ) for simplicity.

Let T &gt; 0 be a fixed real number and (Ω , F , {F t } 0 let ≤ T , P ) be a filtered probability space.Let W be an H -valued Wiener process with covariance Q .

Let σ : [0 , T ] × Ω → L 2 ( H 0 , H ) be jointly measurable and adapted. If we have E ∫ T 0 ‖ σ ( s ) ‖ 2 L 2 ( H 0 ,H ) ds &lt; ∞ , then for t ∈ [0 , T ] , the stochastic integral ∫ t 0 σ ( s ) dW ( s ) is well-defined and is an H -valued continuous square integrable martingale.

For a Poisson random measure N ( dz, ds ) , ˜ N ( dz, ds ) := N ( dz, ds ) -ν ( dz ) ds defines its compensation. Then it can be shown that (see, e.g, [13, Sec. 3, Ch II.]) ˜ N ( dz, ds ) is a square integrable martingale, and for predictable f such that

- (ii) Let ( Z, B ( Z )) be a measurable space, M be the collection of all of nonnegative integer-valued measures on ( Z, B ( Z )) , and B ( M ) be the smallest σ -field on M with respect to which all η ↦→ η ( B ) are measurable, where η ∈ M , η ( B ) ∈ Z + ∪ {∞} , and B ∈ B ( Z ) . Let N : Ω → M be a Poisson random measure with intensity measure ν .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a well-defined F t -martingale.

- (iii) Let m ∈ N . Let { r ( t ) : t ∈ R + } be a right continuous Markov chain with generator Γ = ( γ ij ) m × m taking values in S := { 1 , 2 , 3 , .....m } such that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

In addition, r ( t ) admits the following stochastic integral representation (see, e.g, [24, Sec. 2.1, Ch. 2]): Let ∆ ij be consecutive, left closed, right open intervals of the real line each having length γ ij such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

and so on. Define a function h : S × R → R by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with initial condition r (0) = r 0 , where N 2 ( dt, dy ) is a Poisson random measure with intensity measure dt × L ( dy ) , in which L is the Lebesgue measure on R .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume that such a Markov chain, Wiener process, and the Poisson random measure are independent.

- 2.4. Hypotheses and Stochastic System. The noise coefficients σ : [0 , T ] × H × S → L 2 ( H 0 , H ) and G : [0 , T ] × H × S × Z → H are assumed to satisfy the following Hypotheses H :
- H1 . For all t ∈ [0 , T ] and all i ∈ S , there exists a constant K &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for p equal to 2 , 3 (growth condition on σ ).

- H2 . For all t ∈ [0 , T ] , there exists a constant L &gt; 0 such that for all u , v ∈ H and i, j ∈ S

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(Lipschitz condition on σ ).

- H3 . For all t ∈ [0 , T ] and all i ∈ S , there exist a constant K &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all p = 1 , 2 , and 3 (growth condition on G ).

- H4 . For all t ∈ [0 , T ] , there exists a constant L &gt; 0 such that for all u , v ∈ H and i, j ∈ S ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(Lipschitz condition on G ).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The transformation from equation (1.1) to (1.2) is sketched as follows (the transformation from (1.5) to (1.6) can be achieved in a similar manner). Invoking the Helmholtz decomposition, one decomposes the space L 2 ( G ) into the direct sum of H and its orthogonal complement, namely, L 2 ( G ) = H ⊕ H ⊥ . Moreover, by applying the Leray projection to each term of (1.1), one may write (1.1) as (1.2). The interested reader is referred to, e.g., [14, 25] for more details.

Let F : [0 , T ] × V ×S → R + be a continuous function with its Fr´ echet derivatives F t , F v , and F vv are bounded and continuous. Define the operator

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we have the following change of variables formula due to Itˆ o (see, e.g., [24, Lem. 3 in Sec. 2.1, Ch. 2]):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ N 1 ( dz, ds ) is the compensated Poisson random measure introduced earlier; ˜ N 2 ( ds, dy ) := N 2 ( ds, dy ) -L ( dy ) ds where N 2 ( ds, dy ) and L ( dy ) ds are defined in (2.10); the function h ( s, y ) is defined as in (2.9). In particular, if F ( t, u ( t ) , i ) = | u ( t ) | 2 , then ∑ m j =1 γ ij | u ( t ) | 2 = 0 . We therefore obtain the following energy equality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.5. Path Space and its Topology. Denoted by { τ i } 4 i =1 the topologies

and Ω i the spaces

1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then { (Ω i , τ i ) } 4 i =1 are all Lusin spaces (a topological space that is homeomorphic to a Borel set of a Polish space).

Definition 1. Define the space Ω ∗ by Ω ∗ = ∩ 4 i =1 Ω i . Let τ be the supremum of the topologies 1 induced on Ω ∗ by all τ i . Then it follows from a result of Metivier [18, Prop. 1, Ch. IV] that 2

- (1) (Ω ∗ , τ ) is a Lusin space.
- (2) Let { µ k } k ∈ N be a sequence of Borel probability laws on Ω ∗ (on the Borel σ -algebra B ( τ ) ) such that their images { µ i k } k ∈ N on (Ω i , B ( τ i )) are tight for τ i for all i . Then { µ k } k ∈ N is tight for τ .

Let (Ω , F , P ) be a (complete) probability space on which the following are defined:

- (2) N = { N ( z, t ) : 0 ≤ t ≤ T and z ∈ Z } , the Poisson random measure.
- (1) W = { W ( t ) : 0 ≤ t ≤ T } , an H -valued Q -Wiener process.
- (3) r = { r ( t ) : 0 ≤ t ≤ T } , the Markov chain.
- (4) ξ , an H -valued random variable.

Assume that ξ , W , N , and r are mutually independent. For each t , define the σ -field F t to be σ ( ξ, r ( t ) , W ( s ) , N ( z, s ) : z ∈ Z, 0 ≤ s ≤ t ) ∪ { all P -null sets in F} . Then it is clear that ( F t ) satisfies the usual conditions, and both W ( t ) and N ( z, t ) are F t -adapted processes.

Denoting by J the J -topology in the space D ([0 , T ]; S ) , the path space of solutions

of (1.4) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 2 (Weak solution) . Suppose that, on some probability space (Ω , F , P ) , there exists an increasing family ( G t ) of sub σ -field of F , an H ×S -valued random vector ( ξ, r ) with given distribution µ , and t -adapted processes W ( t ) , ˜ N ( z, t ) , u ( t ) , and r ( t ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- -Wiener martingale.

G

- (2) ( ) is an square integrable martingale with respect to ( G t ) .
- (1) ( W ( t ) , G t , P ) is an H -valued Q
3. ˜ N z, t
- (3) W ( t ) , N ( z, t ) , and ( ξ, r ) are mutually independent.
- (4) For all ρ ∈ V ,

The coarest topology that is finer than each τ i . See, e.g., [11, Sec. 5.2]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

2 Note that all the natural inclusion Ω i ֒ → Ω 1 , i = 2 , 3 , 4 , are continuous.

## (5) For all t and ρ ∈ V ,

P -almost surely.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the family (Ω , F , ( G t ) , P , ξ, r, { W ( t ) } , { N ( z, t ) } , { u ( t ) } , { r ( t ) } ) is called a weak solution of the stochastic Navier-Stokes equation (1.4) .

Definition 3 (Pathwise uniqueness) . A weak solution of the stochastic Navier-Stokes equation (1.4) is said to be pathwise unique if, for any two weak solutions give by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for i = 1 , 2 , the following holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark. The definition of weak solutions to equation (1.7) follow from Definitiion 2 with B k ǫ in the place of B .

We collect some lemmata here for the benefit of the reader.

Lemma2.2. Let f ∈ C (Ω) and sup n E P n [ | f | 1+ δ ] ≤ C for some δ &gt; 0 . Let {P n } be a sequence of probability measures on Ω with P n ⇒P , as n →∞ . Then we have E P n ( | f | ) → E P ( | f | ) .

Lemma 2.3. Consider the continuous dense embeddings V ֒ → H ֒ → V ′ with V ֒ → H and H ֒ → V ′ being compact. Suppose that a set B in L q (0 , T ; H ) ∩D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) is relatively compact in D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) and bounded in L q (0 , T ; V ) . Then B is relatively compact in L q (0 , T ; H ) .

Proof. The proof is based on the Aubin-Lions Lemma, and we refer the interested reader to [18, Lem. 3, Ch. VI]. □

Lemma 2.4 (Aldous' criterion) . Let { X n } ∞ n =1 be a sequence of processes with paths in the space D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) . Suppose that for each rational numbers t ∈ [0 , T ] , we have

Then { X n } ∞ n =1 is tight in D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) if the following condition is satisfied:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For every sequence ( T n , δ n ) where each T n is a stopping time such that T n + δ n ≤ T , and δ n &gt; 0 , δ n → 0 , we have ‖ X n ( T n + δ n ) -X n ( T n )) ‖ V ′ → 0 in probability as n →∞ .

Proof. The interested reader may consult, e.g., [29, p. 353 Thm. 6.8] for the proof of this lemma. □

## 3. A PRIORI ESTIMATES

In the section, we establish a priori estimates to the approximation of the regularized equation (1.7). Recalling the definitions of { e i } ∞ i =1 , H n , and Π n in Section 2, we define W n := Π n W , σ n := Π n σ , and G n := Π n G . Let u 0 be an H -valued random variable and ǫ &gt; 0 be fi xed throughout this section.

Let u n be the solution to following equation: for each v ∈ H n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with u n (0) = Π n u 0 , where ˜ N 1 ( dz, ds ) = N 1 ( dz, ds ) -ν 1 ( dz ) ds .

Proposition 3.1 (A priori estimates) . Let T &gt; 0 be fixed. Suppose that E | u 0 | 2 &lt; ∞ and f ∈ L 2 (0 , T ; V ′ ) . Then under Hypotheses H , there exist constants C 1 and C 2 that depend on E | u 0 | 2 , E ∫ T 0 ‖ f ( s ) ‖ 2 V ′ ds, ν, K, T , and C 3 that depends on E | u 0 | 3 , E ∫ T 0 ‖ f ( s ) ‖ 3 V ′ ds, ν, K, T such that ∀ t ∈ [0 , T ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose further that E | u 0 | 3 &lt; ∞ and f ∈ L 3 (0 , T ; V ′ ) . Then under Hypotheses H , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark. The constants C i in (3.2) , (3.3) , and (3.4) is independent of ǫ .

Proof. Let N &gt; 0 . Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from the Itˆ o formula that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (2.2), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (2.3), 〈 B k ǫ ( u n ( s )) , u n ( s ) 〉 V = 0 . For the external force term f , one deduces from the basic Young inequality that

Asimplification of the last term in (3.5) gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, taking expectation on the both side of (3.5), using Hypotheses H1 and H3 , and then putting everything together, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Denoting C T := E | u 0 | 2 + 1 ν E ∫ T 0 ‖ f ( s ) ‖ 2 V ′ ds + 2 KT (1 + m 2 ) , we utilize the Gronwall inequality to obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Acombination of (3.6) and (3.7) yield

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

An application of Davis inequality and basic Young inequality yield

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In a similar manner, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, Itˆ o formula implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Take ǫ 1 = 1 8 √ 2 and ǫ 2 = 1 8 √ 10 . Then C ǫ 1 = 2 √ 2 and C ǫ 2 = 2 √ 10 . One obtains from above and (3.9) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that τ N ∧ T → T as N → ∞ . Letting N → ∞ in (3.10) and (3.8), we obtain (3.3) and (3.2).

Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from the Itˆ o formula that (see, e.g., [1, Eq. (16), p. 65])

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last integral is over [0 , t ] × Z . Taking integration up to t ∧ τ ′ N and then expectation in (3.11), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

An application of triangle inequality and Hypothesis H3 yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from the basic Young inequality and the property | · | ≤ ‖ · ‖ that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Hypothesis H1 , (3.13), and (3.14) in (3.12), one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that ∫ t ∧ τ ′ N 0 | u n ( s ) | ds ≤ ∫ t 0 | u n ( s ) | ds since t ∧ τ ′ N ≤ t . Thus, by the Schwarz inequality, the Jensen inequality (for concave functions), the property that | · | ≤ ‖·‖ , and (3.2), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Making use of (3.16) and (3.17) in (3.15), we then use the Gronwall inequality to obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Utilizing (3.18) on the last term on the right of (3.15), we conclude

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Asimplification of the last two terms in (3.11) gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Plugging the result above into (3.11), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the second last integral is over [0 , t ] × Z and N 1 = N 1 ( dz, ds ) . Taking supremum over T ∧ τ ′ N and then expectation on (3.19), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the Davis inequality, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

invoking the basic Young inequality and Hypothesis H1 and continuing,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

keep simplifying, one reaches

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In conclusion, one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

An application of triangle inequality and expanding the cubic power yields (with the integral on the left side being over [0 , T ∧ τ ′ N ] and N 1 = N 1 ( dz, ds ) .)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

invoking Hypothesis H3 and continuing,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Employing (3.21) and (3.22) in (3.20) and then using Hypotheses H1 and H3 and the basic Young inequality, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C 1 = (13 + 8 √ T ) K and C 2 = 6 K . Using (3.16), (3.17), and (3.18) in above, we conclude, upon a simplification, that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which leads T ∧ τ N → T as N →∞

′ . Therefore, (3.4) is proved. □

## 4. THE REGULARIZED EQUATION

The proof of Theorem 1.1 consists of two parts: the existence of a weak solution (Theorem 4.12) and the pathwise uniqueness of weak solutions (Theorem 4.13). Once the weak solution is shown to be pathwise unique, then we apply a well-known result of Yamada and Watanabe [30] to deduce Theorem 1.1.

The argument is started by showing the existence of a weak solution; we remind the reader that the parameter ǫ that appears in B k ǫ is chosen to be greater than 0 and fi xed .

- 4.1. Existence of the solution to the regularized equation. The existence of the weak solution is by studying the martingale problem posed by equation (1.7). Suppose that ω † = ( u , r ) is a solution to equation (1.7). Then it is not hard to see from the Itˆ o formula that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recalling (2.13), we have defined Ω † := Ω ∗ × D ([0 , T ]; S ) . Now let ω = ( u, i ) be a generic element in Ω † . Substituting ( u , r ) by ( u, i ) in (4.1), we obtain canonical expression:

is a µ -martingale, where µ := P ◦ ω † -1 is the distribution of ω † and L is the operator introduced (2.11) with B k ǫ in place of B .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The aim of this subsection is to identify a measure µ in the path space Ω † under which M ( · ) in (4.2) is a martingale, and this is called the martingale problem posed by the stochastic Navier-Stokes equation with Markov switching (1.7).

Recalling the definition of path space (Ω † , τ † ) from (2.13), we let B denote the Borel σ -field of the topology τ † . Define F t := σ ( ω ( s ) : 0 ≤ s ≤ t, ω ∈ Ω † ) . Recall that L is the operator introduced in Section 2, we are in a position to introduce the definition of a solution to a martingale problem.

Definition 4. Aprobability measure µ on (Ω , B ) is called a solution of the martingale problem with the initial distribution µ 0 and operator L is the following hold:

- (2) The canonical expression M ( t ) defined in (4.2) is an F t -martingale.
- (1) The time marginal of µ at t = 0 is µ 0 , i.e., µ | t =0 = µ 0 .

Let X t ( ω ) = ω ( t ) for all ω ∈ Ω † be the canonical process on Ω † . Therefore, in terms of the canonical process, the definition becomes:

Definition 5. A process X = { X t } with path in (Ω † , τ † ) defined on a probability space (Ω , F , P ) is called a solution to the martingale problem for the initial distribution µ 0 and operator L if the following hold:

- (1) The distribution of X 0 is µ 0 .
- (2) For any F ∈ D ( L ) , the process (4.2) is a F X t -martingale.

There are several equivalent formulations of a solution to a martingale problem (see, e.g., [22]), and we introduce one of them in the following lemma. The interested reader is referred to [12, Prop. 7.1.2] for more details.

Lemma 4.1. The following statements are equivalent.

- (1) X is a solution to the martingale problem for the operator L .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (2) For all f ∈ D ( L ) , 0 ≤ t 1 &lt; t 2 &lt; · · · &lt; t n +1 , h 1 , h 2 , · · · h n ∈ C b , and n ≥ 1 , we have

Let φ ( t, i ) be a real-valued bounded smooth function with compact support (in each variables). For ρ ∈ D ( A ) ⊆ V , 0 ≤ s ≤ t , and each generic element ω = ( u, i ) ∈ Ω † , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

According to Lemma 4.1, to show M φ ( t ) is a solution to the martingale problem, it suffices to find a Radon measure µ such that

where the last integral is over [ s, t ] × Z .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ψ j ∈ C b (Ω) and F s -measurable.

Define the projection of M φ ( t ) as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ( u n , r ) be the solution to equation (3.1) and denote by µ n the (joint) distribution of ( u n , r ) . Then it follows from the (finite dimensional) Itˆ o formula that M φ n ( t ) is a µ n -martingale, therefore, for all n , E µ n ∏ m j = i ψ j ( s j ) M φ n ( t ) = 0 , for all s &lt; s 1 &lt; · · · &lt; s m &lt; t and for ψ j ∈ C b (Ω) and F s -measurable. Hence,

where second last integral is over [ s, t ] , the last integral is over [ s, t ] × Z , A n = Π n A , B n k ǫ = Π n B k ǫ , σ n = Π n σ , G n = Π n G , and ω = ( u, i ) ∈ Ω † is a generic element.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for ψ j ∈ C b (Ω) and F s -measurable.

If we show that

M1 . there exists a measure µ such that µ n weakly converges to µ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then it follows that M φ ( t ) is a µ -martingale.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we prove M1 . Recall that u n is the solution to (3.1) for each n .

Lemma4.2. The sequence { u n } ∞ n =1 forms a relative compact set in the Skorohod space D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) .

Proof. It is clear that { u n } is a subset of D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) .

Let N &gt; 0 . By the Markov inequality, the property that ‖ · ‖ V ′ ≤ | · | , and (3.2), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ( T n , δ n ) be a sequence, where T n is a stopping time with T n + δ n ≤ T and δ n &gt; 0 with δ n → 0 . For each ǫ &gt; 0 , the Chebyshev inequality implies

Therefore, lim N →∞ lim sup n P ( ‖ u n ( t ) ‖ V ′ &gt; N ) = 0 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from the Itˆ o formula and the Gronwall inequality that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which tends to 0, as n →∞ . Therefore, ‖ u n ( T n + δ n ) -u n ( T n ) ‖ V ′ → 0 in probability as n → ∞ . By Aldous' criterion, we conclude that { u n } is tight in D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) and thus relative compact in it. □

We can have a even stronger convergence which is proved in the following proposition.

Proposition 4.3. The sequence { u n } ∞ n =1 forms a relative compact set in L 2 (0 , T ; H ) .

Proof. It follows from (3.3) that { u n } is bounded in L 2 (0 , T ; V ) ; also, we have that E ∫ T 0 | u n ( t ) | 2 dt ≤ E ∫ T 0 ‖ u n ( t ) ‖ 2 dt ≤ C, which implies { u n } ⊂ L 2 (0 , T ; H ) ∩D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) . In addition, by Lemma 4.2, { u n } is relatively compact in the space D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) ; the proposition follows from Lemma 2.3. □

Recalling Definition 1 and u n being the solution to (3.1), we deduce from a priori estimates and Banach-Alaoglu theorem that { u n } is relatively compact in (Ω 2 , τ 2 ) and (Ω 3 , τ 3 ) . In addition, Lammta 4.2 and 4.3 imply that { u n } is compact in (Ω 1 , τ 1 ) and (Ω 4 , τ 4 ) , respectively. Therefore, by the Prohorov theorem, the induced distribution { µ ∗ n } 3 is tight on each space (Ω j , τ j ) for j = 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 . Hence, by (2) in Definition 1, { µ ∗ n } is tight on (Ω ∗ , τ ) .

Let µ n be the joint distribution of ( u n , r ) . Then { µ n } ∞ n =1 is tight on the space (Ω † , τ † ) , hence, there exist a subsequence { µ n ℓ } ∞ ℓ =1 and a measure µ such that µ n ℓ ⇒ µ .

Next, we consider M2 . Recall from Section 2 that H n is the span of { e j } n j =1 and Π n is a projection operator from H onto H n . Denote by { n ℓ } ∞ ℓ =1 the indices such that µ n ℓ ⇒ µ .

Lemma 4.4. For each ρ ∈ D ( A ) , Π n ℓ ρ → ρ in V , as ℓ →∞ .

Proof. Defining f j := e j √ λ j , one sees ‖ f j ‖ = ‖ e j ‖ 2 λ j = λ j λ j = 1 . This implies that { f j } is a complete orthonormal basis in V . Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 4.5. For each ρ ∈ D ( A ) , we have

As a consequence, ‖ ρ -Π n ℓ ρ ‖ = ∑ ∞ j = n ℓ +1 ( ρ, f j ) V f j → 0 , as ℓ tends to infinity. □

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Adirect computation gives, for almost all r ∈ [ t, s ] ,

as ℓ →∞ , by Lemma 4.4. In addition,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that u ∈ Ω ∗ , therefore, u ∈ L 2 (0 , T ; V ) ⊂ L (0 , T ; V ) . Hence, the lemma follows from the Lebesgue Dominated Convergence Theorem. □

3 µ ∗ n := P ◦ u -1 n

Lemma 4.6. For each ρ ∈ D ( A ) , we have

Proof. Asimilar argument as in Lemma 4.5 shows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as ℓ →∞ for almost all r ∈ [ s, t ] . In addition

by (2.8). Since u ∈ Ω ∗ , u ∈ L 2 (0 , T ; V ) . Thus,

which is an L 1 -function. Therefore, the lemma follows from the Lebesgue Dominated Convergence Theorem. □

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 4.7. For each ρ ∈ D ( A ) , as ℓ →∞ ,

converges to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Through out the proof, we write σ ( r ) = σ ( r, u ( r ) , i ( r )) and ( · , · ) = ( · , · ) H . A direct computation shows that ( ρ, σ n ℓ ( r ) Qσ ∗ n ℓ ( r ) ρ ) equals to ( σ ( r ) Qσ ∗ ( r ) ρ n ℓ , ρ n ℓ ) , therefore,

which implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, by Lemma 4.4, ( ρ, σ n ℓ ( r ) Qσ ∗ n ℓ ( r ) ρ ) → ( ρ, σ ( r ) Qσ ∗ ( r ) ρ ) , as ℓ approaches infinity, for all r ∈ [ s, t ] . In addition,

Consider

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall that u ∈ Ω ∗ , therefore, u ∈ L 2 (0 , T ; H ) ; the Hypothesis H1 implies

for a constant C . Therefore, we conclude that the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is bounded by an L 1 -function, hence, the lemma follows from the Lebesgue Dominated Convergence Theorem. □

Lemma 4.8. For each ρ ∈ D ( A ) , as ℓ →∞

converges to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Through out this proof, we write G ( r, z ) = G ( r, u ( r ) , i ( r ) , z ) , 〈· , ·〉 = 〈· , ·〉 V , u = u ( r ) , and i = i ( r ) .

It follows from Lemma 4.4 that 〈 G n ℓ ( r, z ) , ρ 〉 = 〈 G ( r, z ) , ρ n ℓ 〉 , which converges to 〈 G ( r, z ) , ρ 〉 , as ℓ → ∞ , for all r ∈ [ s, t ] . Therefore, the convergence of the integrand is shown. Next we argue that the integrand is bounded by an L 1 -function, and thus the lemma follows from the the Lebesgue Dominated Convergence Theorem.

For a fixed ℓ , writing a = 〈 u, ρ 〉 and b = 〈 u + G n ℓ ( r, z ) , ρ 〉 , we deduce from the mean value theorem that φ ( 〈 u + G n ℓ ( r, z ) , ρ 〉 , i ) -φ ( 〈 u, ρ 〉 , i ) = φ ′ ( c, i ) 〈 G n ℓ ( r, z ) , ρ 〉 , where c ∈ ( a, b ) . Therefore,

which implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Hypothesis H3 , G ( r, z ) ν ( dz ) is an L 1 -function, therefore, the proof is complete.

∫ Z | | □

In light of Lemmata 4.4 to 4.8, M2 has been proved. Moreover, as shown in the proofs of Lemmata 4.4 to 4.8, the expectation and limit is exchangeable, i.e., lim n →∞ E M φ n ( t ) = E lim n →∞ M φ n ( t ) .

- (1) M φ ( t ) is continuous on (Ω † , τ † ) , and

Lastly, we consider M3 . Clearly, if the assumption of Lemma 2.2 is fulfilled, then M3 is obtained. So far, we have a sequence of measures { µ n } ∞ n =1 , and there exists a measure µ such that µ n ℓ ⇒ µ as ℓ →∞ . Therefore, it remains to prove that

- (2) for some δ &gt; 0 , sup n E µ n ( | M φ ( t ) | 1+ δ ) &lt; C , where C is a constant.

We begin the proof of continuity of M φ ( t ) with the following auxiliary lemma.

Lemma 4.9. Let { u n } ∞ n =1 and u be members of (Ω ∗ , τ ) with u n → u as n →∞ in τ -topology. For almost all t ∈ [0 , T ] , k = 0 , 1 , 2 , and each i ∈ S , we have

as n →∞ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Denote C ( u ) := { t ∈ [0 , T ]; P ( u ( t ) = u ( t -) ) = 1 } . It is known that the complement of C ( u ) is at most countable (see, e.g., [4]). Therefore, for almost all t ∈ [0 , T ] , one has u n ( t ) → u ( t ) , as n →∞ . This further implies that 〈 u n ( t ) , ρ 〉 V →〈 u ( t ) , ρ 〉 V , as n → ∞ for any ρ ∈ D ( A ) . Therefore, the lemma follows from the smoothness of the function φ . □

Lemma 4.10. M φ ( t ) is continuous in the ( τ † ) -topology.

Proof. It suffices to prove that M φ ( t ) is continuous in the τ -topology since there is no convergence issue in r .

Let { u n } and u be members of (Ω ∗ , τ ) with u n → u as n → ∞ in τ -topology. Let M φ ( u n ( t )) be the function where u n is in place of u in (4.3). Given u n → u . We need to show that lim n →∞ M φ ( u n ( t )) = M φ ( u ( t )) , and we prove it by taking the term-by-term limit.

The first three terms follows from Lemma 4.9 and the Bounded Convergence Theorem.

From now on, we write u = u ( r ) , u n = u n ( r ) , i = i ( r ) , ( · , · ) = ( · , · ) H , and 〈· , ·〉 = 〈· , ·〉 V .

For the A term, it is not hard to see that 〈 A u n , ρ 〉 equals to 〈 u n , A ρ 〉 which converges to 〈 u, A ρ 〉 , as n → ∞ , for almost all r ∈ [ s, t ] by Lemma 4.9. Consider |〈 A u n , ρ 〉| 2 ≤ ‖ u n ‖ 2 ‖ ρ ‖ 2 V ′ , and ∫ T 0 ‖ u n ‖ 2 ‖ ρ ‖ 2 V ′ dr ≤ ‖ ρ ‖ 2 V ′ ∫ T 0 ‖ u n ‖ 2 dr &lt; C for all n and a constant C since u n → u in τ -topology and thus in τ 2 . This implies that sup n ∫ T 0 |〈 A u n , ρ 〉| 2 dr &lt; ∞ so that {〈 A u n , ρ 〉} is uniformly integrable, and hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the B k ǫ term, using the definition of B k ǫ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which together with (2.7) further imply

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, the Schwarz inequality implies (with C = 2 ‖ ρ ‖ )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since u n and u are members of Ω ∗ , the L 2 (0 , T ; V ) -norms are finite. In addition, u n → u in τ -topology implies that u n → u in τ 4 (the strong topology in L 2 (0 , T ; H ) ). Hence, we conclude that which implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the term represents the continuous noise, consider

∣ Recalling the definition of L Q -norm, we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ ∣ σ ( r, u n , i ) Qσ ∗ ( r, u n , i ) -σ ( r, u, i ) Qσ ∗ ( r, u, i ) ∣ ∣ ∣ = ‖ σ ( r, u n , i ) -σ ( r, u, i ) ‖ L Q . Therefore, by Hypothesis H2 , we have

which approaches 0 as n → ∞ since u n → u in τ means that u n → u in τ 4 (the strong topology in L 2 (0 , T ; H ) ). Thus, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the jump noise term, notice that G is continuous in all of its components, therefore, lim n →∞ G ( r, u n , i, z ) = G ( r, u, i, z ) for almost all r ∈ [ s, t ] and all fixed z . This implies that, by Lemma 4.9,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

converges to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely in [ s, t ] × Z . Writing a n = 〈 u n , ρ 〉 and b n = 〈 u n + G ( r, u n , i, z ) 〉 , one infers from the Mean Value Theorem that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where φ ′ ( c n ) = φ ′ ( c n , i ) and c n ∈ ( a n , b n ) . Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C = 4 K ‖ ρ ‖ 2 and the last inequality follows from Hypothesis H3 . Since u n → u in τ -topology, u n → u in τ 4 , which implies that sup n ∫ T 0 | u n | 2 dr &lt; C for a constant C . Therefore,

Hence, we conclude, as n →∞ ,

converges to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Herein, the proof is complete.

□

The following lemma the final piece of the required argument. It is the only place where we require E | u 0 | 3 &lt; 0 and f ∈ L 3 (0 , T ; V ′ ) .

Lemma 4.11. Suppose that the Hypotheses H is fulfilled, E | u 0 | 3 &lt; ∞ , and f ∈ L 3 (0 , T ; V ′ ) . There exist some δ &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C is an appropriate constant.

Proof. Recalling from (4.3) the definition of M φ , we employ inequality ( ∑ 5 i =1 a i ) p 5 p -1 ∑ 5 i =1 a p i and the Mean Value Theorem (on G ) to deduce that | M φ ( t ) | 1+ δ or equal to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

≤ is less than since φ is bounded smooth function.

For the A term,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C 1 = ν 1+ δ ‖ A ρ ‖ V ′ . This implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

hence, sup ℓ E n ℓ ∫ t s ∣ 〈 ν A u ( r ) , ρ 〉 V ∣ 1+ δ dr ≤ C A if δ &lt; 1 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ For the nonlinear term, (2.7) and H¨ older inequality imply

where 1 p + 1 q = 1 . Choosing q such that (1 + δ ) q = 2 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking δ = 1 5 , we have 2( 1+ δ 1 -δ ) = 3 . The first expectation on the right of (4.5) will have a uniform bound by (3.4) if we further assume that E | u 0 | 3 &lt; ∞ . The boundedness of E ∫ t s ‖ u n ℓ ( r ) ‖ 2 V dr is followed from (3.2). Therefore, (4.5) implies that, if δ ≤ 1 5 ,

For martingale terms, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the second inequality follows from the Hypothesis H1 with p = 2 , and the last inequality follows from the concavity of the power 1+ δ 2 . Using Hypothesis H3 and inequality ( a + b ) p ≤ 2 p -1 ( a p + b p ) , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, taking expectation and then supremum over ℓ on martingale terms, the above estimates imply

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since, by (3.2), if δ &lt; 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In conclusion, the argument above shows that for 0 &lt; δ ≤ 1 5 , there is a constant C such that sup ℓ E n ℓ [ | M φ | 1+ δ ] ≤ C provided that E | u (0) | 3 is finite. Hence, we complete the proof. □

As M1 , M2 , and M3 are shown, the existence theorem follows:

Theorem 4.12. Suppose that E | u 0 | 3 &lt; ∞ and f ∈ L 3 (0 , T ; V ′ ) . Then under the Hypotheses H , M φ ( t ) is a µ -martingale, i.e., µ is a solution to the martingale problem posed by (1.7) .

4.2. Uniqueness of the solution to the regularized equation. In this subsection, we prove that the (weak) solution obtained from Theorem 4.12 is pathwise unique.

Theorem 4.13. Let E | u 0 | 3 &lt; ∞ and f ∈ L 3 (0 , T ; V ′ ) . Then under Hypotheses H , the solution obtained from Theorem 4.12 is pathwise unique.

Proof. Let w = u -v , where u , v are solutions with same initial data. Let F ( t, x, i ) := e -ρ ( t ) x , where ρ ( t ) is a function that will be determined later. Then the Itˆ o formula implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ N 1 = ˜ N 1 ( dz, ds ) , N 1 = N 1 ( dz, ds ) , and the last integral is over [ s, t ] × Z .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the nonlinear term, it follows from its definition that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last equality follows from (2.3). Therefore, by (2.8) and the basic Young inequality, we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, choosing ρ ( t ) := 1 4 ν ∫ t 0 ‖ u ( s ) ‖ 2 ds , we deduce form (4.6) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ N 1 = ˜ N 1 ( dz, ds ) , N 1 = N 1 ( dz, ds ) , and the last integral is over [ s, t ] × Z . Moreover, by the Davis and the basic Young inequalities and Hypotheses H2 and H4 , the martingale terms in (4.7) have the following estimates.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

where ˜ N 1 = ˜ N 1 ( dz, ds ) . As a consequence, taking supremum over [0 , T ] and then expectation, one obtains from (4.7) the following.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C = 4 √ LC 1 2 . Choosing ǫ small enough so that C ǫ &lt; 1 2 , one obtains from above that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C stands for a generic constant. Furthermore, we employ the Gronwall inequality to obtain E sup 0 ≤ t ≤ T e -ρ ( t ) | w ( t ) | 2 ≤ 0 , which implies the pathwise uniqueness. Hence, we complete the proof. □

## 5. THE NAVIER-STOKES EQUATION WITH MARKOV SWITCHING

In this section, we prove the existence of a weak solution (in the sense of Definition 5) to equation (1.4).

Let u 0 be an H -valued random variable such that E | u 0 | 3 &lt; ∞ . Define u ǫ 0 := k ǫ u 0 . Then u ǫ 0 is an H -valued random variable with E | u ǫ 0 | 3 = E | k ǫ u 0 | 3 ≤ E | u 0 | 3 &lt; ∞ . Let f ∈ L 3 (0 , T ; V ′ ) . Then with the given initial data u ǫ 0 and the external forcing f , there exist a unique strong solution ( u ǫ ( t ) , r ( t )) to the equation (1.7) for each ǫ &gt; 0 .

Proceeding as in the argument of Proposition 3.1, we see that u ǫ ( t ) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Making use of the estimate (5.1), we deduce from Lemma 2.4 that the processes { u ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 is tight in D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) .

Lemma 5.1. The sequence of processes { u ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 is tight in D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) .

Proof. First, it is clear that the paths of the processes { u ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 are in D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) . Let N &gt; 0 . Employing the Markov inequality, the estimate (5.1), and the property ‖ · ‖ V ′ &lt; | · | , we obtain, for each rationals t ∈ [0 , T ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, for each rationals t ∈ [0 , T ] ,

Let ( T ǫ , δ ǫ ) be a sequence, where T ǫ is a stopping time with T ǫ + δ ǫ ≤ T and δ ǫ &gt; 0 with δ ǫ → 0 as ǫ → 0 . For each N &gt; 0 , the Chebyshev inequality implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, the Itˆ o formula and the Gronwall inequality imply that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The estimate (5.1) also shows that { u ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 is bounded in the space L 2 (Ω; L 2 (0 , T ; V )) . Therefore, by an argument analogous to that in Proposition 4.3, we have the following proposition.

as ǫ → 0 . Therefore, ‖ u ǫ ( T ǫ + δ ǫ ) -u ǫ ( T ǫ ) ‖ V ′ → 0 in probability as ǫ → 0 . By Lemma 2.4, the set { u ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 is tight in D ([0 , T ]; V ′ ) . □

Proposition 5.2. The sequence of processes { u ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 forms a relative compact set in the space L 2 (Ω; L 2 (0 , T ; H )) .

Denote by u the limit (along a subsequence) of { u ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 in L 2 (Ω; L 2 (0 , T ; H )) . The next step is to identify that u is indeed a solution to the equation (1.4) in the sense of Definition 5.

In order to carry out the arguments similar to those in Section 4.1, we introduce the following functions.

Let φ ( t, i ) be a real-valued, smooth function with compact support (in each variable). For ρ ∈ D ( A ) ⊆ V with ∇ ρ ∈ ( L ∞ ( G )) 3 , 0 ≤ s ≤ t , and each element ω = ( u, i ) ∈ Ω † , define M φ ( t )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to M2 in Section 4.1, we need to prove that M φ ǫ ( t ) converges to M φ ( t ) as ǫ tends to 0.

where the second last integral is over [0 , t ] , and the last integral is over [0 , t ] × Z , and M φ ǫ ( t ) admits a similar expression with B k ǫ replacing B .

Proposition 5.3. Let M φ ǫ ( t ) and M φ ( t ) be as above. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The convergence of the terms other than the nonlinear term B k ǫ follows a similar argument as in the proof of assertion M2 .

Recall the definitions of B and B k ǫ from Section 2. It suffices to show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that the function u ( r ) is a generic element in the space Ω ∗ , therefore, u ( r ) ∈ H . Then it follows from (2) of Lemma 2.1 that k ǫ u → u as ǫ → 0 , in H . It follows from (2.5) and (2.4) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The former term on the right of (5.3) bounded by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as ǫ → 0 since k ǫ u → u . The latter term is bounded by

for an appropriate constant C , which is independent of ǫ . Therefore, by the Lebesgue Dominated Convergence Theorem, the latter term converges to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, we conclude that as ǫ → 0 ,

Lemma 5.4. The function M φ ( t ) is continuous in the ( τ † ) -topology.

Proof. The proof of this lemma follows from the argument for proving Lemma 4.10. In fact, everything follows along the same lines except for the B . The convergence of B follows from an argument analogous to the proof of [26, Lem. 3.2, Ch. III]. □

□

Denote by µ ǫ the distribution of ( u ǫ ( t ) , r ( t )) and µ the distribution of ( u ( t ) , r ( t )) .

Lemma 5.5. Suppose that the Hypotheses H is fulfilled, E | u 0 | 3 &lt; ∞ , and f ∈ L 3 (0 , T ; V ′ ) . There exist some δ &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C is an appropriate constant.

Proof. The proof follows from the same lines as Lemma 4.11 except for the nonlinear term B . It follows from [26, Eq. (3.74)] that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for an appropriate constant C . Hence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 1 p + 1 q = 1 . Choosing q such that 3(1 + δ ) q = 4 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking δ = 1 11 , we have 2( 1+ δ 1 -3 δ ) = 3 . By (3.4), we have the following estimate

Therefore, The first expectation on the right of (5.4) will have a uniform bound by (3.4) if we further assume that E | u 0 | 3 &lt; ∞ . The boundedness of E ∫ t s ‖ u ǫ ( r ) ‖ 2 V dr follows from (3.2) and (3) of Lemma 2.1. Therefore, (5.4) implies that, if δ ≤ 1 11 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The results of Lemmata 5.4 and 5.5 together with Lemma 2.2 imply the following proposition.

Proposition 5.6. Let u ǫ be the solution (1.7) and u the limit of { u ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 in L 2 (Ω; L 2 (0 , T ; H )) . Denote by µ ǫ the distribution of ( u ǫ ( t ) , r ( t )) and µ the distribution of ( u ( t ) , r ( t )) . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, we are at the stage to prove Theorem 1.2.

Proof of Theorem 1.2. Given u 0 satisfying the assumption, we define u ǫ 0 := k ǫ u 0 . Then u ǫ 0 is an H -valued random variable with E | u ǫ 0 | 3 = E | k ǫ u 0 | 3 ≤ E | u 0 | 3 &lt; ∞ .

By Proposition 5.2, we see that there is a limit of u ǫ in the space L 2 (Ω; L 2 (0 , T ; H )) , and we denote it by u . Moreover, we denote by µ ǫ the distribution of ( u ǫ ( t ) , r ( t )) and µ the distribution of ( u ( t ) , r ( t )) .

Given ( u 0 , f ) satisfying the assumption, we consider the pair of initial condition and external forcing ( u ǫ 0 , f ) . Then this pair gives a unique strong solution to equation (1.7) by Theorem 1.1, and we denote the sequence of solutions by { u ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 .

Following the same argument as in Section 4.1, it suffices to prove the following:

M1 ′ . There exists a sequence { µ ǫ n } that converges weakly to µ as ǫ n → 0 .

- M3 ′ . lim n →∞ E µ ǫn M φ ( t ) = E µ M φ ( t ) ,
- M2 ′ . lim n →∞ M φ ǫ n ( t ) = M φ ( t ) .

where M φ ( t ) and M φ ǫ n ( t ) are defined earlier in this section.

Now, as M1 ′ , M2 ′ , and M3 ′ are direct consequences of Propositions 5.2, 5.3, and 5.6, respectively, the proof is complete. □

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is a part of the PhD thesis of the first author. He thanks Professor Sundar for guidance, and Professor Xiaoliang Wan for financial support from NSF grant DMS1622026.

## REFERENCES

- [1] S. Albeverio, F. Flandoli, and Y. G. Sinai: SPDE in Hydrodynamic: recent progress and prospects . Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 1942. Springer-Verlag, Berlin; Fondazione C.I.M.E., Florence, 2008.
- [2] A. Bensoussan and R. Temam: Equations stochastiques du type Navier-Stokes. J. Func. Anal. , 13 195-222, 1973.
- [3] B. Birnir: The Kolmogorov-Obukhov Theory of Turbulence: A Mathematical Theory of Turbulence . SpringerBriefs in Mathematics, Springer, New York, 2013.
- [4] P. Billingsley: Convergence of Probability Measures . A Wiley-Interscience Publication, Second edition, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, 1999.
- [5] F. Boyer and P. Fabrie: Mathematical Tools for the Study of the Incompressible Navier-Stokes Equations and Related Models . Applied Mathematical Sciences, 183. Springer, New York, 2013.
- [6] G. Da Prato and A. Debussche: Ergodicity for the 3D stochastic Navier-Stokes equations. J. Math. Pures et Appl. , 82 877-947, 2003.
- [7] L. C. Evans: Partial Differential Equations . Second edition. Graduate Studies in Mathematics, 19. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 2010.
- [8] C. Foias, O. Manley, R. Rosa, and R. Temam: Navier-Stokes Equations and and Turbulence . Encyclopedia of Mathematics and its applications, 83, Cambridge University Profess, Cambridge, 2001.
- [9] F. Flandoli and D. Gatarek: Martingale and stationary solutions for stochastic Navier-Stokes equations. Prob. Th. and Rel. Fields , 102 , 367-391, 1995.
- [10] F. Flandoli and B. Maslowski: Ergodicity of the 2-D Navier-Stokes equation under random perturbations. Comm. Math. Phys. , 171 , 119-141, 1995.
- [11] N. R. Howes: Modern Analysis and Topology . Universitext. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1995.
- [12] G. Kallianpur and P. Sundar: Stochastic Analysis and Diffusion Processes . Oxford Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 24. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2014.
- [13] N. Ikeda and S. Watanabe: Stochastic Differential Equations and Diffusion Processes . North-Holland Mathematical Library, Second edition, North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdan, 1989.
- [14] O. A. Ladyzhenskaya: The Mathematical Theory of Viscous Incompressible Flow . Second English edition, Mathematics and its Applications, Vol. 2 Gordon and Breach, Science Publishers, New YorkLondon-Paris 1969.
- [15] J. Leray: Sur le mouvement d'un liquide visqueux emplissant l'espace. Acta math. 63 (1934), 193248.

- [16] J. Mattingly: Ergodicity of the 2-D Navier-Stokes equations with random forcing and large viscosity. Comm. Math. Phys. , 206 , 273-288, 1999.
- [17] J. L. Menaldi and S. S. Sritharan: Stochastic 2-D Navier-Stokes equation. Appl. Math. and Optim. , 46 , 31-53, 2002.
- [18] M. Metivier: Stochastic Partial Differential Equations in Infinite Dimensional Spaces . Quaderni, Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, 1988.
- [19] W. S. O˙ za´ nski and B. C. Pooley: Leray's fundamental work on the Navier-Stokes equations: a modern review of 'Sur le mouvement d'un liquide visqueux emplissant l'epsace'. Partial Differential Equations in Fluid Dynamics , London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., 452, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2018.
- [20] C. Pr´ evˆ ot and M. R¨ ockner: AConcise Course on Stochastic Partial Differential Equations . Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 1905, Springer, Berlin, 2007.
- [21] M. R¨ ockner and X. Zhang: Stochastic tamed 3D Navier-Stokes equations. Prob. Th. and Rel. Fields , 145 , 211-267, 2009.
- [22] S. S. Sritharan and P. Sundar: The stochastic magneto-hydrodynamic system. Infin. Dimens. Anal. Quantum Probab. Relat. Top. 2 (1999), 241-265.
- [23] S. S. Sritharan and P. Sundar: Large deviations for the two-dimensional Navier-Stokes equations with multiplicative noise. Stoch. Proc. and their Appl. , 116 1636-1659, 2006.
- [24] A. V. Skorohod: Asymptotic Methods in the Theory of Stochastic Differential Equations . Translations of Mathematical Monographs, 78. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1989.
- [25] H. Sohr: The Navier-Stokes Equations. An Elementary Functional Analytic Approach . Modern Birkh¨ auser Classics. Birkh¨ auser/Springer Basel AG, Basel, 2001.
- [26] R. Temam: Navier-Stokes Equations. Theory and numerical analysis . North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1984.
- [27] M.Viot: Solutions faibles d'´ equations aux deriv´ ees partielles stochastique non lineaires . Th` ese, Univ. Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, 1976.
- [28] Vishik and Fursikov: Mathematical Problems in Statistical Hydromechanics . Kluwer Academic Publ., Boston, 1988.
- [29] J. B. Walsh: An Introduction to Stochastic Partial Differential Equations. Lecture Notes in Math., 1180, Springer, Berlin, 1986.
- [30] T. Yamada and S. Watanabe: On the uniqueness of solutions of stochastic differential equations. J. Math. Kyoto Univ. 11 (1971), 155-167.

4415 FRENCH HALL-WEST, UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI, CINCINNATI, OH, 45221-0025, USA Email address : hsupa@ucmail.uc.edu

316 LOCKETT HALL, LOUISIANA STATE UNIVERSITY, BATON ROUGE, LA, 70803-4918, USA Email address : psundar@lsu.edu