## Periodic measures for a class of SPDEs with regime-switching

Chun Ho Lau and Wei Sun Department of Mathematics and Statistics Concordia University

Montreal, H3G 1M8, Canada E-mail: chunho.lau@concordia.ca, wei.sun@concordia.ca

## Abstract

We use the variational approach to investigate periodic measures for a class of SPDEs with regime-switching. The hybrid system is driven by degenerate L´ evy noise. We use the Lyapunov function method to study the existence of periodic measures and show the uniqueness of periodic measures by establishing the strong Feller property and irreducibility of the associated time-inhomogeneous semigroup. The main results are applied to stochastic porous media equations with regime-switching.

AMS Subject Classification (2020): 60H15; 60J76; 35B10

Keywords: Stochastic partial differential equation, L´ evy noise, regime-switching, periodic measure, strong Feller property, irreducibility, stochastic porous media equation.

## 1 Introduction

Stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs) have gained more and more attentions in recent years. They have been applied to different fields including physics, biology, economics, etc. See [9], [25] and [20] for general discussions on SPDEs and their applications.

It is important to study long time behaviours of solutions to SPDEs. We refer the reader to Da Prato and Zabczyk [8] and Maslowski and Seidler [21] for systematic investigation of ergodicity for time-homogeneous SPDEs. In the past decades, many new results have been obtained for the existence and uniqueness of invariant measures. Here we list some of them which motivated our paper. Hairer and Mattingly [16] established ergodicity of the 2D Navier-Stokes equations with degenerate stochastic forcing. Romito and Xu [26] discussed invariant measures of the 3D stochastic Navier-Stokes equations driven by mildly degenerate noise. Xie [29] obtained the uniqueness of invariant measures for general SPDEs driven by non-degenerate L´ evy noise. Wang [27] used Harnack inequalities to investigate ergodicity of SPDEs. Gess and R¨ ockner [12] studied regularity and characterization for quasilinear SPDEs driven by degenerated Wiener noise. Zhang [33] considered invariant measures of 3D stochastic MHDα model driven by degenerate noise. Neuß [24] studied ergodicity for singular-degenerate stochastic porous media equations.

If stochastic equations are time-inhomogeneous, in general, we do not expect that invariant measures exist; instead, we consider periodic measures. There are many existing results studying the periodic behavior of stochastic differential equations (SDEs) and SPDEs. In [19], Khasminskii systematically studied periodically varying properties of SDEs driven by Brownian motions. In [35], Zhang et al. investigated the existence and uniqueness of periodic solutions of SDEs driven by L´ evy processes. In [13], Guo and Sun generalized Doob's celebrated theorem on the uniqueness of invariant measures for timehomogeneous Markov processes so as to obtain the ergodicity and uniqueness of periodic solutions for non-autonomous SDEs driven by L´ evy noises. For some other results related to periodic measures of SDEs, we refer the reader to Da Prato and Tudor [7], Xu et al. [30, 31], Chen et al. [4], Hu and Xu [17], and Ji et al. [18]. In [10], Feng and Zhao showed that there exist pathwise random periodic solutions to some SPDEs. In [6], Da Prato and Debussche investigated the long time behavior of solutions to the 2D Stochastic Navier-Stokes equations with a time-periodic forcing term. In [5], Cheng and Liu used the variational approach to study recurrent properties of solutions to SPDEs driven by Wiener noise. Under suitable conditions, in particular, by assuming strict monotonicity, they showed that the recurrent solutions are globally asymptotically stable in square-mean sense. In [32], Yuan and Bao used the semigroup method to establish the exponential stability for a class of finite regime-switching SPDEs driven by L´ evy noise.

The aim of this work is to investigate the existence and uniqueness of periodic measures for a class of SPDEs with regime switching. The model consists of two component processes p X p t q , Λ p t qq with X p t q and Λ p t q being of continuous and discrete states, respectively. The evolution of X p t q is described by an SPDE that is driven by degenerate L´ evy noise. Through introducing regime switching Λ p t q to the random dynamical system, more flexibility can be added in applications. The study of such a hybrid system is becoming more and more important in different research areas such as biology, ecosystems, wireless communications, signal processing, engineering and mathematical finance. Completely different from the methods of [5] and [32], we will investigate ergodicity of SPDEs with countable regime-switching through considering the strong Feller property and irreducibility of the corresponding time-inhomogeneous semigroups.

Now we describe the framework of this paper. Let p H, x¨ , ¨y H q be a real separable Hilbert space and p V, | ¨ | V q a real reflexive Banach space that is continuously and densely embedded into H . Denote by V ˚ the dual space of V and x¨ , ¨y the duality between V and V ˚ . We have x u, v y ' x u, v y H for u P H and v P V . Let t W p t qu t ě 0 be an H -valued cylindrical Wiener process on a complete filtered probability space p Ω , F , t F t u t ě 0 , P q . Denote by L p H q and L 2 p H q the spaces of all bounded operators and Hilbert-Schmidt operators on H , respectively. Let Z be a real Banach space with norm | ¨ | and N a Poisson random measure on p Z, B p Z qq with intensity measure ν . We assume that W and N are independent. Set r N p dt, dz q ' N p dt, dz q ´ dtν p dz q . Let S ' t 1 , 2 , . . . u .

Set We consider the SPDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with X p 0 q ' x P H . Hereafter, we assume that the coefficient functions A : r 0 , 8q ˆ V ˆ S Ñ V ˚ , B : r 0 , 8q ˆ V ˆ S Ñ L 2 p H q and H,J : r 0 , 8q ˆ V ˆ S ˆ Z Ñ H are all measurable. The process Λ p t q has state space S such that when ∆ Ñ 0,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hereafter, t q ij u are Borel measurable functions on H such that q ij p x q ě 0 for any x P H and i, j P S with i ‰ j and ř j P S q ij p x q ' 0 for any x P H and i P S . Throughout this paper, we assume that

(Q0)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We point out that Λ p t q can be represented as a stochastic integral with respect to a Poisson random measure. For each x P H and distinct i, j P S , define q i 0 p x q ' 0 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, Λ p t q can be modeled by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some Poisson random measure N 1 with the Lebesgue measure on r 0 , L s as its characteristic measure. We assume that N 1 p¨ , ¨q is independent of W p¨q and N p¨ , ¨q .

The remainder of this paper is as follows. First, we show the existence and uniqueness of solutions to the hybrid system (1.1) and (1.2) in Section 2. Then, in Sections 3, we establish the strong Feller property and irreducibility for the time-inhomogeneous semigroup corresponding to the hybrid system. We adopt the coupling method used in Zhang [34]. This remarkable coupling method by change of measure was first introduced to establish the dimension-free Harnack inequality by Arnaudon et al. [2]. In Section 4, we obtain the existence and uniqueness of periodic measures for the hybrid system by using the Lyapunov function method and generalizing the method of Guo and Sun [13] from SDEs to SPDEs. Finally, in Section 5, we use stochastic porous media equations as an example to illustrate the theory. The main theorem of this paper is Theorem 6.

## 2 Existence and Uniqueness of Solutions

To establish the existence and uniqueness of solutions to Equations (1.1) and (1.2), we impose the following assumption.

Assumption 1. Suppose that there exist α ą 1 , β ě 0 , θ ą 0 , K P R , γ ă θ 2 β , c ą 0 , ρ P L 8 loc p V ; r 0 , 8qq and C P L β ` 2 2 loc pr 0 , 8q ; r 0 , 8qq such that for v 1 , v 2 , v P V , i P S and t P r 0 , 8q ,

(HC) (Hemicontinuity) s ÞÑx A p t, v 1 ` sv 2 , i q , v y is continuous on R .

- (LM1) (Local monotonicity)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (C) (Coercivity)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (G1) (Growth of A )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (G2) (Growth of B and H )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (G β ) (Growth of H in L β ` 2 )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (G ρ ) (Growth of ρ )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we can state the main result of this section.

Theorem 1. Suppose that Assumption 1 and condition (Q0) hold. Let T ą 0 , x P H and i P S . Then, there exists a unique H ˆ S -valued adapted c` adl` ag process tp X p t q , Λ p t qqu t Pr 0 ,T s such that

2. for any V -valued progressively measurable dt ˆ P -version X of p X , the following holds for all t P r 0 , T s and P -a.s.:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

3. Λ p 0 q ' i and Equation (1.2) holds.

Proof. First, we consider Equation (1.1) when i P S is fixed. For this case, (1.1) becomes an ordinary SPDE. To simplify notation, we drop the dependence on i . We have the following result on the existence and uniqueness of solutions.

Theorem 2. ( [3, Theorem 1.2] ) Under the assumptions of Theorem 1, there exists a unique H -valued adapted c` adl` ag process t X p t qu t Pr 0 ,T s such that

1. any dt ˆ P -equivalent class p X of X is in L α pr 0 , T s ; V q Ş L 2 pr 0 , T s ; H q , P -a.s.; 2. for any V -valued progressively measurable dt ˆ P -version X of p X , the following holds for all t P r 0 , T s and P -a.s.:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Theorem 2, we know that for any p x, i q P H ˆ S , there exists a unique H -valued adapted process X p i q p t q such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X p i q is a V -valued progressively measurable dt ˆ P -version. Let 0 ă σ 1 ă σ 2 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă σ n ă ¨ ¨ ¨ be the set of all jump points of the stationary point process p 1 p t q corresponding to the Poisson random measure N 1 p dt, dr q . We have lim n Ñ8 σ n ' 8 almost surely by condition (Q0).

Now we construct the processes p X, Λ q and its progressively measurable version. For t P r 0 , σ 1 q , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, (2.1) holds for t P r 0 , σ 1 q .

Let

Set

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, for t P r σ 1 , σ 2 q , we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

p X p t q , Λ p t qq ' p r X p t ´ σ 1 q , r Λ p t ´ σ 1 qq , X p t q ' r X p t q . which together with (2.3) gives the unique solution on the time interval r 0 , σ 2 q . Continuing this procedure inductively, we define p X p t q , Λ p t qq on the time interval r 0 , σ n q for each n . Therefore, p X p t q , Λ p t qq is the unique (c` adl` ag) solution to the hybrid system (1.1) and (1.2) since lim n Ñ8 σ n ' 8 almost surely.

## 3 Ergodicity

Let tp X p t q , Λ p t qqu t ě 0 be the unique solution to the hybrid system (1.1) and (1.2). By the standard argument, we know that tp X p t q , Λ p t qqu t ě 0 is a Markov process (cf. [11, Theorem 4.8] and [1, Theorem 6.4.5]). Denote by B p H ˆ S q the Borel σ -algebra of H ˆ S , and B b p H ˆ S q and C b p H ˆ S q the spaces of all real-valued bounded Borel measurable and continuous functions on H ˆ S , respectively. Let P p s, p x, i q ; t, A q be the transition probability function of tp X p t q , Λ p t qqu t ě 0 given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x P H, i P S , A P B p H ˆ S q and 0 ď s ă t ă 8 . Define the corresponding time-inhomogeneous transition semigroup by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this section, we will establish the strong Feller property and irreducibility of t P s,t u .

## 3.1 Strong Feller Property

Denote by L ` ,s 2 p H q the set of all Hilbert-Schmidt operators on H that are positive and self-adjoint. We impose the following assumption.

Assumption 2. Suppose that α ě 2 and the following conditions hold:

1. (LipB) For any n P N , there exists C n ą 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all v 1 , v 2 P V with | v 1 | H , | v 2 | H ď n , t ě 0 and i P S .

2. There exist λ P r 2 , 8q X p α ´ 2 , 8q , t B n u Ă L ` ,s 2 p H q and n 0 P N such that the following conditions hold:
2. (N) For any n P N , t ě 0 , v P V with | v | H ď n and i P S ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we state the main theorem of this subsection.

Theorem 3. Suppose that Assumption 1 holds with C P L 8 loc pr 0 , 8q ; p 0 , 8qq , Assumption 2 and condition (Q0) hold. Then, the transition semigroup t P s,t u of p X p t q , Λ p t qq is strong Feller.

We will first prove Theorem 3 for the case that Λ p t q ' i for some i P S in § 3.1.1, and then give the proof for the general case in § 3.1.2.

## 3.1.1 Strong Feller Property for SPDEs

Let i P S be fixed. Then, we can treat Equation (1.1) as an ordinary SPDE. We will generalize the remarkable method of Zhang [34] to include jumps. Our goal is to establish the following result.

Theorem 4. Under the assumptions of Theorem 3, the transition semigroup t P s,t u of X p t q is strong Feller.

To prove Theorem 4, we first consider the case that J ' 0 and establish a lemma that is similar to [34]. To simplify notation, we drop the dependence on i . Fix T ą 0.

Lemma 1. Suppose that Assumption 1 holds with α ě 2 , J ' 0 and the following conditions hold:

- (i) There exists K 2 ą 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all t P r 0 , T s and v 1 , v 2 P V .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

for all t P r 0 , T s and v, v 1 , v 2 P V .

Then, P s,t f is λ ` 2 ´ α 2 λ -H¨ older continuous for any f P B b p H q .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We follow the elegant method of [34, Lemma 3.1]. Let ε P p 0 , 1 q satisfying 0 \_p α ´ 2 q ă λ p 1 ´ ε q ă p 2 α ´ 2 q ^ α . Take α 1 P p 0 , ε q , whose value will be determined at the end of the proof. For x, y P H , consider

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with X p 0 q ' x and Y p 0 q ' y , respectively. Define

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Itˆ o's formula (cf. [22]), we find that for t ă τ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Set

We have r P p 0 , 1 q . Set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We choose a sequence of functions V n P C 2 p R q such that V n p x q ' V p x q for x ě 1 n and V 2 n p x q ď 0 for x P R . Note that for t ă τ n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by (3.2), we obtain that for t ă τ n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (3.1), (3.3), the assumption on B and the concave property of V n , we obtain that for t ă τ n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by Gronwall's lemma, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, by Fatou's lemma, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (3.5), we get lim n Ñ8 η n ě T ^ τ. Set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, we have that lim n Ñ8 ξ n ' T ^ τ . Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, t Ă W p s qu s Pr 0 ,ξ n ^ t s is a cylindrical Wiener process on H under the probability measure R t ^ ξ n P . Define E ´ 1 p t, v q : ' r B p t, v qs ˚ p B p t, v qqr B p t, v qs ˚ q ´ 1 ,

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Young's inequality, we obtain that for t ă τ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since λ p 1 ´ 2 r q λ ´ 1 ď 2 ´ 2 r and | X p t q ´ Y p t q| λ p 2 ´ 2 r q λ ´ 1 H ď | X p t q ´ Y p t q| 2 ´ 2 r H if | X p t q ´ Y p t q| H ď 1, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C λ,δ,K 2 depends only on δ , λ and K 2 . Thus, for t ă τ n , we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Gronwall's lemma, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then t R s ^ ξ n u s Pr 0 ,T s ,n P N and thus t R s u s Pr 0 ,T s is uniform integrable. Hence, t Ă W p t qu t Pr 0 ,T s is a cylindrical Wiener process under R T P . Moreover, t Y p t qu t ě 0 satisfies

with Y p 0 q ' y . This implies that t Y p t qu t ě 0 is also a solution to (1.1) with J ' 0.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now show that P s,t f is λ ` 2 ´ α 2 λ -H¨ older continuous for any f P B b p H q . To simplify notation, we only give the proof for the case that s ' 0. The proof for the case that s ą 0 is completely similar.

Let f P B b p H q , 0 ď t ď T and x, y P H . We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (3.5), (3.8) and the inequality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

there exists C 1 r, r K,T,δ,λ,K 2 ą 0 such that if | x ´ y | H ď 1,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we estimate P p τ ě t q . Set r V p x q ' x ε { 2 for x ‰ 0 and choose a sequence of functions r V n P C 2 p R q such that r V n p x q ' r V p x q for x ě 1 n and r V 2 n p x q ď 0 for x P R . Similar to (3.6), we can show that for s ă τ n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Gronwall's lemma, we get

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which together with (3.11) implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Set

Therefore, by (3.9), (3.10) and (3.12), we obtain that for any x, y P H with | x ´ y | H ă 1,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Proof of Theorem 4.

We first consider the case that J ' 0. For R ą 0, define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Denote by X p s, w ; t q the solution of (1.1) with X p s q ' w , w P H for fixed i P S . Suppose | w | H ă R . Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let t X R p s, w ; t qu be the unique solution of the SPDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let f P B b p H q . We have

with X p s q ' w . Denote by t P R s,t u the transition semigroup of t X R p s, w ; t qu . Suppose x, y P H with | x | H , | y | H ă R . By the uniqueness of solutions, we find that X p s, x ; t q ' X R p s, x ; t q and X p s, y ; t q ' X R p s, y ; t q for all t ă τ x R ^ τ y R . Let R ą n 0 , which is given in condition (LM2). By conditions (N), (LipB), (LM2) and replacing δ , r K , B with δ n 0 , K Ă n 0 , B n 0 , respectively, we can apply Lemma 1 to show that t P R s,t u is strong Feller.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Itˆ o's formula, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by Gronwall's lemma, we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, by the Burkholder-Davis-Gundy inequality, there exists C 1 ą 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence for l P p 0 , R ´| x | H q , we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, P s,t f is continuous at x by (3.13) and (3.14). Since x P H is arbitrary, the proof for the case that J ' 0 is complete.

We now consider the case that J ı 0. Let t Z p t qu t ě 0 be the unique solution of the SPDE (1.1) with J ' 0.

Denote by P Z p s, x ; t, X q the transition semigroup of t Z p t qu t ě 0 , where x P H, X P B p H q and 0 ď s ă t ă 8 . Define ζ 1 : ' inf t u ą s : N pr s, u s , t| z | ě 1 uq ' 1 u , which is the first jump time of u ÞÑ N pr s, u s , t| z | ě 1 uq after time s . Then, by conditioning on ζ 1 , we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Repeating this procedure, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since we have shown that the transition semigroup of t Z p t qu t ě 0 is strong Feller, P Z p s, x ; t, X q and Ψ k , k P N , are all continuous with respect to x . Then, by (3.15), we conclude that P X p s, x ; t, X q is lower semi-continuous with respect to x . Therefore, the transition semigroup t P s,t u is strong Feller by [23, Proposition 6.1.1].

## 3.1.2 Proof of Theorem 3

Proof. Denote the transition probability function of p X p t q , Λ p t qq by t P p s, p x, i q , t, B ˆt j uq : 0 ď s ă t, p x, i q P H ˆ S , B P B p H q , j P S u . For p x, i q P H ˆ S , let X p i q p t q be defined by Equation (2.2). We also define Ą X p i q p t q to be the killing process with generator L ` q ii . Then, for f P B b p H q ,

Let Ą P p i q p s, x ; ¨q be the transition probability function of Ą X p i q p t q . Then, for 0 ď s ă t , B P B p H q and j P S , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Repeating this procedure, we get

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the sum is over

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the sum is over

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By condition (Q0), we find that U n ď rp t ´ s q L s n ` 1 p n ` 1 q ! . Letting n Ñ8 , we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Theorem 4, we know that the transition semigroup of X p i q p t q is strong Feller. Then, following the argument of [28, Lemma 4.5], we can show that the semigroup of Ą X p i q p t q is also strong Feller. Thus, we conclude that Ą P p i q p s, x ; t, B q and Ψ k for k P N are all continuous with respect to x . Using the fact that S is equipped with a discrete metric, we conclude that P p s, p x, i q ; t, B ˆt j uq is lower semi-continuous with respect to p x, i q . Therefore, the transition semigroup t P s,t u of p X p t q , Λ p t qq is strong Feller by [23, Proposition 6.1.1].

## 3.2 Irreducibility

For ̟ ą 0, define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We impose the following assumptions.

- (D) There exists ̟ ą 2 such that D p A,̟ q ' H ˆ S .
- (Q1) For any distinct i, j P S , there exist an open set U Ă H and j 1 , . . . , j r P S with j p ‰ j p ` 1 , j 1 ' i and j r ' j such that q j p j p ` 1 p x q ą 0 for p ' 1 , . . . , r ´ 1 and x P U .

Assumption 3. Assumption 1 holds with C P L 8 loc pr 0 , 8q ; p 0 , 8qq , γ ' 0 and the exponent α in condition (G ρ ) replaced by some α 1 P p 1 , α q .

Now we give the main result of this subsection.

Theorem 5. Suppose that Assumption 3 and conditions (D), (Q1) hold. Then, the transition semigroup t P s,t u of p X p t q , Λ p t qq is irreducible.

Proof. First, we consider the case that i P S is fixed. To simplify notation, we drop the dependence on i . Define the first jump time of t X p t qu t ě 0 by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is exponentially distributed with rate ν pt| z | ě 1 uq . Let t Z p t qu t ě 0 be the unique solution of the SPDE (1.1) with J ' 0. We have that Z p t q ' X p t q for t ă ζ 1 . Hence, to obtain the irreducibility of t P s,t u , we may assume without loss of generality that J ' 0.

Denote by t X x p t qu t ě 0 the solution of Equation (1.1) with X p 0 q ' x , x P H . Let T, M, R ą 0, t 1 P p 0 , T q , y p 0 q P D p A H q and t y p t qu t Pr 0 ,T s be the solution of the following equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to [34, Lemma 2.1], we can prove the following result.

Lemma 2. Let m : ' 2 M ´p K ` ρ p y p 0 qq ` 1 q T ą 0 . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and there exists ϑ ą 0 , which is independent of t 1 , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that in this paper A is time-dependent. Hence we need replace p T ´ t 1 q 2 | A p y 0 q| 2 in [34, Lemma 2.1] by ş r´ t 1 ,T s w p s q| A p s, y p 0 qq| 2 ds with suitable w p s q . Let ε ą 0 and n P N . We consider the following equation:

r where t y p t qu t Pr 0 ,T s is the solution of (3.16). Note that r X n p t 1 q ' X p t 1 q . By Theorem 2 and (3.17), we know that (3.18) has a unique solution t X n p t qu t Pr 0 ,T s .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

r Following the argument of [34] and carefully handling the dependence of constants, we obtain the following estimation for the solution r X n . Lemma 3. There exists ϑ ą 0 , which is independent of ε, n, T, M, R, t 1 , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By virtue of Lemma 3, following the argument of [34, Lemma 2.3], we can prove the following lemma.

Lemma 4. Let T ą 0 , y p 0 q P D p A,̟ q and η, δ P p 0 , 1 q . Then, there exist M,R ą 0 and t 1 P p 0 , T q such that for any n P N we can find an ε P p 0 , 1 q satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Lemma 4 and following the argument of [34, Theorem 1.1], we complete the proof of Theorem 5 for the case that i P S is fixed. Finally, similar to [14, Theorem 3], we can complete the proof for the general case.

## 4 Existence and Uniqueness of Periodic Measures

In this section, we discuss periodic measures for the hybrid system (1.1) and (1.2) .

Definition 1. Let E be a Polish space with Borel σ -algebra B p E q , t Y p t qu t ě 0 an E -valued Markov process, and ℓ ą 0 . A probability measure µ 0 on B p E q is said to be an ℓ -periodic measure for t Y p t qu t ě 0 if the following condition holds:

- Y p 0 q has distribution µ 0 implies that the joint distribution of Y p t 1 ` kℓ q , . . . , Y p t n ` kℓ q is independent of k for all 0 ď t 1 ă ¨ ¨ ¨ ă t n and n P N .

For g P C 1 , 2 pr 0 , 8q ˆ H ˆ S ; R q , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We make the following assumption on the matrix Q ' p q ij p x qq .

- (Q2) There exists a positive increasing function f on S satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we can state the main theorem of this paper.

Theorem 6. Let ℓ ą 0 . Suppose that functions A,B,H,J are all ℓ -periodic with respect to t , the embedding of V into H is compact, Assumption 3 holds with C P L 8 pr 0 , 8q ; p 0 , 8qq , Assumption 2 and conditions (D), (Q0), (Q1), (Q2) hold, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

- (i) Equations (1.1) and (1.2) have a unique solution tp X p t q , Λ p t qqu t ě 0 ;
- t P u of tp X p t q , Λ p t qqu 0 is strong Feller and irreducible;
- tp X p t q , Λ p t qqu t ě 0 has a unique ℓ -periodic measure µ 0 ;
- (ii) The transition semigroup s,t t ě (iii) The hybrid system
- (iv) Let µ s p A q ' P µ 0 pp X p s q , Λ p s qq P A q for A P B p H ˆ S q and s ě 0 . Then, for any s ě 0 and ϕ P L 2 p H ˆ S ; µ s q ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Claims (i) and (ii) follow from Theorems 1, 3 and 5.

Let p X p t q , Λ p t qq be the unique solution to the hybrid system (1.1) and (1.2) with initial value p x, i q P H ˆ S . Define V p t, x, i q ' | x | 2 H ` f p i q , where f is given by condition (Q2). Then,

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by conditions (C), (4.1) and (Q2), we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For n P N , define the stopping time T n by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For t ě 0, by Itˆ o's formula (see Gy¨ ongy and Krylov [15, Theorem 2]), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (4.3), we get lim n Ñ8 A n ' 8 .

We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, there exist positive constants ǫ 1 and ǫ 2 such that for sufficiently large n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Letting n Ñ8 in (4.5), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where B c n ' tp y, k q P H ˆ S : | y | V ` k ě n u .

By (4.4), we find that there exists λ ą 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which together with Chebyshev's inequality implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, there exists a sequence of positive integers γ n Ò 8 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where B H ˆ S p ι q : ' tp y, k q P H ˆ S : | y | H ` k ă ι u for ι ą 0.

By the assumption that functions A,B,H,J are all ℓ -periodic with respect to t , we find that the transition semigroup t P s,t u is ℓ -periodic, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the embedding of V into H is compact, combining the periodicity and the strong Feller property of t P s,t u with (4.6), (4.7) and following the argument of [19, Theorem 3.2 and Remark 3.1], we conclude that tp X p t q , Λ p t qqu t ě 0 has an ℓ -periodic measure µ 0 .

By using the same argument, we can show that [13, Lemma 3.12 and Theorem 3.13] hold with the state space R m replaced by H ˆ S . Then, by Theorems 3 and 5, we conclude that there exists a unique family of probability measure t η s u on B p H ˆ S q that is ℓ -periodic with respect to t P s,t u , that is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, we obtain the uniqueness of periodic measures, namely, µ 0 : ' η 0 . Finally, following the same argument of the proof of [13, Theorem 3.13], we obtain (4.2).

## 5 An Example

Example (Stochastic porous media equations) . Let d ě 1 and O Ă R d be a bounded open set with smooth boundary. Set L ' ´p´ ∆ q γ for γ ą 0 . Let r ą 1 . Denote by dµ the normalized Lebesgue measure on O and define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where H ´ γ p O ; dµ q is the completion of L 2 p O ; dµ q with respect to the norm

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the embedding of V into H is compact.

Let t q ij u be measurable functions defined on H such that one of the following conditions is satisfied:

(a) There exist m P N and M ą 0 such that for all x P H ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(b)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, conditions (Q0), (Q1) and (Q2) (setting f p i q ' i 2 under condition (a), and f p i q ' i δ { 2 under condition (b)) hold (cf. [14, Examples 1 and 2] ).

Let S ' N , ℓ ą 0 , and g be a measurable function on r 0 , 8q ˆ S such that g p¨ , i q P L 8 r 0 , 8q is ℓ -periodic for each i P S and sup t ě 0 ,i P S | g p t, i q| ă `8 . For t P r 0 , 8q and x P R , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where κ p¨ , i q is ℓ -periodic for each i P S and k 1 ď κ p t, i q ď k 2 for all t P r 0 , 8q , i P S and some positive constants k 1 ă k 2 . One can show that condition (D) holds and there exists C r ą 0 such that for all t P r 0 , 8q , x 1 , x 2 P V and i P S ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let λ 1 ď λ 2 ď ¨ ¨ ¨ ď λ j ď ¨ ¨ ¨ be the eigenvalues of ´ ∆ and t e j u the corresponding unit eigenvectors. Suppose 1 2 ă s ď γ d . Define B 0 P L 2 p H q by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and Let b ą 0 and t b j u j P N be measurable functions defined on r 0 , 8q ˆ H ˆ S satisfying the following conditions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As an explicit example, similar to [34, Example 4.6] , we may let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where b 1 is a measurable function on r 0 , 8qˆ S such that b 1 p¨ , i q is ℓ -periodic for each i P S and 0 ă inf t Pr 0 ,ℓ q ,i P S b 1 p t, i q ď sup t Pr 0 ,ℓ q ,i P S b 1 p t, i q ă 8 .

Let t W p t qu t ě 0 be an H -valued cylindrical Wiener process on a complete filtered probability space p Ω , F , t F t u t ě 0 , P q , Z a real Banach space and N a Poisson random measure on p Z, B p Z qq with intensity measure ν . Assume that W and N are independent. Suppose that c ą 0 , K ą 0 , ρ P L 8 loc p V ; r 0 , 8qq and H,J : r 0 , 8qˆ V ˆ S ˆ Z Ñ H are measurable functions satisfying the following conditions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define

We now show that all conditions of Theorem 6 are satisfied. It is easy to see that conditions (HC) and (N) hold. Note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, condition (C) is satisfied by taking C p t q ' ř 8 j ' 1 b 2 j 2 s ` c , θ ' 2 k 1 and α ' r ` 1 . We have that where c r , c 1 r , c 2 r are the constants from Young's inequality for products. Then, we get (G1) by modifying C p t q to be the maximum of ř 8 j ' 1 b 2 j 2 s ` c and Additionally, set β ' 0 .

Conditions (G2) and (G β ) follow from the definitions of B and H . By (5.1) and [27, Theorem 2.4.1] , we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then (LM2) and hence (LM1) holds. Finally, by the assumption on J and α ' r ` 1 ą 2 , we find that condition (4.1) holds. Thus, all conditions of Theorem 6 are fulfilled. Therefore, all assertions of Theorem 6 hold.

Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (No. 4394-2018).

## References

- [1] D. Applebaum. L´ evy Processes and Stochastic Calculus, Second Edition. Cambridge University Press, (2009).
- [2] M. Arnaudon, A. Thalmaier and F.Y. Wang. Harnack inequality and heat kernel estimates on manifolds with curvature unbounded below. Bull. Sci. Math. 130, 223-233 (2006).
- [3] Z. Brze´ zniak, W. Liu and J. Zhu. Strong solutions for SPDE with locally monotone coefficients driven by L´ evy noise. Nonl. Anal.: Real World Appl. 17, 283-310 (2014).
- [4] F. Chen, Y. Han, Y. Li and X. Yang. Periodic solutions of Fokker-Planck equations. J. Diff. Equ. 263, 285-298 (2017).
- [5] M. Cheng and Z. Liu. Periodic, almost periodic and almost automorphic solutions for SPDEs with monotone coefficients. Disc. Contin. Dyn. Syst., Ser. B. 26, 6425-6462 (2021).
- [6] G. Da Prato and A. Debussche. 2D stochastic Navier-Stokes equations with a time-periodic forcing term. J. Dyn. Diff. Equ. 20, 301-335 (2008).
- [7] G. Da Prato and C. Tudor. Periodic and almost periodic solutions for semilinear stochastic equations. Stoch. Anal. Appl. 13, 13-33 (1995).
- [8] G. Da Prato and J. Zabczyk. Ergodicity for Infinite-dimensional Systems. Cambridge University Press (1996).
- [9] G. Da Prato and J. Zabczyk. Stochastic Equations in Infinite Dimensions, Second Edition. Cambridge University Press (2014).
- [10] C. Feng and H. Zhao. Random periodic solutions of SPDEs via integral equations and Wiener-Sobolev compact embedding. J. Funct. Anal. 262, 4377-4422 (2012).
- [11] L. Gawarecki and V. Mandrekar. Stochastic Differential Equations in Infinite Dimensions with Applications to Stochastic Partial Differential Equations. Springer, (2011).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- [12] B. Gess and M. R¨ ockner. Stochastic variational inequalities and regularity for degenerate stochastic partial differential equations. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 369, 3017-3045 (2017).
- [13] X.X. Guo and W. Sun. Periodic solutions of stochastic differential equations driven by L´ evy noises. J. Nonl. Sci. 31:32 (2021).
- [14] X.X. Guo and W. Sun. Periodic solutions of hybrid jump diffusion processes. Front. Math. China 16, 705-725 (2021).
- [15] I. Gy¨ ongy and N.V. Krylov. On stochastic equations with respect to semimartingales II, Ito formula in Banach spaces. Stoch. 6, 153-174 (1982).
- [16] M. Hairer and J. C. Mattingly. Ergodicity of the 2D Navier-Stokes equations with degenerate stochastic forcing. Ann. Math. 164, 993-1032 (2006).
- [17] H. Hu and L. Xu. Existence and uniqueness theorems for periodic Markov process and applications to stochastic functional differential equations. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 466, 896926 (2018).
- [18] M. Ji, W. Qi, Z. Shen and Y. Yi. Existence of periodic probability solutions to FokkerPlanck equations with applications, J. Funct. Anal. 277, 108281 (2019).
- [19] R.Z. Khasminskii. Stochastic Stability of Differential Equations, Second Edition. Springer (2012).
- [20] W. Liu and W. R¨ ockner. Stochastic Partial Differential Equations: an Introduction. Springer (2015).
- [21] B. Maslowski and J. Seidler. Invariant measures for nonlinear SPDE's: uniqueness and stability. Arch. Math. 34, 153-172 (1998).
- [22] M. M´ etivier. Semimartingales. A Course on Stochastic Processes. De Gruyter, (1982).
- [23] S.P. Meyn and R.L. Tweedie. Markov Chains and Stochastic Stability. Springer, (1993).
- [24] M. Neuß. Ergodicity for singular-degenerate stochastic porous media equations. J. Dyn. Diff. Equ. (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10884-021-09961-9
- [25] S. Peszat and J. Zabczyk. Stochastic Partial Differential Equations with L´ evy Noise, an Evolution Equation Approach. Cambridge University Press (2007).
- [26] M. Romito and L. Xu. Ergodicity of the 3D stochastic Navier-Stokes equations driven by mildly degenerate noise. Stoch. Proc. Appl. 121, 673-700 (2011).
- [27] F.Y. Wang. Harnack Inequalities for Stochastic Partial Differential Equations. Springer (2013).
- [28] F. Xi, G. Yin and C. Zhu. Regime-switching jump diffusions with non-Lipschitz coefficients and countably many switching states: existence and uniqueness, Feller, and strong Feller properties. Modeling, Stochastic Control, Optimization, and Applications. 571-599, (2019).
- [29] B. Xie. Uniqueness of invariant measures of infinite dimensional stochastic differential equations driven by L´ evy noises. Potent. Anal. 36, 35-66 (2012).
- [30] D. Xu D., Y. Huang and Z. Yang. Existence theorems for periodic Markov process and stochastic functional differential equations. Disc. Contin. Dyn. Syst. Ser. A. 24, 1005-1023 (2009).
- [31] D. Xu, B. Li, S. Long and L. Teng. Moment estimate and existence for solutions of stochastic functional differential equations. Nonl. Anal. 108, 128-143 (2014).
- [32] C. Yuan and J. Bao. On the exponential stability of switching-diffusion processes with jumps. Quart. Appl. Math. 71, 311-329 (2013).

- [33] R. Zhang. Existence and uniqueness of invariant measures of 3D stochastic MHDα model driven by degenerate noise. Appl. Anal. 101, 629-654 (2020).
- [34] S.Q. Zhang. Irreducibility and strong Feller property for non-linear SPDEs. Stoch. 91, 352382 (2019).
- [35] X. Zhang, K. Wang and D. Li. Stochastic periodic solutions of stochastic differential equations driven by L´ evy process. J. Math. Anal. Appl. 430, 231-242 (2015).