## On the Sequential Probability Ratio Test in Hidden Markov Models

Oscar Darwin

<!-- image -->

Department of Computer Science, Oxford University, United Kingdom

Stefan Kiefer

<!-- image -->

Department of Computer Science, Oxford University, United Kingdom

## Abstract

We consider the Sequential Probability Ratio Test applied to Hidden Markov Models. Given two Hidden Markov Models and a sequence of observations generated by one of them, the Sequential Probability Ratio Test attempts to decide which model produced the sequence. We show relationships between the execution time of such an algorithm and Lyapunov exponents of random matrix systems. Further, we give complexity results about the execution time taken by the Sequential Probability Ratio Test.

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Random walks and Markov chains; Mathematics of computing → Stochastic processes; Theory of computation → Logic and verification

Keywords and phrases Markov chains, hidden Markov models, probabilistic systems, verification

[Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/LIPIcs.CVIT.2016.23](https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.CVIT.2016.23)

## 1 Introduction

A (discrete-time, finite-state) Hidden Markov Model (HMM) (often called labelled Markov chain ) has a finite set Q of states and for each state a probability distribution over its possible successor states. Every state is associated with a probability transition over a successor state and an emitted letter ( observation ). For example, consider the following HMM:

<!-- image -->

In state q 1 , the probability of emitting a and the next state being also q 1 is 1 3 , and the probability of emitting b and the next state being q 2 is 2 3 . An HMM is typically viewed as a producer of a finite or infinite word of emitted observations. For example, starting in q 1 , the probability of producing a word with prefix aba is 1 3 · 2 3 · 2 3 , whereas starting in q 2 , the probability of aba is 2 3 · 1 3 · 1 3 . The random sequence of states is considered not observable (which explains the term hidden in HMM).

HMMs are widely employed in fields such as speech recognition (see [32] for a tutorial), gesture recognition [9], signal processing [13], and climate modeling [1]. HMMs are heavily used in computational biology [16], more specifically in DNA modeling [11] and biological sequence analysis [15], including protein structure prediction [25] and gene finding [3]. In computer-aided verification, HMMs are the most fundamental model for probabilistic systems; model-checking tools such as Prism [26] or Storm [14] are based on analyzing HMMs efficiently.

One of the most fundamental questions about HMMs is whether two initial distributions are (trace) equivalent , i.e., generate the same distribution on infinite observation sequences. In the example above, we argued that (the Dirac distributions on) the states q 1 , q 2 are not equivalent. The equivalence problem is very well studied and can be solved in polynomial

<!-- image -->

© John Q. Public and Joan R. Public;

licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY

42nd Conference on Very Important Topics (CVIT 2016).

Editors: John Q. Open and Joan R. Access; Article No. 23; pp. 23:1-23:35

<!-- image -->

Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics time using algorithms that are based on linear algebra [33, 29, 36, 12]. The equivalence problem has applications in verification, e.g., of randomised anonymity protocols [23].

Equivalence is a strong notion, and a natural question about nonequivalent distributions in a given HMM is how different they are. For initial distributions π 1 , π 2 on the states of the HMM, let us write P π 1 , P π 2 for the induced probability measure on infinite observation sequences; i.e., P π i ( E ), for a measurable event E ⊆ Σ ω , is the probability that the random infinite word w ∈ Σ ω produced starting from π i is in E . Then, the total variation distance between P π 1 , P π 2 is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This supremum is a maximum; i.e., there always exists a 'maximizing event' E ⊆ Σ ω with d ( π 1 , π 2 ) = P π 1 ( E ) -P π 2 ( E ). In these terms, initial distributions π 1 , π 2 are equivalent if and only if d ( π 1 , π 2 ) = 0. The total variation distance was studied in more detail in [10]. There it was shown that the problem whether d ( π 1 , π 2 ) = 1 holds can also be decided in polynomial time. Call distributions π 1 , π 2 distinguishable if d ( π 1 , π 2 ) = 1. Distinguishability was used for runtime monitoring [24] and diagnosability [4, 2] of stochastic systems.

Distributions π 1 , π 2 that are distinguishable (i.e., d ( π 1 , π 2 ) = 1) can nevertheless be 'hard' to distinguish. In our example above, (the Dirac distributions on) q 1 , q 2 are distinguishable. If we replace the transition probabilities 1 3 , 2 3 in the HMM by 1 2 -ε, 1 2 + ε , respectively, states q 1 , q 2 remain distinguishable for every ε &gt; 0, although, intuitively, the smaller ε &gt; 0 the more observations are needed to define an event E such that P π 1 ( E ) -P π 2 ( E ) is close to 1.

To make this more precise, for initial distributions π 1 , π 2 , a word w ∈ Σ ω and n ∈ N consider the likelihood ratio

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where w n denotes the lengthn prefix of w . In the example above, we argued that P q 1 ( aba Σ ω ) = 1 3 · 2 3 · 2 3 and P q 2 ( aba Σ ω ) = 2 3 · 1 3 · 1 3 . Thus, for any word w starting with aba we have L n ( w ) = 2. We consider the likelihood ratio L n as a random variable for every n ∈ N . It turns out more natural to focus on the log-likelihood ratio ln L n . One can show that the limit lim n →∞ ln L n ∈ [ -∞ , ∞ ] exists P π 1 -almost surely and P π 2 -almost surely (see, e.g., [10, Proposition 6]). In fact, if π 1 , π 2 are distinguishable, then lim n →∞ ln L n = ∞ holds P π 1 -almost surely and lim n →∞ ln L n = -∞ holds P π 2 -almost surely. This suggests the 'average slope', lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n , of increase or decrease of ln L n as a measure of how distinguishable two distinguishable distributions π 1 , π are.

The log-likelihood ratio plays a central role in the sequential probability ratio test (SPRT) [37], which is optimal [38] among sequential hypothesis tests (such tests attempt to decide between two hypotheses without fixing the sample size in advance). In terms of an HMM and two initial distributions π 1 , π 2 , the SPRT attempts to decide, given longer and longer prefixes of an observation sequence w ∈ Σ ω , which of π 1 , π 2 is more likely to emit w . The SPRT works as follows: fix a lower and an upper threshold (which determine type-I and type-II errors); given increasing prefixes of w keep track of ln L n ( w ), and when the upper threshold is crossed output π 1 and stop, and when the lower threshold is crossed output π 2 and stop. Again, it is natural to assume that the average slope of increase or decrease of ln L n determines how long the SPRT needs to cross one of the thresholds.

If the average slope lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n exists and equals a number ℓ with positive probability, we call ℓ a likelihood exponent . The term is motivated by a close relationship to Lyapunov exponents , which characterise the growth rate of certain random matrix products. As the most fundamental contribution of this paper, we show that the average slope exists almost surely and that any HMM with m states has at most m 2 +1 likelihood exponents.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows. In Section 3 we exhibit a tight connection between the SPRT and likelihood exponents; i.e., the time taken by the SPRT depends on the likelihood exponents of the HMM. This connection motivates our results on likelihood exponents in the rest of the paper. In Section 4 we prove complexity results concerning the probability that the average slope equals a particular likelihood exponent. In Section 5 we show that the average slope exists almost surely and prove our bound on the number of likelihood exponents. Further, we show that the likelihood exponents can be efficiently expressed in terms of Lyapunov exponents. In Section 6 we show that for deterministic HMMs one can compute likelihood exponents in polynomial time. We conclude in Section 7.

## 2 Preliminaries

<!-- image -->

We write N for the set of non-negative integers. For d ∈ N we write [ d ] = { 1 , . . . , d } . For a finite set Q , vectors µ ∈ R Q are viewed as row vectors, and their transpose (a column vector) is denoted by µ ⊤ . The norm ‖ µ ‖ is assumed to be the l 1 norm: ‖ µ ‖ = ∑ q ∈ Q | µ q | . We write ⃗ 0 , ⃗ 1 for the vectors all of whose entries are 0, 1, respectively. For q ∈ Q , we denote by e q ∈ { 0 , 1 } Q the vector with ( e q ) q = 1 and ( e q ) q ′ = 0 for q ′ = q . A matrix M ∈ [0 , 1] Q × Q is stochastic if ⃗ 1 ⊤ = M⃗ 1 ⊤ . We often identify vectors µ ∈ [0 , 1] Q such that ‖ µ ‖ = 1 with the corresponding probability distribution on Q . For µ ∈ [0 , ∞ ) Q we write supp( µ ) := { q ∈ Q | µ q &gt; 0 } .

̸

For a finite alphabet Σ and n ∈ N we denote by Σ n , Σ ∗ , Σ + , Σ ω the sets of lengthn words, finite words, non-empty finite words, infinite words, respectively. For w ∈ Σ ω we write w n for the lengthn prefix of w .

A Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is a triple H = ( Q, Σ , Ψ) where Q is a finite set of states, Σ is a set of observations (or 'letters'), and the function Ψ : Σ → [0 , 1] Q × Q specifies the transitions such that ∑ a ∈ Σ Ψ( a ) is stochastic. For computational purposes we assume the numbers in Ψ are rational and expressed as fractions of integers encoded in binary. A Markov chain is a pair ( Q,T ) where Q is a finite set of states and T ∈ [0 , 1] Q × Q is a stochastic matrix. A Markov chain ( Q,T ) is naturally associated with its directed graph ( Q, { ( q, r ) | T q,r &gt; 0 } ), and so we may use graph concepts, such as strongly connected components (SCCs), in the context of a Markov chain. Trivial SCCs are considered SCCs. The embedded Markov chain of an HMM ( Q, Σ , Ψ) is the Markov chain ( Q, ∑ a ∈ Σ Ψ( a )). We say that an HMM is strongly connected if the graph of its embedded Markov chain is.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fix an HMM H = ( Q, Σ , Ψ) for the rest of the section. We extend Ψ to the mapping Ψ : Σ ∗ → [0 , 1] Q × Q with Ψ( a 1 · · · a n ) = Ψ( a 1 ) · . . . · Ψ( a n ) and Ψ( ε ) = I , where ε is the empty word and I the Q × Q identity matrix. We call a finite sequence v = q 0 a 1 q 1 · · · a n q n ∈ Q (Σ Q ) ∗ a path and v (Σ Q ) ω a cylinder set and an infinite sequence q 0 a 1 q 1 a 2 q 2 · · · ∈ Q (Σ Q ) ω a run . To H and an initial probability distribution π ∈ [0 , 1] Q we associate the probability space ( Q (Σ Q ) ω , G ∗ , P π ) where G ∗ is the σ -algebra generated by the cylinder sets and P π is the unique probability measure with P π ( q 0 a 1 q 1 · · · a n q n (Σ Q ) ω ) = π q 0 ∏ n i =1 Ψ( a i ) q i -1 ,q i . As the states are often irrelevant, for E ⊆ Σ ω and E ↑ := { q 0 a 1 q 1 a 2 q 2 · · · | a 1 a 2 · · · ∈ E } ∈ G ∗ we view also E as an event and may write P π ( E ) to mean P π ( E ↑ ). In particular, for w ∈ Σ ∗ we have P π ( w Σ ω ) = ‖ π Ψ( w ) ‖ . For E ⊆ Σ ω we write ✶ E for the indicator random variable with ✶ E ( w ) = 1 if w ∈ E and ✶ E ( w ) = 0 if w ̸∈ E . By E π we denote the expectation with respect to P π . If π is the Dirac distribution on state q , then we write E q .

A Markov chain ( Q,T ) and an initial distribution ι ∈ [0 , 1] Q are associated with a probability measure P ι on measurable subsets of Q ω ; the construction of the probability space is similar to HMMs, without the observation alphabet Σ.

Let ( Q, Σ , Ψ) be an HMM and let π 1 , π 2 be two initial distributions. The total variation distance is d ( π 1 , π 2 ) := sup E ↑∈ G ∗ | P π 1 ( E ) -P π 2 ( E ) | . This supremum is actually a maximum due to Hahn's decomposition theorem; i.e., there is an event E ⊆ Σ ω such that d ( π 1 , π 2 ) = P π 1 ( E ) -P π 2 ( E ). We call π 1 and π 2 distinguishable if d ( π 1 , π 2 ) = 1. Distinguishability is decidable in polynomial time [10].

Let π 1 and π 2 be initial distributions. For n ∈ N , the likelihood ratio L n is a random variable on Σ ω given by L n ( w ) = ‖ π 1 Ψ( w n ) ‖ ‖ π 2 Ψ( w n ) ‖ . Based on results from [10] we have the following lemma.

- Lemma 2. Let π 1 , π 2 be initial distributions.
1. lim n →∞ L n exists P π 2 -almost surely and lies in [0 , ∞ ) .
2. lim n →∞ L n = 0 P π 2 -almost surely if and only if π 1 and π 2 are distinguishable.
- Example 3. We illustrate convergence of the likelihood ratio using an example from [27] where the authors use HMMs to model sleep cycles. They took measurements of 51 healthy and 51 diseased individuals and using electrodes attached to the scalp, they read electrical signal data as part of an electroencephalography (EEG) during sleep. They split the signal into 30 second intervals and mapped each interval onto the simplex ∆ 3 = { ( x 1 , x 2 , x 3 , x 4 ) ∈ [0 , 1] 4 | ∑ 4 i =1 x i = 1 } . For each individual this results in a time series of points in ∆ 3 . They modelled this data using two HMMs, each with 5 states, for healthy and diseased individuals using a numerical maximum likelihood estimate. Each state is associated with a probability density function describing the distribution of observations in ∆ 3 . We describe in Appendix A.2 how we obtained from this an HMM H = ( Q, Σ , Ψ) with (finite) observation alphabet Σ = { a 1 , . . . , a 5 } and two initial distributions π 1 , π 2 corresponding to healthy and diseased individuals, respectively. Using the algorithm from [10] one can show that π 1 and π 2 are distinguishable.

We sampled runs of H started from π 1 and π 2 and plotted the corresponding sequences of ln L n . We refer to each of these two plots as a log-likelihood plot ; see Figure 1.

By Lemma 2.2 it follows that ln L n converges P π 1 -a.s. (almost-surely) to ∞ and P π 2 -a.s. to -∞ . This is affirmed by Figure 1. Both log-likelihood plots also appear to follow a particular slope. This suggests that we can distinguish between words produced by π 1 and π 2 by tracking the value of ln L n to see whether it crosses a lower or upper threshold. This is the intuition behind the Sequential Probability Ratio Test (SPRT).

<!-- image -->

## Sequential Probability Ratio Test

Fix an HMM H = ( Q, Σ , Ψ) for the rest of the paper. Given initial distributions π 1 , π 2 and error bounds α, β ∈ (0 , 1), the SPRT runs as follows. It continues to read observations and computes the value of ln L n until ln L n leaves the interval [ A,B ], where A := ln α 1 -β and B := ln 1 -α β . If ln L n ≤ A the test outputs ' π 2 ' and if ln L n ≥ B the test outputs ' π 1 '. We may view the SPRT as a random variable SPRT α,β : Σ ω →{ π 1 , π 2 , ? } , where ? denotes that the SPRT does not terminate, i.e., ln L n ∈ [ A,B ] for all n . We have the following correctness property.

Figure 1 The two images show two log-likelihood plots of sample runs produced by π 1 and π 2 , respectively.

<!-- image -->

- Proposition 4. Suppose π 1 and π 2 are distinguishable. Let α, β ∈ (0 , 1) . By choosing A = ln α 1 -β and B = ln 1 -α β , we have P π 1 (SPRT α,β = π 2 ) ≤ α and P π 2 (SPRT α,β = π 1 ) ≤ β .

In the following we consider the SPRT with respect to the measure P π 2 . This is without loss of generality as there is a dual version of the SPRT, say SPRT with L n = 1 /L n instead of L n , such that SPRT β,α = SPRT α,β . Define the stopping time

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have that N α,β is monotone decreasing in the sense that for α ≤ α ′ and β ≤ β ′ we have N α,β ≥ N α ′ ,β ′ . When π 1 and π 2 are distinguishable, N α,β is P π 2 -a.s. finite by Lemma 2.2.

## 3.1 Expectation of N α,β

Consider the two-state HMM where p 1 = p 2 .

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(The Dirac distributions of) s 1 and s 2 are distinguishable. Further, the increments ln L n +1 -ln L n are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) and 0 &gt; E s 2 [ln L n +1 -ln L n ] = p 2 ln p 1 p 2 +(1 -p 2 ) ln 1 -p 1 1 -p 2 =: ℓ . Intuitively as ℓ gets more negative, the HMMs become more different. 1 Indeed, Wald [37] shows that the expected stopping time E s 2 [ N α,β ] and ℓ are inversely proportional:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This Wald formula cannot hold in general for (multi-state) HMMs. The increments ln L n +1 -ln L n need not be independent and E s 2 [ln L n +1 -ln L n ] can be different for different n . Further, | ln L n +1 -ln L n | can be unbounded; cf. [24, Example 6].

1 In fact, ℓ is the KL-divergence of the distributions f 1 , f 2 where f i ( a ) = p i and f i ( b ) = 1 -p i for i = 1 , 2.

Nevertheless, in Figure 1 we observed that ln L n appears to decrease linearly (on the π 2 plot). Indeed, we show in Theorem 8 below that the limit lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n exists P π 2 -almost surely. Intuitively it corresponds to the average slope of the log-likelihood plot for π 2 . In the two-state case, there is a simple proof of this using the law of large numbers:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The number ℓ is called a likelihood exponent, as defined generally in the following definition.

- Definition 5. For initial distributions π 1 , π 2 , a number ℓ ∈ [ -∞ , 0] is a likelihood exponent if P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = ℓ ) &gt; 0 .

By Lemma 2.1 we have P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n &gt; 0) = 0, as P π 2 (lim n →∞ L n &lt; ∞ ) = 1. Hence, we may restrict likelihood exponents to [ -∞ , 0]. We write Λ π 1 ,π 2 ⊆ [ -∞ , 0] for the set of likelihood exponents for π 1 , π 2 and define Λ := ⋃ π 1 ,π 2 Λ π 1 ,π 2 ; i.e., Λ depends only on the HMM H . For ℓ ∈ Λ we define the event E ℓ = { lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = ℓ } .

- Example 6. In the case of Example 3 we have Λ π 1 ,π 2 = { ℓ } where the slope of the right hand side of Figure 1 suggests that ℓ ≈ -80 10000 = -0 . 008.
- Example 7. Even for fixed π 1 , π 2 there may be multiple likelihood exponents. Consider the following HMM with initial Dirac distributions π 1 = e s 1 and π 2 = e s 4 .

<!-- image -->

We observe two different likelihood exponents depending on the first letter produced. If the first letter is a then ln L n +1 -ln L n are i.i.d. for n ≥ 1 and lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = 1 2 ln 1 / 3 1 / 2 + 1 2 ln 2 / 3 1 / 2 = 1 2 ln 8 9 =: ℓ like the two-state example above. If the first letter is b then L n = 3 2 for all n ≥ 1 and lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = 0. Thus, Λ π 1 ,π 2 = { ℓ, 0 } and P π 2 ( E ℓ ) = P π 2 ( E 0 ) = 1 2 .

The following theorem is perhaps the most fundamental contribution of this paper.

- Theorem 8. For any initial distributions π 1 , π 2 the limit lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n exists P π 2 -almost surely. Furthermore, we have | Λ | ≤ | Q | 2 +1 .

It follows from a stronger theorem, Theorem 23, which we prove in Section 5.

Returning to the SPRT, we investigate how lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n influences the performance of the SPRT for small α and β . Intuitively we expect a steeper slope in the likelihood plot (cf. Figure 1) to lead to faster termination. In the two-state case, Wald's formula (1) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we use the notation ∼ defined as follows. For functions f, g : (0 , ∞ ) × (0 , ∞ ) → (0 , ∞ ) we write ' f ( x, y ) ∼ g ( x, y ) (as x, y → 0)' to denote that for all ε &gt; 0 there is δ &gt; 0 such that for all x, y ∈ (0 , δ ) we have f ( x, y ) /g ( x, y ) = [1 -ε, 1 + ε ].

In Theorem 9 below we generalise Equation (2) to arbitrary HMMs. Indeed a very similar asymptotic identity holds. In the case that Λ = { ℓ } and ℓ ∈ ( -∞ , 0) we have E s 2 [ N α,β ] ∼ ln α ℓ as α, β → 0. If | Λ | &gt; 1 then we condition our expectation on lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n .

- Theorem 9 (Generalised Wald Formula) . Let ℓ be a likelihood exponent and let π 1 and π 2 be initial distributions.
2. If ℓ = 0 then there exist α, β &gt; 0 such that E π 2 [ N α,β | E ℓ ] = ∞ .
1. If ℓ ∈ ( -∞ , 0) then E π 2 [ N α,β | E ℓ ] ∼ ln α ℓ ( as α, β → 0) .
3. If ℓ = -∞ then sup α,β E π 2 [ N α,β | E ℓ ] &lt; ∞ .

The theorem above pertains to the expectation of N α,β . In the next subsection we give additional information about the distribution of N α,β , further strengthening the connection between N α,β and likelihood exponents.

## 3.2 Distribution of N α,β

## 3.2.1 Likelihood Exponent 0

▶ Example 10. We continue with Example 7 to illustrate the second case in Theorem 9. By picking α = 1 4 , β = 1 4 the thresholds for the SPRT are A = ln 1 3 and B = ln 3. If the first letter is b , then ln L n = ln 3 2 for all n &gt; 1, thus never crosses the SPRT bounds and lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = 0. Hence with probability 1 2 the SPRT fails to terminate and N α,β = ∞ . It follows that P π 2 ( E 0 ) = 1 2 and E π 2 [ N α,β | E 0 ] = ∞ and, thus, E π 2 [ N α,β ] = ∞ .

The second part of Theorem 9 says that the expectation of N α,β conditioned under E 0 is infinite. The following proposition strengthens this statement. Conditioning under E 0 , the probability that N α,β is infinite converges to 1 as α, β → 0. Recall that N α,β is monotone decreasing. It follows that { N α ′ ,β ′ = ∞} ⊆ { N α,β = ∞} if α ≤ α ′ and β ≤ β ′ .

- Proposition 11. The following two equalities hold up to P π 2 -null sets:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- Corollary 12 (using Lemma 2.2) . Initial distributions π 1 and π 2 are distinguishable if and only if P π 2 ( E 0 ) = 0 if and only if P π 2 ( N α,β &lt; ∞ ) = 1 holds for all α, β &gt; 0 .

## 3.2.2 Likelihood Exponent -∞

▶ Example 13. Consider now a modification of Example 7 where state s 3 has the b loop removed.

<!-- image -->

The likelihood exponents are -∞ and ℓ := 1 2 ln 8 9 so that Λ = {-∞ , ℓ } . Also, P s 4 ( E -∞ ) = P s 4 ( E ℓ ) = 1 2 . Up to P s 4 -null sets the events E -∞ , b Σ ω and ba ∗ b Σ ω are equal. The event ba ∗ b Σ ω represents the right chain producing an observation which the left chain cannot produce, causing the SPRT to terminate for any α, β . Therefore conditioned on E -∞ , the random variable N α,β -1 is bounded by a geometric random variable with parameter 1 2 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We define the stopping time N ⊥ = min { n ∈ N | L n = 0 } . Note that sup α,β N α,β ≤ N ⊥ since { L n = 0 } ⊆ { L n ≤ α 1 -β } for all α, β . By the following proposition, the reverse inequality also holds.

- Proposition 14. The events E -∞ and { L n = 0 for some n } are equal. Thus, sup α,β N α,β = N ⊥ and lim α,β → 0 P π 2 ( N α,β &lt; ∞ ) = P π 2 ( E -∞ ) .

Applying this to Example 13, we obtain sup α,β E π 2 [ N α,β | E -∞ ] = 3.

## 3.2.3 Likelihood Exponent in ( -∞ , 0)

Conditioned on E ℓ where ℓ ∈ ( -∞ , 0), Theorem 9 states that N α,β scales with ln α ℓ in expectation. The following result shows that this relationship also holds P π 2 -almost surely.

- Proposition 15. Let ℓ ∈ Λ and assume ℓ ∈ ( -∞ , 0) . We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In fact, we prove the first part of Theorem 9 using Proposition 15. If there were a bound M ∈ N such that P π 2 -a.s. N α,β -ln α ≤ M , the first part of Theorem 9 would follow from Proposition 15 by the dominated convergence theorem. However this is not the case in general. Instead we show in Appendix B.4 that the set of random variables { N α,β -ln α | 0 &lt; α, β ≤ 1 2 } is uniformly integrable with respect to the measure P π 2 and then use Vitali's convergence theorem.

- Example 16. Recall Example 3, where Λ = { ℓ } . Figure 2 demonstrates the asymptotic

Figure 2 The time taken by the SPRT for 0 ≤ -ln α = -ln β ≤ 1000.

<!-- image -->

relationship in Proposition 15. Each of the 50 lines correspond to a sample run and we record the value of N α,β for 0 ≤ -ln α = -ln β ≤ 1000. From the figure we estimate -1 ℓ as 10 5 800 = 125. This coincides with the estimate given in Example 6.

We conclude from this section that the performance of the SPRT, in terms of its termination time N α,β , is tightly connected to likelihood exponents. This motivates our study of likelihood exponents in the rest of the paper.

## 4 Probability of E ℓ

In this section we aim at computing P π 2 ( E ℓ ) for a likelihood exponent ℓ . We show the following theorem.

## ▶ Theorem 17. Given an HMM and initial distributions π 1 , π 2 ,

1. one can compute P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = -∞ ) and P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = 0) in PSPACE;
2. one can decide whether P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = 0) = 0 (i.e., 0 ̸∈ Λ π 1 ,π 2 ) in polynomial time;
3. deciding whether P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = 0) = 1 , whether P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = -∞ ) = 0 , and whether P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = -∞ ) = 1 are all PSPACE-complete problems.

The following example illustrates the construction underlying the PSPACE upper bound.

## ▶ Example 18. Consider another adaption of Example 7.

<!-- image -->

If the first letter produced by s 4 is b , then L n = 3 2 for all n ∈ N . If the first two letters are ab , then L 1 = 1 2 and L n = 0 for n ≥ 2. If the first two letters are aa , then s 5 ∈ supp( e s 1 Ψ( aaw )) for all w ∈ Σ ∗ , and therefore, up to a P s 4 -null set, L n &gt; 0 holds for all n ∈ N , which implies (using Proposition 14) that there is ℓ ∈ ( -∞ , 0) such that lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = ℓ . Thus, Λ s 1 ,s 4 = {-∞ , ℓ, 0 } .

The likelihood ratio L n is 0 if and only if supp( π 1 Ψ( w n )) = ∅ . In order to track the support of π 1 Ψ( w n ), we consider the left part of the HMM as an NFA with s 1 as the initial state and its determinisation as shown in the DFA below.

<!-- image -->

Almost surely, s 4 produces a word that drives this DFA into a bottom SCC, which then determines lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n : concretely, the bottom SCC {{ s 5 } , { s 2 , s 5 }} is associated with ℓ , the bottom SCC {∅} with -∞ , and the bottom SCC {{ s 3 }} with 0.

In general, the observations need not be produced uniformly at random but by an HMM. Therefore, in the following construction, we also keep track of the 'current' state of the HMM which produces the observations. For S ⊆ Q and a ∈ Σ, define δ ( S, a ) := { q ′ ∈ Q | ∃ q ∈ S : Ψ( a ) q,q ′ &gt; 0 } . Define the Markov chain B := (2 Q × Q,T ) where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Given initial distributions π 1 , π 2 on Q as before, define an initial distribution ι on 2 Q × Q by ι ((supp( π 1 ) , q )) := ( π 2 ) q . Intuitively, the left part S of a state ( S, q ) tracks the support of π 1 Ψ( w n ), and the right part q tracks the current state of the HMM that had been initialised at a random state from π 2 . The following lemma states the key properties of this construction.

- Lemma 19. Consider the Markov chain B = (2 Q × Q,T ) defined above.
1. Every bottom SCC of B is associated with a single likelihood exponent; i.e., for every bottom SCC C ⊆ 2 Q × Q there is ℓ ( C ) ∈ [ -∞ , 0] such that for any initial distribution π 1 ∈ [0 , 1] Q and any state q 2 ∈ Q with (supp( π 1 ) , q 2 ) ∈ C we have Λ π 1 ,e q 2 = { ℓ ( C ) } .
2. Let ( S, q ) ∈ C for a bottom SCC C . If S = ∅ then ℓ ( C ) = -∞ ; otherwise, if e q and the uniform distribution on S are not distinguishable then ℓ ( C ) = 0 ; otherwise ℓ ( C ) ∈ ( -∞ , 0) .
3. We have P π 2 ( E ℓ ) = P ι ( { visit bottom SCC C with ℓ ( C ) = ℓ } ) .

All parts of the lemma rely on the observation that lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n depend only on the support of π 1 and on the support of π 2 . The first part of the lemma follows from Lévy's 0-1 law. We use this lemma for the proof of Theorem 17.1.

Proof sketch for Theorem 17.1. The Markov chain B from Lemma 19 is exponentially big but can be constructed by a PSPACE transducer, i.e., a Turing machine whose work tape (but not necessarily its output tape) is PSPACE-bounded. This PSPACE transducer can also identify the bottom SCCs. For each bottom SCC C , the PSPACE transducer also decides whether ℓ ( C ) = -∞ or ℓ ( C ) ∈ ( -∞ , 0) or ℓ ( C ) = 0, using Lemma 19.2 and the polynomial-time algorithm for distinguishability from [10]. Finally, to compute P π 2 ( E -∞ ) and P π 2 ( E 0 ), by Lemma 19.3, it suffices to set up and solve a linear system of equations for computing hitting probabilities in a Markov chain. This system can also be computed by a PSPACE transducer. Since linear systems of equations can be solved in the complexity class NC, which is included in polylogarithmic space, one can use standard techniques for composing space-bounded transducers to compute P π 2 ( E -∞ ) and P π 2 ( E 0 ) in PSPACE. ◀

Proof of Theorem 17.2. Immediate from Corollary 12 and the polynomial-time decidability of distinguishability [10]. ◀

Towards a proof of Theorem 17.3, we use the mortality problem, which asks, given a finite set of states Q , a finite alphabet Σ, and a function Φ : Σ →{ 0 , 1 } Q × Q , whether there exists a word w ∈ Σ ∗ such that Φ( w ) is the zero matrix. The mortality problem can be viewed as a special case of the NFA non-universality problem (given an NFA, does it reject some word?). Like NFA universality, the mortality problem is PSPACE-complete [22].

Concerning P π 2 ( E -∞ ) (cf. Theorem 17.3), we actually show a stronger result, namely that any nontrivial approximation of P π 2 ( E -∞ ) is PSPACE-hard. The proof is also based on the mortality problem.

▶ Proposition 20. There is a polynomial-time computable function that maps any instance of the mortality problem to an HMM and initial distributions π 1 , π 2 so that if the instance is positive then P π 2 ( E -∞ ) = 1 and if the instance is negative then P π 2 ( E -∞ ) = 0 . Thus, any nontrivial approximation of P π 2 ( E -∞ ) is PSPACE-hard.

Proof. Let ( Q, Σ , Φ) be an instance of the mortality problem. If there is q ∈ Q that indexes a zero row in ∑ a ∈ Σ Φ( a ), remove the row and column indexed by q in all Φ( a ). Thus, we can assume without loss of generality that ∑ a ∈ Σ Φ( a ) has no zero row. Construct an HMM ( Q, Σ , Ψ) so that Φ( a ) and Ψ( a ) have the same zero pattern for all a ∈ Σ. Define π 1 as a uniform distribution on Q . Define π 2 as a Dirac distribution on a fresh state that emits letters from Σ uniformly at random. Thus, if ( Q, Σ , Φ) is a positive instance of the mortality problem then P π 2 ( E -∞ ) = 1, and if ( Q, Σ , Φ) is a negative instance then P π 2 ( E -∞ ) = 0. ◀

The proof that deciding whether P π 2 ( E 0 ) = 1 is PSPACE-hard is similarly based on mortality.

## 5 Representing Likelihood Exponents

In the following we show that one can efficiently represent likelihood exponents in terms of Lyapunov exponents . The definition of Lyapunov exponents is based on the following definition.

- Definition 21. A matrix system is a triple M = ( Q, Σ , Ψ) where Q is a finite set of states, Σ is a finite set of observations, and Ψ : Σ → R Q × Q ≥ 0 specifies the transitions. (Note that an HMM is a matrix system.) A Lyapunov system is a pair S = ( M , ρ ) where M = ( Q, Σ , Ψ) is a matrix system and ρ ∈ (0 , 1] Σ is a probability distribution with full support, such that the directed graph ( Q,E ) with E = { ( q, r ) | ∑ a ∈ Σ Ψ q,r ( a ) &gt; 0 } is strongly connected.

We can identify the probability distribution ρ from this definition with the single-state HMM ( { s } , Σ , Ψ ρ ) where Ψ ρ ( a ) s,s = ρ ( a ) for all a ∈ Σ. In this way, ρ produces a random infinite word from Σ ω . We will write P ρ for the associated probability measure. The following lemma is Theorem 1 from [30].

- Lemma 22 ([30]) . Let (( Q, Σ , Ψ) , ρ ) be a Lyapunov system. Then there is λ ∈ R such that, for all π ∈ [0 , ∞ ) Q , P ρ -a.s., either π Ψ( w n ) = ⃗ 0 for some n ∈ N or the limit lim n →∞ 1 n ln ‖ π Ψ( w n ) ‖ exists and equals λ .

For a Lyapunov system S we call λ ( S ) = λ from the lemma the Lyapunov exponent defined by S . We prove the following theorem, which implies Theorem 8.

- Theorem 23. Given an HMM ( Q, Σ , Ψ) we can compute in polynomial time 2 K ≤ 2 | Q | 2 Lyapunov systems S 1 1 , S 2 1 , S 1 2 , S 2 2 , . . . , S 1 K , S 2 K such that for any initial distributions π 1 , π 2 the limit lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n exists P π 2 -a.s. and lies in

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, the HMM ( Q, Σ , Ψ) has at most | Q | 2 +1 likelihood exponents.

In the rest of the section we provide more details on the construction underlying Theorem 23. As an intermediate concept (between the given HMM and the Lyapunov systems from Theorem 23) we define generalized Lyapunov systems .

- Lemma 24. Let S = (( Q 1 , Σ , Ψ 1 ) , ( Q 2 , Σ , Ψ 2 ) , C ) be a generalized Lyapunov system.
1. There is λ ∈ R , henceforth called λ ( S ) , such that, for all π 1 ∈ [0 , ∞ ) Q 1 and all probability distributions π 2 ∈ [0 , 1] Q 2 with supp( π 1 ) × supp( π 2 ) ⊆ C , we have P π 2 -a.s. that either π 1 Ψ 1 ( w n ) = ⃗ 0 for some n ∈ N or the limit lim n →∞ 1 n ln ‖ π 1 Ψ 1 ( w n ) ‖ exists and equals λ ( S ) .
2. One can compute in polynomial time a Lyapunov system S ′ such that λ ( S ) = λ ( S ′ ) .

Let H = ( Q, Σ , Ψ) be an HMM. Let R ⊆ Q × Q be a (not necessarily bottom) SCC of the graph G H , H such that Q R := { q 2 ∈ Q | ∃ q 1 ∈ Q : ( q 1 , q 2 ) ∈ R } is a bottom SCC of the graph of ∑ a ∈ Σ Ψ( a ). We call such R a right-bottom SCC. Clearly there are at most | Q | 2 right-bottom SCCs. Towards Theorem 23 we want to define, for each right-bottom SCC R , two generalized Lyapunov systems S 1 R , S 2 R . Intuitively, S 1 R and S 2 R correspond to the numerator and the denominator of the likelihood ratio, respectively.

For a function of the form Φ : Σ → R Q × Q and P ⊆ Q we write Φ | P : Σ → R P × P for the function with Φ | P ( a )( q, r ) = Φ( a )( q, r ) for all a ∈ Σ and q, r ∈ P ; i.e., Φ | P ( a ) denotes the principal submatrix obtained from Φ( a ) by restricting it to the rows and columns indexed by P .

Define Ψ ′ ( a, r ) q,r := Ψ( a ) q,r for all a ∈ Σ and q, r ∈ Q . Then ( Q, Σ × Q, Ψ ′ ) is an HMM, which is similar to H , but which emits, in addition to an observation from Σ, also the next state. Since Q R is a bottom SCC of the graph of ∑ a ∈ Σ Ψ( a ), the HMM H 2 := ( Q R , Σ × Q R , Ψ ′ | Q R ) is strongly connected. This HMM H 2 will be used both in S 1 R and in S 2 R .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now define S 1 R := ( M 1 , H 2 , C 1 ), where M 1 := ( R, Σ × Q R , Ψ | R ) and C 1 := { (( q 1 , q 2 ) , q 2 ) | ( q 1 , q 2 ) ∈ R } . Finally, denoting by R ′ ⊆ Q R × Q R the SCC of the graph G H , H that contains the 'diagonal' vertices ( q, q ) ∈ Q R × Q R , define S 2 R := ( M 2 , H 2 , C 2 ), where M 2 := ( R ′ , Σ × Q R , Ψ | R ′ ) and C 2 := { (( q 1 , q 2 ) , q 2 ) | ( q 1 , q 2 ) ∈ R ′ } .

For sets U, V ⊆ Q × Q let U -→ G H , H V denote that there are u ∈ U and v ∈ V such that v is reachable from u in G H , H .

We are ready to state the following key technical lemma:

- Lemma 25. Given an HMM ( Q, Σ , Ψ) , let R⊆ 2 Q × Q be the set of its right-bottom SCCs, and, for R ∈ R , let S 1 R , S 2 R be the generalized Lyapunov systems defined above. Then, for any initial distributions π 1 , π 2 , the limit lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n exists P π 2 -a.s. and lies in

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof sketch. Let π 1 , π 2 be initial distributions. Very loosely speaking, we show in the appendix that on P π 2 -almost every run w there is a right-bottom SCC R which 'traps' 'most' of the mass of π 1 Ψ( w n ) and π 2 Ψ( w n ). This can be made meaningful and formal using (the cross-product systems) S 1 R , S 2 R . We then show that on P π 2 -almost every such run w , for both i = 1 , 2, the limit lim n →∞ 1 n ln ‖ π i Ψ( w n ) ‖ exists and equals λ ( S i R ) (or π 1 Ψ( w n ) = ⃗ 0 for some n ). It follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With Lemma 25 at hand, the proof of Theorem 23 is easy:

Proof of Theorem 23. As argued before, the set R of right-bottom SCCs of the given HMM has at most | Q | 2 elements. These right-bottom SCCs R and the associated generalized Lyapunov systems S 1 R , S 2 R can be computed in polynomial time. By Lemma 25 we have Λ = ⋃ π 1 ,π 2 Λ π 1 ,π 2 ⊆ {-∞} ∪ { λ ( S 1 R ) -λ ( S 2 R ) | R ∈ R} . By Lemma 24.2, for each R ∈ R one can compute in polynomial time an equivalent Lyapunov system. ◀

Theorem 23 allows us to represent the likelihood exponents of an HMM in terms of Lyapunov exponents. In general, approximating or even computing Lyapunov exponents is hard, but there are practical approximation algorithms using convex optimisation [31, 35].

## 6 Deterministic HMMs

In Sections 4 and 5 we have seen that the problems of representing/computing likelihood exponents and of computing their probabilities tend to be computationally difficult. In this section we study deterministic HMMs and show that this subclass leads to tractable problems. An HMM ( Q, Σ , Ψ) is deterministic if, for all a ∈ Σ, all rows of Ψ( a ) contain at most one non-zero entry. Thus, for all q ∈ Q and w ∈ Σ ∗ , we have | supp( e q Ψ( w )) | ≤ 1.

A useful observation is that the Markov chain B = (2 Q × Q,T ), which was defined before Lemma 19 and can be exponential in general, has only quadratic size in the deterministic case if we restrict it to the part that is reachable from initial Dirac distributions.

## ▶ Example 26. Consider the deterministic HMM ( Q, Σ , Ψ) in Figure 3(a). Let π 1 = e q 1

<!-- image -->

## Figure 3 Cross-product constructions for a deterministic HMM.

and π 2 = e q 2 (the latter is indicated by an arrow pointing to q 2 ). Then the relevant (i.e., reachable from ( { q 1 } , q 2 )) part of B is shown in Figure 3(b). Let us add back the observations that gave rise to the transitions in B , and for simplicity drop the set brackets in the left component of states. We obtain the HMM in Figure 3(c). With this HMM we may keep track of the exact likelihood ratio. For example, suppose that the word aba is emitted, so that L 3 = ‖ e q 1 Ψ( aba ) ‖ ‖ e q 2 Ψ( aba ) ‖ = 1 2 and supp( e q 1 Ψ( aba )) = { q 2 } and supp( e q 2 Ψ( aba )) = { q 1 } . Suppose the next letter is b (which is the case with probability 1 3 ). Then L 4 arises from L 3 by multiplying with Ψ q 2 ,q 1 ( b ) Ψ q 1 ,q 2 ( b ) = 2, and the supports are switched again. In terms of log-likelihoods, we have ln L 4 = ln L 3 +ln2. This motivates the Markov chain shown in Figure 3(d), where the transitions outgoing from a state ( r 1 , r 2 ) are labelled by the log-likelihood ratio of their corresponding probabilities in the HMM. The Markov chain has stationary distribution ( 2 3 , 1 3 ). By the strong ergodic theorem for Markov chains, we obtain (the irrational number)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In general there may again be several likelihood exponents, including -∞ and 0. For the rest of the section, let H = ( Q, Σ , Ψ) be a deterministic HMM. Motivated by Example 26, define an HMM A = (( Q × Q ) ∪ s ⊥ , ˆ Σ , ˆ Ψ), where s ⊥ is a fresh state, and

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Note that the embedded Markov chain of A is similar to the Markov chain B from Lemma 19: states ( { q 1 } , q 2 ) in B are called ( q 1 , q 2 ) in A , the states ( ∅ , q ) in B are subsumed by the state s ⊥ of A , and the states ( S, q ) in B with | S | &gt; 1 are not represented in A . The observations in ˆ Σ ⊆ [ -∞ , ∞ ) track the log-likelihood ratio.

- Example 27. Consider the HMM H on the left, with initial distributions π 1 = e q 1 and π 2 = e q 2 . The part of A reachable from ( q 1 , q 2 ) is shown on the right:

<!-- image -->

Here we have Λ π 1 ,π 2 = {-∞ , 0 } with P π 2 ( E -∞ ) = P π 2 ( E 0 ) = 1 2 .

Denote by ¯ A the embedded Markov chain of A . Let C ⊆ Q × Q be a non-{ s ⊥ } bottom SCC of ¯ A . Let µ ∈ [0 , 1] C denote the stationary distribution of the restriction of ¯ A on C . Define the vector ν ∈ R C of average observations by ν ( r 1 ,r 2 ) := ∑ ˆ a ∈ ˆ Σ ‖ e ( r 1 ,r 2 ) ˆ Ψ(ˆ a ) ‖ · ˆ a . By the strong ergodic theorem for Markov chains, the average observation in C equals µν ⊤ =: ℓ ( C ). Extend this definition by ℓ ( { s ⊥ } ) := -∞ . Then we have the following lemma.

- Lemma 28. Let π 1 = e q 1 and π 2 = e q 2 be initial distributions. For the Markov chain ¯ A define ι := e ( q 1 ,q 2 ) . We have P π 2 ( E ℓ ) = P ι ( { visit bottom SCC C with ℓ ( C ) = ℓ } ) .

The proof is essentially the same as in Lemma 19.3. This gives us the following result.

- Theorem 29. Given a deterministic HMM ( Q, Σ , Ψ) with initial Dirac distributions π 1 , π 2 , one can compute in polynomial time
1. Λ π 1 ,π 2 as a set of expressions of the form ∑ i x i ln y i where x i , y i ∈ Q , and
2. Pr π 2 ( E ℓ ) for each such ℓ ∈ Λ π 1 ,π 2 .

Proof sketch. The theorem follows mostly from Lemma 28, with the slight complication that for part 2 we have to check numbers of the form ∑ i x i ln y i (where x i , y i ∈ Q ) for equality. But this can be done in polynomial time as shown in [17]. ◀

## 7 Conclusions

<!-- image -->

We have shown that the performance of the SPRT is tightly connected with likelihood exponents. These numbers are related to Lyapunov exponents and can be viewed as a distance measure between HMMs. We have shown that the number of likelihood exponents is quadratic in the number of states. The associated computational problems tend to be complex (PSPACE-hard), but become tractable for deterministic HMMs. In our work we did not make any ergodicity assumptions on the HMMs, unlike in earlier works from mathematics and engineering such as [21, 8, 18, 20]. Efficient approximation of likelihood exponents, in theory or praxis, remains an open problem.

## References

- 1 P. Ailliot, C. Thompson, and P. Thomson. Space-time modelling of precipitation by using a hidden Markov model and censored Gaussian distributions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society , 58(3):405-426, 2009.
- 2 S. Akshay, H. Bazille, E. Fabre, and B. Genest. Classification among hidden Markov models. In Proceedings of the Annual Conference on Foundations of Software Technology and Theoretical Computer Science (FSTTCS) , volume 150 of LIPIcs , pages 29:1-29:14. Schloss Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2019. URL: https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.FSTTCS. 2019.29 , doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.FSTTCS.2019.29 .

- 3 M. Alexandersson, S. Cawley, and L. Pachter. SLAM: Cross-species gene finding and alignment with a generalized pair hidden Markov model. Genome Research , 13:469-502, 2003.
- 4 N. Bertrand, S. Haddad, and E. Lefaucheux. Accurate approximate diagnosability of stochastic systems. In Proceedings of Language and Automata Theory and Applications (LATA) , volume 9618 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 549-561. Springer, 2016. URL: https: //doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-30000-9\_42 , doi:10.1007/978-3-319-30000-9\_42 .
- 5 V.I. Bogachev. Measure Theory . Number v. 1 in Measure Theory. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007. URL: https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=CoSIe7h5mTsC .
- 6 A. Borodin. On relating time and space to size and depth. SIAM Journal of Computing , 6(4):733-744, 1977. URL: https://doi.org/10.1137/0206054 , doi:10.1137/0206054 .
- 7 A. Borodin, J. von zur Gathen, and J.E. Hopcroft. Fast parallel matrix and GCD computations. Information and Control , 52(3):241-256, 1982. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/ S0019-9958(82)90766-5 , doi:10.1016/S0019-9958(82)90766-5 .
- 8 B. Chen and P. Willett. Detection of hidden Markov model transient signals. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems , 36(4):1253-1268, 2000. doi:10.1109/7.892673 .
- 9 F.-S. Chen, C.-M. Fu, and C.-L. Huang. Hand gesture recognition using a real-time tracking method and hidden Markov models. Image and Vision Computing , 21(8):745-758, 2003.
- 10 T. Chen and S. Kiefer. On the total variation distance of labelled Markov chains. In Proceedings of the Joint Meeting of the Twenty-Third EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic (CSL) and the Twenty-Ninth Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS) , pages 33:1-33:10, Vienna, Austria, 2014.
- 11 G.A. Churchill. Stochastic models for heterogeneous DNA sequences. Bulletin of Mathematical Biology , 51(1):79-94, 1989.
- 12 C. Cortes, M. Mohri, and A. Rastogi. L p distance and equivalence of probabilistic automata. International Journal of Foundations of Computer Science , 18(04):761-779, 2007.
- 13 M.S. Crouse, R.D. Nowak, and R.G. Baraniuk. Wavelet-based statistical signal processing using hidden Markov models. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , 46(4):886-902, April 1998.
- 14 C. Dehnert, S. Junges, J.-P. Katoen, and M. Volk. A Storm is coming: A modern probabilistic model checker. In Proceedings of Computer Aided Verification (CAV) , pages 592-600. Springer, 2017.
- 15 R. Durbin. Biological Sequence Analysis: Probabilistic Models of Proteins and Nucleic Acids . Cambridge University Press, 1998.
- 16 S.R. Eddy. What is a hidden Markov model? Nature Biotechnology , 22(10):1315-1316, October 2004.
- 17 K. Etessami, A. Stewart, and M. Yannakakis. A note on the complexity of comparing succinctly represented integers, with an application to maximum probability parsing. ACM Trans. Comput. Theory , 6(2):9:1-9:23, 2014. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/2601327 , doi: 10.1145/2601327 .
- 18 C.-D. Fuh. SPRT and CUSUM in hidden Markov models. The Annals of Statistics , 31(3):942-977, 2003. URL: https://doi.org/10.1214/aos/1056562468 , doi:10.1214/aos/ 1056562468 .
- 19 László Gerencsér, G. Michaletzky, and Zsanett Orlovits. Stability of block-triangular stationary random matrices. Systems &amp; Control Letters , pages 620-625, 08 2008. doi:10.1016/j. sysconle.2008.01.001 .
- 20 E. Grossi and M. Lops. Sequential detection of Markov targets with trajectory estimation. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 54(9):4144-4154, 2008. doi:10.1109/TIT.2008.928261 .
- 21 B.-H. Juang and L. R. Rabiner. A probabilistic distance measure for hidden Markov models. AT&amp;T Technical Journal , 64(2):391-408, 1985. URL: https:// onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1985.tb00439.x , doi:https:// doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1985.tb00439.x .

- 22 J.-Y. Kao, N. Rampersad, and J. Shallit. On NFAs where all states are final, initial, or both. Theoretical Computer Science , 410(47):5010-5021, 2009. URL: https://www. sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304397509005477 , doi:https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.tcs.2009.07.049 .
- 23 S. Kiefer, A.S. Murawski, J. Ouaknine, B. Wachter, and J. Worrell. Language equivalence for probabilistic automata. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computer Aided Verification (CAV) , volume 6806 of LNCS , pages 526-540. Springer, 2011.
- 24 S. Kiefer and A.P. Sistla. Distinguishing hidden Markov chains. In Proceedings of the 31st Annual Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS) , pages 66-75, New York, USA, 2016. ACM.
- 25 A. Krogh, B. Larsson, G. von Heijne, and E.L.L. Sonnhammer. Predicting transmembrane protein topology with a hidden Markov model: Application to complete genomes. Journal of Molecular Biology , 305(3):567-580, 2001.
- 26 M. Kwiatkowska, G. Norman, and D. Parker. PRISM 4.0: Verification of probabilistic real-time systems. In Proceedings of Computer Aided Verification (CAV) , volume 6806 of LNCS , pages 585-591. Springer, 2011.
- 27 R. Langrock, B. Swihart, B. Caffo, N. Punjabi, and C. Crainiceanu. Combining hidden Markov models for comparing the dynamics of multiple sleep electroencephalograms. Statistics in medicine , 32, 08 2013. doi:10.1002/sim.5747 .
- 28 C.M. Papadimitriou. Computational complexity . Addison-Wesley, 1994.
- 29 A. Paz. Introduction to Probabilistic Automata (Computer Science and Applied Mathematics) . Academic Press, Inc., Orlando, FL, USA, 1971.
- 30 V.Yu. Protasov. Asymptotics of products of nonnegative random matrices. Functional Analysis and Its Applications , 47:138-147, 2013.
- 31 V.Yu. Protasov and R.M. Jungers. Lower and upper bounds for the largest Lyapunov exponent of matrices. Linear Algebra and its Applications , 438(11):4448-4468, 2013. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002437951300089X , doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.laa.2013.01.027 .
- 32 L.R. Rabiner. A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE , 77(2):257-286, 1989.
- 33 M.P. Schützenberger. On the definition of a family of automata. Information and Control , 4(2):245-270, 1961.
- 34 Theodore J. Sheskin. Conditional mean first passage time in a markov chain. International Journal of Management Science and Engineering Management , 8(1):32-37, 2013. doi:10. 1080/17509653.2013.783187 .
- 35 D. Sutter, O. Fawzi, and R. Renner. Bounds on Lyapunov exponents via entropy accumulation. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 67(1):10-24, 2021. doi:10.1109/TIT.2020. 3026959 .
- 36 W.-G. Tzeng. A polynomial-time algorithm for the equivalence of probabilistic automata. SIAM J. Comput. , 21(2):216-227, April 1992.
- 37 A. Wald. Sequential Tests of Statistical Hypotheses. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 16(2):117 - 186, 1945. URL: https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177731118 , doi:10.1214/ aoms/1177731118 .
- 38 A. Wald and J. Wolfowitz. Optimum character of the sequential probability ratio test. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 19(3):326-339, 1948. URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/ 2235638 .

## A Proofs and Additional Material on Section 2

<!-- image -->

## A.1 Proof of Lemma 2

- Lemma 2. Let π 1 , π 2 be initial distributions.

1. lim n →∞ L n exists P π 2 -almost surely and lies in [0 , ∞ ) .
2. lim n →∞ L n = 0 P π 2 -almost surely if and only if π 1 and π 2 are distinguishable.

Proof. The first part is [10, Proposition 6]. Towards the second part, the following equalities hold.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, lim n →∞ min { L n , 1 } = 0 ⇐⇒ lim n →∞ L n = 0.

## A.2 Details on Example 3

In [27] they derived two embedded Markov chains with the following transition matrices:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

.

Their HMMs are state-labelled. For each state i , they fit a Dirichlet probability density function (pdf) f i describing the distribution of observations in ∆ 3 emitted at state i . The pdfs of diseased and healthy individuals were so similar that they used the same pdf for both HMMs. Thus the two HMMs differ only in the transition probabilities.

Since ∆ 3 is infinite and in this paper we assume finite observation alphabets, we partition the simplex into the sets

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for k = 1 , . . . , 5. The set U k contains the points in ∆ 3 most likely to be produced in state k . We assign a letter a k for each U k , and define a set of observations Σ = { a 1 , . . . , a 5 } . Thus, the probability of producing letter a k from state i is given as O i,k = ∫ U k f i ( x ) dx . We estimated the entries of O using a numerical Monte Carlo technique. We generated 100,000 samples from all 5 Dirichlet distributions in their paper which yielded the estimate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since we consider transition labelled HMMs, we define transition functions Ψ 1 , Ψ 2 with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

◀

for m = 1 , 2. Let Q = [10]. We construct the HMM ( Q, Σ , Ψ) where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each a ∈ Σ.

Let π 1 and π 2 be the Dirac distributions on states 1 and 6 respectively. These initial distributions correspond to healthy and diseased individuals started from sleep state 1.

## B Proofs from Section 3

## B.1 Proof of Proposition 4

- Proposition 4. Suppose π 1 and π 2 are distinguishable. Let α, β ∈ (0 , 1) . By choosing A = ln α 1 -β and B = ln 1 -α β , we have P π 1 (SPRT α,β = π 2 ) ≤ α and P π 2 (SPRT α,β = π 1 ) ≤ β .

Proof. We wish to control the probabilities P π 2 ( L N &gt; B ) and P π 1 ( L N &lt; A ) by choosing suitable values of A and B . Write N := N α,β and let W 1 n = { w ∈ Σ ω | A ≤ L m ( w ) ≤ B ∀ m&lt;n,L n &lt; A } then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, we may derive P π 2 ( L N &gt; b ) ≥ 1 b P π 1 ( L N &gt; b ) so it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to guarantee the error bounds α = P π 1 ( L N &lt; A ) and β = P π 2 ( L N &gt; B ) . ◀

## B.2 Proof of Theorem 9

- Theorem 9 (Generalised Wald Formula) . Let ℓ be a likelihood exponent and let π 1 and π 2 be initial distributions.
2. If ℓ = 0 then there exist α, β &gt; 0 such that E π 2 [ N α,β | E ℓ ] = ∞ .
1. If ℓ ∈ ( -∞ , 0) then E π 2 [ N α,β | E ℓ ] ∼ ln α ℓ ( as α, β → 0) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We will prove Theorem 9 later using results in this section

- Proposition 11. The following two equalities hold up to P π 2 -null sets:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, lim α,β → 0 P π 2 ( N α,β = ∞ ) = P π 2 ( E 0 ) .

Towards the proof of Proposition 11 we use the following which is Theorem 5 from [24].

▶ Lemma 30. Let ( Q, Σ , Ψ) be an HMM and let π 1 and π 2 be initial distributions. If π 1 and π 2 are distinguishable then there is c &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Proposition 11. By Lemma 19 there are a set of bottom SCCs Z in B . Such that for all Z ∈ Z we have ℓ ( Z ) = { 0 } . Let π ∈ [0 , 1] Q and r ∈ Q such that (supp π, r ) ∈ Z . Suppose that π and δ r are distinguishable then by Lemma 30 both P δ r ( L ∗ n ≥ 1) ≤ 2 exp ( -c 2 18 n ) and P π ( L ∗ n ≤ 1) ≤ 2 exp ( -c 2 18 n ) where L ∗ n is the likelihood ratio started from initial distributions π and δ r . Fix -c 2 18 &lt; α ≤ 0 and define the event W n = { 1 &gt; L ∗ n ≥ e nα } . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = 0) = 0 which contradicts Λ = { 0 } . Hence π and δ r are not distinguishable and so P δ r -almost surely, we have lim n →∞ L ∗ n &gt; 0. By conditioning on the events { a 1 r 1 · · · a n r n ∈ (Σ Q ) ∗ | supp π 1 Ψ( w ) = supp π, r n = r } it follows that E 0 = { lim n →∞ L n &gt; 0 } . We now show the second equality. If lim n →∞ L n &gt; 0 then for α, β small enough L n never crosses the SPRT bounds. Hence, we have { lim n →∞ L n &gt; 0 } ⊆ ⋃ α,β { N α,β = ∞} . For the converse inclusion, suppose that N α,β = ∞ for some α, β this would contradict lim n →∞ L n = 0 since then N α,β would be P π 2 -almost surely finite. ◀

## B.3 Proof of Proposition 14

- Proposition 14. The events E -∞ and { L n = 0 for some n } are equal. Thus, sup α,β N α,β = N ⊥ and lim α,β → 0 P π 2 ( N α,β &lt; ∞ ) = P π 2 ( E -∞ ) .

Proof. The right-to-left inclusion is clear. Towards the converse, let p min &gt; 0 be the minimum non-zero entry in π 1 and all Ψ( a ) where a ∈ Σ. Suppose that L n &gt; 0 holds for all n . Then we have for all n ≥ 1:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 23:20 On the Sequential Probability Ratio Test in Hidden Markov Models

̸

Thus, lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = -∞ . We have sup α,β N α,β ≤ N ⊥ . Also,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all n ∈ N and so sup α,β N α,β = N ⊥ . The final claim follows because { N ⊥ &lt; ∞} = E -∞ . ◀

## B.4 Proof of Proposition 15

Towards the proof of Proposition 15 we first show the following lemma.

- Lemma 31. The set of random variables { N α,β -ln α | 0 &lt; α, β ≤ 1 2 } is uniformly integrable with respect to the measure P π 2 ; i.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We use the following technical lemma which is Lemma 9 from [24].

- Lemma 32. There is a number c &gt; 0 , computable in polynomial time, such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Lemma 31. By Proposition 15, conditioned on E ℓ we have lim α,β → 0 N α,β ln α exists P π 2 -almost surely. Hence, the convergence is also in P π 2 -measure. Therefore, by the Vitali convergence theorem [5] it is sufficient to show that the set of random variables { N α,β ln α | α, β ∈ (0 , 1 2 ) } is uniformly integrable conditioned on E ℓ . In fact, because

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is sufficient to check the uniform integrability condition without conditioning on E ℓ .

For fixed M ≥ 144 | Q | c 2 , write m α = ⌊ -M ln α 2 | Q | ⌋ . It follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, m α ≥ M ln 2 2 | Q | -1. The following holds

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as M →∞ where the fourth inequality follows by Lemma 32. Hence, Equation (3) must hold. ◀

## ▶ Proposition 15. Let ℓ ∈ Λ and assume ℓ ∈ ( -∞ , 0) . We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Since Ψ n min ≤ L n ≤ Ψ -n min it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence N α,β → ∞ P π 2 -almost surely as α, β → 0. Consider the case ℓ k ∈ ( -∞ , 0). Let U α,β = { w ∈ Σ ω | ln L N α ≤ ln α 1 -β } . The set ⋂ α,β ∈ (0 , 1] U c α,β ⊆ { L n is unbounded } . Hence, lim α,β → 0 ✶ U α,β = 1 P π 2 -almost surely. Conditioned on E ℓ it follows that

And so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

◀

## C Proofs from Section 4

## C.1 Proof of Lemma 19

- Lemma 19. Consider the Markov chain B = (2 Q × Q,T ) defined above.
1. Every bottom SCC of B is associated with a single likelihood exponent; i.e., for every bottom SCC C ⊆ 2 Q × Q there is ℓ ( C ) ∈ [ -∞ , 0] such that for any initial distribution π 1 ∈ [0 , 1] Q and any state q 2 ∈ Q with (supp( π 1 ) , q 2 ) ∈ C we have Λ π 1 ,e q 2 = { ℓ ( C ) } .
2. Let ( S, q ) ∈ C for a bottom SCC C . If S = ∅ then ℓ ( C ) = -∞ ; otherwise, if e q and the uniform distribution on S are not distinguishable then ℓ ( C ) = 0 ; otherwise ℓ ( C ) ∈ ( -∞ , 0) .
3. We have P π 2 ( E ℓ ) = P ι ( { visit bottom SCC C with ℓ ( C ) = ℓ } ) .

Proof. 1. Let C ⊆ 2 Q × Q be a bottom SCC of B . Let π, π ′ be distributions on Q and q, q ′ ∈ Q such that (supp( π ) , q ) , (supp( π ′ ) , q ′ ) ∈ C . Suppose that ℓ ∈ Λ π,e q ; i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It suffices to show that Λ π ′ ,e q ′ = { ℓ } , i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Lévy's 0-1 law it suffices to show that for all paths q ′ a 1 q 1 · · · a m q m with P e q ′ ( q ′ a 1 q 1 · · · a m q m (Σ Q ) ω ) &gt; 0 there is y &gt; 0 with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let u = q ′ a 1 q 1 · · · a m q m be a path with P e q ′ ( u (Σ Q ) ω ) &gt; 0. Since C is a bottom SCC of B , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, letting v = q ′ a 1 q 1 · · · a m q m · · · a k q k , with k ≥ m , be an arbitrary extension of u with P e q ′ ( v (Σ Q ) ω ) &gt; 0 and supp( π ′ Ψ( a 1 · · · a m · · · a k )) = supp( π ) and q k = q , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Concerning the event in (6), by (4) and since supp( π ′ Ψ( a 1 · · · a k )) = supp( π ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Concerning the event in (7), it follows from Lemma 2.1 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, since P e q ′ ( q ′ a 1 q 1 · · · a k q k (Σ Q ) ω ) &gt; 0, we have q ∈ supp( e q ′ Ψ( a 1 · · · a k )) and so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, continuing the inequality chain from above, we conclude that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

proving (5), as desired.

2. Let ( S, q ) ∈ C for a bottom SCC C . If S = ∅ then we may define ℓ ( C ) = -∞ . Otherwise, let π S denote the uniform distribution on S . Suppose that π S and e q are not distinguishable. By Corollary 12 it follows that 0 ∈ Λ π S ,e q . Using part 1 we obtain ℓ ( C ) = 0. Finally, suppose that π S and e q are distinguishable. By Corollary 12 it follows that 0 ̸∈ Λ π S ,e q . Since C does not contain any states of the form ( ∅ , q ′ ), by Proposition 14 we have -∞̸∈ Λ π S ,e q . Using part 1 we obtain ℓ ( C ) ∈ ( -∞ , 0).
3. We define a function f that maps paths of H to paths of B as follows. Set f ( q 0 a 1 q 2 · · · a m q m ) := ( S 0 , q 0 )( S 1 , q 1 ) · · · ( S m , q m ) where S 0 = supp( π 1 ) and δ ( S i -1 , a i ) = S i for all 1 ≤ i ≤ m . The Markov chain B is constructed so that for any path v = ( S 0 , q 0 )( S 1 , q 1 ) · · · ( S m , q m ) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let C be any bottom SCC, and let ℓ = ℓ ( C ). Define the event

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So we have P ι ( { visit C } ) = P π 2 ( V C ), and it suffices to show that P π 2 ( E ℓ | V C ) = 1. Let u = q 0 a 1 q 1 · · · a m q m be a path with P π 2 ( u (Σ Q ) ω ) &gt; 0 such that f ( u ) ends in C , say in ( S, q ) ∈ C , with q = q m . Thus, supp( π 1 Ψ( a 1 · · · a m )) = S and q ∈ supp( π 2 Ψ( a 1 · · · a m )). It suffices to show that P π 2 ( E ℓ | u (Σ Q ) ω ) = 1. We have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Concerning the event in (8), by part 2 and since supp( π 1 Ψ( a 1 · · · a m )) = S , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Concerning the event in (9), it follows from Lemma 2.1 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, since q ∈ supp( π 2 Ψ( a 1 · · · a m )), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, the events in (8) and (9) occur P e q -a.s. We conclude that P π 2 ( E ℓ | u (Σ Q ) ω ) = 1, as desired. ◀

We can finally prove Theorem 9. We use the fact that conditional expected time of visiting a state in a Markov chain is finite. This follows directly from the main result of [34].

Proof of Theorem 9. The first point follows by Lemma 31 and Proposition 15 using Vitali's convergence theorem. The second point follows from Proposition 11. Finally, by Proposition 14 we have sup α,β E π 2 [ N α,β | E -∞ ] ≤ E π 2 [ N ⊥ | E -∞ ] &lt; ∞ since by Lemma 19 L n = 0 if and only if we visit a bottom SCC C such that ( ∅ , q ) ∈ C for some q ∈ Q . ◀

## C.2 Proof of Theorem 17

Below we refer to the complexity class NC, the subclass of P comprising those problems solvable in polylogarithmic time by a parallel random-access machine using polynomially many processors; see, e.g., [28, Chapter 15]. To prove membership in PSPACE in a modular way, we use the following pattern:

- Lemma 33. Let P 1 , P 2 be two problems, where P 2 is in NC. Suppose there is a reduction from P 1 to P 2 implemented by a PSPACE transducer, i.e., a Turing machine whose work tape (but not necessarily its output tape) is PSPACE-bounded. Then P 1 is in PSPACE.

Proof. Note that the output of the transducer is (at most) exponential. Problems in NC can be decided in polylogarithmic space [6, Theorem 4]. Using standard techniques for composing space-bounded transducers (see, e.g., [28, Proposition 8.2]), it follows that P 1 is in PSPACE. ◀

Now we prove the following theorem from the main body.

- Theorem 17. Given an HMM and initial distributions π 1 , π 2 ,
1. one can compute P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = -∞ ) and P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = 0) in PSPACE;
2. one can decide whether P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = 0) = 0 (i.e., 0 ̸∈ Λ π 1 ,π 2 ) in polynomial time;
3. deciding whether P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = 0) = 1 , whether P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = -∞ ) = 0 , and whether P π 2 (lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n = -∞ ) = 1 are all PSPACE-complete problems.
- Proof. 1. The Markov chain B from Lemma 19 is exponentially big but can be constructed by a PSPACE transducer, i.e., a Turing machine whose work tape (but not necessarily its output tape) is PSPACE-bounded. The DAG (directed acyclic graph) structure, including the SCCs, of a graph can be computed in NL, which is included in NC. Using the pattern of Lemma 33, the DAG structure of the Markov chain B can be computed in PSPACE. Thus, there is a PSPACE transducer that computes both B and its DAG structure. For each bottom SCC C , the PSPACE transducer also decides whether ℓ ( C ) = -∞ or ℓ ( C ) ∈ ( -∞ , 0) or ℓ ( C ) = 0, using Lemma 19.2 and the polynomial-time algorithm for

distinguishability from [10]. Finally, to compute P π 2 ( E -∞ ) and P π 2 ( E 0 ), by Lemma 19.3, it suffices to set up and solve a linear system of equations for computing hitting probabilities in a Markov chain. This system can also be computed by a PSPACE transducer. Linear systems of equations can be solved in NC [7, Theorem 5]. Using Lemma 33 again, we conclude that one can compute P π 2 ( E -∞ ) and P π 2 ( E 0 ) in PSPACE.

2. This part was proved in the main body.
3. The claims concerning P π 2 ( E -∞ ) follow from part 1 and Proposition 20. Consider the problem whether P π 2 ( E 0 ) = 1. By part 1, it is in PSPACE. Towards PSPACE-hardness we reduce again from mortality. Let ( Q, Σ , Φ) be an instance of the mortality problem. Let Q ′ := Q ∪ { q ⊥ , q 2 } for fresh states q ⊥ , q 2 , and let Σ ′ := Σ ∪ { $ } for a fresh letter $. Obtain Φ ′ from Φ by adding, for every q ∈ Q ′ , a $-labelled transition to q ⊥ , and an a -labelled loop from q 2 to itself for all a ∈ Σ. Construct an HMM ( Q ′ , Σ ′ , Ψ) so that Φ ′ ( a ) and Ψ( a ) have the same zero pattern for all a ∈ Σ ′ (e.g., use uniform distributions). See Figure 4. Let π 1 ∈ [0 , 1] Q ′ be the uniform distribution on Q (i.e., ( π 1 ) q ⊥ = ( π 1 ) q 2 = 0),
3. Figure 4 Illustration of the reduction from mortality to P π 2 ( E 0 ) &lt; 1. In this example, Φ( ab ) is the zero matrix. Accordingly, we have P π 2 ( E 0 ) &lt; 1, as L 2 ( abw ) = 0 for all w ∈ Σ ω .

<!-- image -->

and let π 2 be the Dirac distribution on q 2 .

Suppose ( Q, Σ , Φ) is a positive instance of the mortality problem. Let v ∈ Σ ∗ such that Φ( v ) is the zero matrix. Then L | v | ( vw ) = 0 holds for all w ∈ Σ ω . It follows that P π 2 ( E -∞ ) &gt; 0 and so P π 2 ( E 0 ) &lt; 1.

Conversely, suppose ( Q, Σ , Φ) is a negative instance of the mortality problem. The word produced from q 2 contains P e q 2 -a.s. the letter $, i.e., is of the form u $ v for u ∈ Σ ∗ and v ∈ (Σ ∪ { $ } ) ω . Since ( Q, Σ , Φ) is a negative instance, it follows that supp( π 1 Ψ( u $)) = { q ⊥ } = supp( e q ⊥ Ψ( u $)). Thus, lim n →∞ L n &gt; 0. Hence, P π 2 ( E 0 ) = 1. ◀

## D Proofs from Section 5

For ease of reading, we repeat some definitions from Section 5.

First, for two matrix systems M 1 = ( Q 1 , Σ , Ψ 1 ) and M 2 = ( Q 2 , Σ , Ψ 2 ) with finite Q 1 , Q 2 , Σ and transitions Ψ 1 , Ψ 2 : Σ → R Q × Q ≥ 0 we define the directed graph G M 1 , M 2 =

( Q 1 × Q 2 , E ) such that there is an edge from ( q 1 , q 2 ) to ( r 1 , r 2 ) if there is a ∈ Σ with Ψ 1 ( a ) q 1 ,r 1 &gt; 0 and Ψ 2 ( a ) q 2 ,r 2 &gt; 0.

A generalized Lyapunov system is a triple S = ( M , H , C ) where M = ( Q 1 , Σ , Ψ 1 ) is a matrix system and H = ( Q 2 , Σ , Ψ 2 ) is a strongly connected HMM and C ⊆ Q 1 × Q 2 is a bottom SCC of G M , H . Given a generalized Lyapunov system, one can efficiently compute an 'equivalent' Lyapunov system:

- Lemma 24. Let S = (( Q 1 , Σ , Ψ 1 ) , ( Q 2 , Σ , Ψ 2 ) , C ) be a generalized Lyapunov system.
1. There is λ ∈ R , henceforth called λ ( S ) , such that, for all π 1 ∈ [0 , ∞ ) Q 1 and all probability distributions π 2 ∈ [0 , 1] Q 2 with supp( π 1 ) × supp( π 2 ) ⊆ C , we have P π 2 -a.s. that either π 1 Ψ 1 ( w n ) = ⃗ 0 for some n ∈ N or the limit lim n →∞ 1 n ln ‖ π 1 Ψ 1 ( w n ) ‖ exists and equals λ ( S ) .
2. One can compute in polynomial time a Lyapunov system S ′ such that λ ( S ) = λ ( S ′ ) . The following is the key technical lemma that we use to prove Lemma 24.
- Lemma 34. Let H = ( Q, Σ , Ψ) be an HMM and define Ψ ′ as in the main text such that H ′ = ( Q, Σ Q, Ψ ′ ) is an HMM. One can compute in polynomial time a finite set ∆ , a probability distribution ρ ∈ (0 , 1] ∆ and for each r 0 ∈ Q (a representation of) a mapping κ r 0 : ∆ → (Σ Q ) with the following property.

Extend κ r 0 to (Σ Q ) + inductively. For each c ∈ ∆ and w ∈ ∆ + we let κ r 0 ( c w ) = ( a 1 r 1 ) κ r 1 ( w ) where a 1 r 1 = κ r 0 ( c ) . Then, for each word w ∈ (Σ Q ) + we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P e r 0 refers to the measure on words produced by H ′ with initial distribution e r 0 .

Proof. Let τ : [Σ Q ] → Σ Q be a bijection which we view as an arbitrary ordering on Σ Q and write τ ( k ) = a k q k . For each r ∈ Q we define a function κ r : [0 , 1) → Σ Q

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where for notational purposes, ∑ 0 k =1 Ψ( a k ) p,q k = 0. For each r ∈ Q , since ∑ | Q × Σ | k =1 Ψ( a k ) r,q k = 1 it follows that κ r is well defined on the interval [0 , 1). Let ∆ be the set of atomic elements of the finite σ -algebra σ { κ -1 r ( { aq } ) | r, q ∈ Q,a ∈ Σ } . The set ∆ is a finite partition of [0 , 1) and consists of intervals [ α, β ) where α, β ∈ [0 , 1] ∩ Q . We demonstrate the construction of ∆ using the example HMM below.

<!-- image -->

In the diagram below we give a representation of the functions κ q 1 , κ q 2 , κ q 3 and also the resulting set ∆. The first three horizontal stacks of rectangles each represent a partition of the interval [0 , 1) into the values taken by κ q i for i = 1 , 2 , 3. The bottom horizontal stack of rectangles represent the intervals in ∆.

1

<!-- image -->

One can compute in polynomial time the endpoints of all intervals [ α, β ) ∈ ∆. For any a ∈ ∆ and r ∈ Q the image κ r ( a ) contains exactly one element. Therefore, for each r ∈ Q we may define a function κ r : ∆ → Σ Q such that κ r ([ α, β )) = κ r ( x ) for all x ∈ [ α, β ). We define the probability distribution ρ on ∆ by ρ [ α,β ) = β -α for all [ α, β ) ∈ ∆. The distribution ρ is computable in polynomial time.

In our example above ∆ = { [0 , 0 . 2) , [0 . 2 , 0 . 4) , [0 . 4 , 0 . 6) , [0 . 6 , 0 . 7) , [0 . 7 , 0 . 8) , [0 . 8 , 1) } and κ q 1 is defined piecewise by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let r 0 ∈ Q . We may extend the mapping κ r 0 to a word c w ∈ ∆ + inductively by letting κ r 0 ( c w ) = ( a 1 r 1 ) κ r 1 ( w ) where ( a 1 r 1 ) = κ r 0 ( c ). We now prove (10) by induction on the length of the word. Let a 1 r 1 ∈ Σ Q then by the definition of κ r 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now assume Equation (10) holds for all words of length n -1 ∈ N . Then for a word a 1 r 1 w ∈ (Σ Q ) n

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by the independence of P ρ which completes the induction.

◀

For π 1 ∈ [0 , ∞ ) Q 1 and π 2 ∈ [0 , 1] Q 2 we write π 1 × π 2 ∈ [0 , ∞ ] Q 1 × Q 2 for the vector ( π 1 × π 2 ) ( i,j ) := ( π 1 ) i ( π 2 ) j .

Proof of Lemma 24. By Lemma 34, since ( Q 2 , Σ , Ψ 2 ) is an HMM, we may compute in polynomial time a finite set ∆, a distribution ρ ∈ [0 , 1] ∆ and for each r ∈ Q 2 a mapping κ r : ∆ → Σ Q 2 with the property stated in Lemma 34. Then, we define ˜ Ψ : ∆ → [0 , 1] Q 1 × Q 2 such that for all ( q 0 , r 0 ) , ( q, r ) ∈ Q 1 × Q 2 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We extend ˜ Ψ to the mapping ˜ Ψ : ∆ ∗ → [0 , 1] ( Q 1 × Q 2 ) × ( Q 1 × Q 2 ) by ˜ Ψ( a 1 · · · a n ) = ˜ Ψ( a 1 ) · · · ˜ Ψ( a n ).

Let r 0 ∈ Q 2 , a 1 · · · a n ∈ ∆ ∗ and κ r 0 ( a 1 · · · a n ) = a 1 r 1 · · · a n r n . By the definition of the extension of κ r 0 , it follows that ∧ n i =1 κ r i -1 ( a i ) = a i r i . For all q 0 , . . . q n ∈ Q 1 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and therefore by the definition of ˜ Ψ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose there is an edge in G ( Q 1 , Σ , Ψ 1 ) , ( Q 2 , Σ , Ψ 2 ) between two states ( q 0 , r 0 ) , ( q, r ) ∈ C then there is a ∈ Σ such that Ψ 1 ( a ) q 0 ,q &gt; 0 and Ψ 2 ( a ) r 0 ,r &gt; 0. Hence, P e r 0 ( a (Σ Q ) ω ) &gt; 0 and so by Lemma 34 there exists a ∈ κ -1 r 0 ( { ar } ). It follows that ˜ Ψ( a ) ( q 0 ,r 0 ) , ( q,r ) &gt; 0. Therefore, since C is a bottom SCC of G ( Q 1 , Σ , Ψ 1 ) , ( Q 2 , Σ , Ψ 2 ) , we have that the graph of the matrix system ( C, ∆ , ˜ Ψ | C ) is strongly connected and therefore (( C, ∆ , ˜ Ψ | C ) , ρ ) is a Lyapunov system. Moreover, for any π 1 ∈ [0 , 1] Q 1 and π 2 ∈ [0 , 1] Q 2 such that supp( π 1 ) × supp( π 2 ) ⊆ C we have that ‖ ( π 1 × π 2 ) ˜ Ψ( a 1 · · · a n ) ‖ = ‖ ( π 1 × π 2 ) | C ˜ Ψ | C ( a 1 · · · a n ) ‖ where ( π 1 × π 2 ) | C is the truncation of the vector π 1 × π 2 to C . Further, we have for all x ∈ R and n ∈ N

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining the above equalities with Lemma 22 we have that there exists a λ ∈ [ -∞ , 0] which does not depend on π 1 or π 2 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

◀

## D.1 Proof of Lemma 25

Towards a proof of Lemma 25 we make some additional definitions. A reducible Lyapunov system is a Lyapupov system (( Q, Σ , Ψ) , ρ ) except that the graph G = ( Q,E ) with E = { ( q, r ) | ∑ a ∈ Σ Ψ q,r ( a ) &gt; 0 } is not necessarily strongly connected. For sets U, V ⊆ Q we write U → G V if there is u ∈ U and v ∈ V such that v is reachable from u in G .

We use the following technical lemmas.

- Theorem 35 (Fürstenberg-Kesten theorem) . Let (( Q, Σ , Ψ) , µ ) be a reducible Lyapunov system then there exists λ ∈ [ -∞ , ∞ ) such that P ρ -a.s. we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following lemma is Theorem 1.1 from [19].

- Lemma 36. Let Σ be a finite set of observations, ρ ∈ [0 , 1] Σ and let (( Q 1 , Σ , Ψ 1 ) , ρ ) , (( Q 2 , Σ , Ψ 2 ) , ρ ) be reducible Lyapunov systems. By Theorem 35 there exists λ 1 , λ 2 ∈ [ -∞ , ∞ ) such that for i = 1 , 2 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, let Ψ 12 : Σ → [0 , 1] Q 1 × Q 2 specify transition from Q 1 to Q 2 and define Ψ ∗ : Σ → [0 , 1] ( Q 1 ∪ Q 2 ) × ( Q 1 ∪ Q 2 ) block-wise as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows (( Q 1 ∪ Q 2 , Σ , ˙ Ψ) , ρ ) is a reducible Lyapunov system and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By generalising Lemma 36

- Lemma 37. Let (( Q, Σ , Ψ) , ρ ) be a reducible Lyapunov system and suppose ( Q,E ) has strongly connected components C 1 , . . . , C K . Let 0 be the zero matrix and let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For each k ∈ [ K ] , G k := (( C k , Σ , Ψ | C k ) , ρ ) is a Lyapunov system. We have that P ρ -almost surely,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ⃗ 1 is the row vector all of whose entries are 1 . Further, for any initial distribution π ∈ [0 , 1] Q , we have that P ρ -almost surely,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We first prove (15). By Theorem 35 for i ∈ [ N ] there exists λ i ∈ [ -∞ , ∞ ) such that P ρ -a.s.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the case λ i = -∞ then by Lemma 22 we have that P ρ -a.s. there is a word u ∈ Σ ∗ such that ⃗ 1Ψ | C i ( u ) = ⃗ 0 hence C i ∈ Z .

In the case λ i ∈ R then by Lemma 22 λ i = λ ( G i ). Also { w ∈ Σ ω | ∃ n ∈ N : ⃗ 1Ψ | C i ( w n ) = ⃗ 0 } is P ρ -null set and therefore empty because ρ has full support and therefore all finite words have positive probability of being produced. It follows that C i / ∈ Z .

We proceed by induction. In the case K = 1, the cases described previously immediately imply that (15) holds. Now we assume the lemma holds for some K = m ∈ N . We prove this implies the theorem holds for K = m +1.

Let (( Q, Σ , Ψ) , ρ ) be a reducible Lyapunov system such that ( Q,E ) has strongly connected components C 1 , . . . , C m +1 . We have that (( C 1 ∪ · · · ∪ C m , Σ , Ψ | C 1 ∪···∪ C m ) , ρ ) is a reducible Lyapunov system so by the induction hypothesis, P ρ -a.s. we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the case that λ m +1 ∈ R then λ ( G m +1 ) = λ m +1 and C m +1 / ∈ Z . Therefore, λ m +1 ∈ { λ ( G i ) | i ∈ [ m +1] , C i / ∈ Z} .

In the case λ m +1 = -∞ , then C m +1 ∈ Z and clearly { λ ( G i ) | i ∈ [ m ] , C i / ∈ Z} = { λ ( G i ) | i ∈ [ m +1] , C i / ∈ Z} . So by Lemma 36 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now prove (16). Like in Section 4, for S ⊆ Q and a ∈ Σ, define δ ′ ( S, a ) = { q ′ ∈ Q | ∃ q ∈ S : Ψ( a ) q,q ′ &gt; 0 } . Then we define the Markov chain B ′ := (2 Q , T ′ ) where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let D be the set of bottom SCCs that are reachable in B ′ from the initial state supp π . We fix D ∈ D . We may order the C 1 · · · C K such that for some k ∈ [ K ]

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i ∈ [ k ]. It is clear that S D ⊆ C 1 ∪ · · · ∪ C k . We show the reverse inclusion. Let i ∈ [ k ] then there is q 0 ∈ C i ∩ S D . For any q ′ ∈ C i there is a word a 1 q 1 · · · a m q m ∈ (Σ Q ) ∗ such that q m = q ′ and Ψ q i -1 ,q i ( a i ) &gt; 0 for all i ∈ [ m ]. It follows that q ′ ∈ S D and therefore S D = C 1 ∪ · · · ∪ C k .

We have that P ρ -a.s. lim n →∞ 1 n ln ‖ ⃗ 1Ψ | S D ( w n ) ‖ exists and equals

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by (15). In particular there is q ∈ S D such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For all S 0 ∈ D there is a sequence a 1 S 1 · · · a n S n ∈ (Σ D ) ∗ such that q ∈ S n and S i = δ ( S i -1 , a i ) for all i = 1 , . . . , n . We have that β S 0 := ∏ n i =1 ρ ( a i ) &gt; 0. Write β = min { β S 0 | S 0 ∈ D } . Let π ′ ∈ [0 , 1] Q be such that supp π ′ ∈ D . Then for any u ∈ Σ ∗ we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence by Lévy's 0-1 law we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last equality follows because D ∈ D is reachable from supp π in B ′ which implies that for any C i ⊆ S D we have supp π → G C i .

We now relax the dependence on D . For any D ∈ D , let F D = { w ∈ Σ ω | ∃ n ∈ N : supp ( π Ψ( w n )) ∈ D } . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Write Θ = { λ ( G i ) | supp π → G C i , C i / ∈ Z} ∪ {-∞} then P ρ -a.s. we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following is also repeated from Section 5.

Let H = ( Q, Σ , Ψ) be an HMM. Let R ⊆ Q × Q be a (not necessarily bottom) SCC of the graph G H , H such that Q R := { q 2 ∈ Q | ∃ q 1 ∈ Q : ( q 1 , q 2 ) ∈ R } is a bottom SCC of the graph of ∑ a ∈ Σ Ψ( a ). We call such R a right-bottom SCC. Clearly there are at most | Q | 2 right-bottom SCCs. Towards Theorem 23 we want to define, for each right-bottom SCC R , two generalized Lyapunov systems S 1 R , S 2 R . Intuitively, S 1 R and S 2 R correspond to the numerator and the denominator of the likelihood ratio, respectively.

For a function of the form Φ : Σ → R Q × Q and P ⊆ Q we write Φ | P : Σ → R P × P for the function with Φ | P ( a )( q, r ) = Φ( a )( q, r ) for all a ∈ Σ and q, r ∈ P ; i.e., Φ | P ( a ) denotes the principal submatrix obtained from Φ( a ) by restricting it to the rows and columns indexed by P .

◀

Define Ψ ′ ( a, r ) q,r := Ψ( a ) q,r for all a ∈ Σ and q, r ∈ Q . Then ( Q, Σ × Q, Ψ ′ ) is an HMM, which is similar to H , but which emits, in addition to an observation from Σ, also the next state. Since Q R is a bottom SCC of the graph of ∑ a ∈ Σ Ψ( a ), the HMM H 2 := ( Q R , Σ × Q R , Ψ ′ | Q R ) is strongly connected. This HMM H 2 will be used both in S 1 R and in S 2 R .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now define S 1 R := ( M 1 , H 2 , C 1 ), where M 1 := ( R, Σ × Q R , Ψ | R ) and C 1 := { (( q 1 , q 2 ) , q 2 ) | ( q 1 , q 2 ) ∈ R } . Finally, denoting by R ′ ⊆ Q R × Q R the SCC of the graph G H , H that contains the 'diagonal' vertices ( q, q ) ∈ Q R × Q R , define S 2 R := ( M 2 , H 2 , C 2 ), where M 2 := ( R ′ , Σ × Q R , Ψ | R ′ ) and C 2 := { (( q 1 , q 2 ) , q 2 ) | ( q 1 , q 2 ) ∈ R ′ } .

For sets U, V ⊆ Q × Q let U -→ G H , H V denote that there are u ∈ U and v ∈ V such that v is reachable from u in G H , H .

▶ Lemma 25. Given an HMM ( Q, Σ , Ψ) , let R⊆ 2 Q × Q be the set of its right-bottom SCCs, and, for R ∈ R , let S 1 R , S 2 R be the generalized Lyapunov systems defined above. Then, for any initial distributions π 1 , π 2 , the limit lim n →∞ 1 n ln L n exists P π 2 -a.s. and lies in

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let H = ( Q, Σ , Ψ) and observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider a word a 1 r 1 a 2 r 2 · · · ∈ (Σ Q ) ω such that P π 2 ( Qa 1 r 1 · · · a m r m (Σ Q ) ω ) &gt; 0 for all m ∈ N and further, there exists a k ∈ N such that r k ∈ P where P ⊆ Q is a bottom SCC of H . We write u = a 1 r 1 · · · a k r k and w = a k +1 r k +1 a k +2 r k +2 · · · ∈ (Σ Q ) ω . Let µ i = π i Ψ( u ) × e r k for i = 1 , 2. Recall the definition of Ψ. We have that for any n &gt; k that ‖ π i Ψ( a 1 · · · a k + n ) ‖ = ‖ π i Ψ( a 1 · · · a k )Ψ( a k +1 · · · a k + n ) ‖ = ‖ µ i Ψ( w n ) ‖ for i = 1 , 2. We fix u and consider words w produced by H with initial distribution e r k . We have that P e r k -almost surely if the limits exist,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since lim n →∞ n k + n = 1.

By Lemma 34 there is a finite set ∆, distribution ρ ∈ (0 , 1] ∆ and mapping κ r k : ∆ + → (Σ Q ) + such that P ρ ( { κ -1 r k ( w n } )∆ ω ) = P e r k ( w n (Σ Q ) ω ) for all n ∈ N . Let S ⊆ Q × Q . It follows that for each n ∈ N and A ∈ [0 , 1] S × S we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let C be the set of SCCs of G H , H . We define σ : C → P ( Q ) such that σ ( R ) = { q ∈ Q | ∃ p ∈ Q s.t. ( p, q ) ∈ R } . Recall that r k ∈ P and P is a bottom SCC. Thus, for all i = 1 , 2, n ∈ N and ( p, q ) ∈ supp ( µ i Ψ( w n )) we have q ∈ P . Therefore, for all R ∈ C

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider the composition Ψ ◦ κ r k : ∆ + → [0 , 1] ( Q × Q ) × ( Q × Q ) . For any R ∈ σ -1 ( P ) we have that trivially

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, (( R, ∆ , Ψ | R ◦ κ r k ) , ρ ) is a Lyapunov system and recall that S 1 R = (( R, Σ P, Ψ | R ) , ( P, Σ P, Ψ ′ | P ) , C 1 R ) is a generalized Lyapunov system where C 1 R = { (( q 1 , q 2 ) , q 2 ) | ( q 1 , q 2 ) ∈ R } . Let V = { q ∈ Q | ( q, r k ) ∈ R } and υ ∈ [0 , 1] V . Since supp( υ × e r k ) ×{ r k } ∈ C 1 R by Lemma 24 the limit lim n →∞ 1 n ln ‖ ( υ × e r k )Ψ | R ( w n ) ‖ exists P e r k -almost surely and equals either λ ( S 1 R ) or -∞ . Then, by (17) with S = R we have for all x ∈ [ -∞ , 0] that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall the definition of L . The following series of equalities hold:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now focus on the case i = 2. Since P is an SCC, there is a unique right-bottom SCC P ′ that contains the states { ( p, p ) | p ∈ P } . Let U ′ be another right-bottom SCC in the set σ -1 ( P ) / L . Since U ′ is an SCC and not in L we have that ‖ ∑ ( s,r ) ∈ U ′ ( e s × e r )Ψ | U ′ ( w n ) ‖ &gt; 0 for all n ∈ N . Therefore P e r -a.s. by Lemma 24,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows that there is some ( s, r ) ∈ U ′ such that P e r (lim n →∞ 1 n ln ‖ ( e s × e r )Ψ | U ′ ( w n ) ‖ = λ ( S 1 U ′ )) &gt; 0. Let U = { q ∈ Q | ∃ p ∈ Q s.t. ( q, p ) ∈ U ′ } . Then s ∈ U , r ∈ P and ( r, r ) ∈ P ′ .

Hence, with P e r -probability greater than 0 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that λ ( S 1 P ′ ) ≥ λ ( S 1 U ′ ). We have that ( r k , r k ) ∈ supp µ 2 and so P e r k -almost surely we have ‖ ( e r k × e r k )Ψ P ′ ( w n ) ‖ &gt; 0 for all n ∈ N . By (18), it follows that P e r k -a.s. we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, recalling the definition of S 2 R we have P π 2 -almost surely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since S 2 R = S 1 P ′ when σ ( R ) = P .

Recall that for any R ∈ R the right-bottom SCC R ′ is such that { ( p, p ) | p ∈ σ ( R ) } ⊆ R ′ We may now relax the dependence on u and P . We have that supp π 1 × supp π 2 → G H , H (supp π 1 Ψ( a 1 · · · a k )) ×{ r k } for any a 1 r 1 · · · a k r k ∈ (Σ Q ) + where P π 2 ( Qa 1 r 1 · · · a k r k (Σ Q ) ω ) &gt; 0. Therefore for all R ∈ R

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally we have up to a P π 2 -null set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the lemma follows.

## E Proofs from Section 6

- Theorem 29. Given a deterministic HMM ( Q, Σ , Ψ) with initial Dirac distributions π 1 , π 2 , one can compute in polynomial time

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

◀

1. Λ π 1 ,π 2 as a set of expressions of the form ∑ i x i ln y i where x i , y i ∈ Q , and
2. Pr π 2 ( E ℓ ) for each such ℓ ∈ Λ π 1 ,π 2 .

Proof. In a Markov chain, one can compute the stationary distribution and hitting probabilities in polynomial time by solving a linear system of equations. Thus, the numbers ℓ ( C ) defined before Lemma 28 can be computed in polynomial time. Both parts of the theorem follow then from Lemma 28. A slight complication is that for part 2, for an ℓ = ∑ i x i ln y i ∈ Λ π 1 ,π 2 , in order to compute P π 2 ( E ℓ ) we have to sum the hitting probabilities for all C with ℓ = ℓ ( C ). To select those C we have to compare numbers of the form ∑ i x i ln y i where x i , y i ∈ Q , and it is not immediately obvious how to do that. However, one can compare two such numbers for equality in polynomial time as shown in [17]. ◀