## Comparison theorem and stability under perturbation of transition rate matrices for regime-switching processes ∗

Jinghai Shao †

November 30, 2022

## Abstract

A comparison theorem for state-dependent regime-switching diffusion processes is established, which enables us to control pathwisely the evolution of the statedependent switching component simply by Markov chains. Moreover, a sharp estimate on the stability of Markovian regime-switching processes under the perturbation of transition rate matrices is provided. Our approach is based on the elaborate constructions of switching processes in the spirit of Skorokhod's representation theorem varying according to the problem being dealt with. In particular, this method can cope with the switching processes in an infinite state space and not necessarily being of birth-death type. As an application, some known results on ergodicity and stability of state-dependent regime-switching processes can be improved.

keywords Comparison theorem, Regime-switching diffusions, Ergodicity, Perturbation theory

AMS MSC 2010 : 60J27, 60J60, 60K37

∗ Supported in part by NNSFs of China (No. 12271397, 11831014) and National Key R&amp;D Program of China (No. 2022YFA1000033)

† Center for Applied Mathematics, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China. Email: shaojh@tju.edu.cn.

## 1 Introduction

Stochastic processes with regime-switching have been extensively studied in many research fields due to their characterization of random changes of the environment between different regimes; see, for instance, [3, 8, 12, 16, 17, 18, 21, 27, 30] and references therein. Especially, when the switching of the environment depends on the state of the studied dynamic system, called usually state-dependent regime-switching process(for short, RSP ), the properties of such system become much more complicated due to their intensive interaction. The monograph [27] has introduced various properties of the state-dependent RSP , which tells us that it is a very challenging task to provide easily verifiable conditions to justify the ergodicity and stability of the state-dependent RSP s.

In view of the relatively abundant results on state-independent RSP s, it is natural to simplify a state-dependent RSP into a state-independent one. So, one needs to establish some kind of comparison theorem for state-dependent RSP s. Such idea has been used in many works. For instance, Cloez and Hairer [3] used this idea to study the exponential ergodicity in the Wasserstein distance for birth-death type state-dependent RSP s based on an application of weak Harris' theorem. The state-dependent switching process and the constructed state-independent process constitute a coupling process. However, the constructed coupling process in [3] is not a Markovian process any longer and needs modification in applications (cf. [3, Remark 3.10]). Majda and Tong used the same method to study the exponential ergodicity in the setting of piecewise deterministic processes with regime-switching and applied their results to the tropical stochastic lattice models. In [19], the author constructed a Markovian coupling for the birth-death type state-dependent RSP s, then, in [21], together with Xi, extended it to a general case under the condition of the existence of an order-preserving coupling for Markov chains(cf. [21, Lemma 2.7]). This result is not constructive, and the verification of Assumption 2.6 in [21] is not easy in application.

Accordingly, our first purpose is to establish a comparison theorem for more general state-dependent RSP s, especially to get rid of the restriction of birth-death type switching and to be applicable to switching processes in an infinitely countable state space. Our comparison theorem is in the pathwise sense. As a consequence, the corresponding results in [3, 11, 19, 21] can be generalized after certain necessary modification.

For state-dependent RSP s, the study of Feller property and smooth dependence of initial values is of great interest. It is quite different to that of Markovian RSP s and diffusion processes, which has been noted in the works [16], [26], [27, Chapter 2] and references therein. For instance, in [16, Theorem 3.1], the continuous differentiability of continuous component of RSP s w.r.t. the initial value in L p with p ∈ (0 , 1) was proved under suitable regular conditions. Moreover, restricted to a bounded set, certain gradient estimate associated with the continuous component of RSP s can be derived from [16, Theorem 4.1]. Recently, together with K. Zhao, we studied in [23] the continuous dependence of initial value for state-dependent RSP s, which are solutions to certain stochastic functional differential equations with regime-switching. As shown in [23], the key point is the estimate for the following quantity

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, it was also shown in [22] that the quantity Θ( t, Λ , ˜ Λ) plays a crucial role in the study of stability of RSP s under the perturbation of Q -matrix. However, the estimate in [22, 23] does not work for switching processes in an infinite state space, which needs to be generalized from the viewpoint of application. Besides, the estimation of Θ( t, Λ , ˜ Λ) develops the classical perturbation theory for Markov chains(cf. [13, 14, 15, 28]). See more details in Section 3 below.

Our improvements in the previous two concerned problems are all based on a new observation on Skorokhod's representation theorem for the jumping processes. The approach of using Skorokhod's representation theorem to study RSP s has been widely used in the literature; see, e.g. [8], [16], [17], [22], [27] etc. The basic idea of Skorokhod's representation theorem is to represent the switching process in terms of an integral with respect to a Poisson random measure based on a sequence of constructed intervals on the real line. The length of each interval is determined by ( q ij ( x )). However, the impact of the construction and sort order of the intervals on the obtained jumping processes has been neglected in all the previous works. In this work, we shall show that it is necessary to carry out different construction of the intervals to solve different problems. This will be illustrated through establishing the comparison theorem and studying the stability problem under the perturbation of Q -matrix.

This work is organized as follows. In Section 2, we first provide the construction of the coupling process, then establish the comparison theorem for state-dependent RSP s. As an illustrative example, we use this comparison theorem to study the stability of statedependent RSP s. In Section 3, we also first provide the construction of the coupling process (Λ t , ˜ Λ t ) in (1.1), the key point of which is the construction of intervals used in Skorokhod's representation theorem. Then we provide an estimate of (1.1) which improves the one given in [22].

## 2 Comparison theorem for state-dependent RSPs

Let S = { 1 , 2 , . . . , N } with 2 ≤ N ≤ ∞ . So, S is allowed to be an infinitely countable state space by taking N = ∞ . Consider

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where b : R d × S → R d , σ : R d ×S → R d × d satisfying suitable conditions and ( B t ) is a d -dimensional Brownian motion. Here (Λ t ) is a jumping process on S satisfying

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

provided δ &gt; 0. When ( q ij ( x )) does not depend on x , ( X t , Λ t ) is called a state-independent RSP or a Markovian RSP . Meanwhile, when ( q ij ( x )) does depend on x , ( X t , Λ t ) is called a state-dependent RSP , which is used to model the phenomenon that the dynamic system ( X t ) can impact the change rate of the random environment in applications. There is an intensive interaction between ( X t ) and (Λ t ) for the state-dependent RSP s, and hence it is quite desirable to develop a stochastic comparison theorem to simplify such system. Since ( X t ) can be simplified, if necessary, by using classical comparison theorem for diffusion processes(cf. [9, 10]) or for L´ evy process (cf. [25]) performed separatively in each fixed regime i , hence the key point is to control the jumping component (Λ t ) whose transition rates vary with ( X t ).

Theorem 2.1 Assume that SDEs (2.1) and (2.2) admit a solution ( X t , Λ t ) for any initial value ( X 0 , Λ 0 ) = ( x, i ) ∈ R d ×S . Suppose that ( q ij ( x )) is conservative for every x ∈ R d and satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(Q2) ∀ i ∈S , there is a c i ∈ N such that q ij ( x ) = 0 , ∀ j ∈ S with | j -i | &gt; c i , ∀ x ∈ R d .

Define

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then there exist two continuous-time Markov chains (Λ ∗ t ) and ( ¯ Λ t ) on S with the transition rate matrix ( q ∗ ij ) and (¯ q ij ) respectively such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.2 (i) For birth-death type ( q ij ( x )) , i.e. q ij = 0 for | i -j | ≥ 2 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This coincides with the Markov chain constructed in [19].

- (ii) There are many works to investigate the existence of solution to (2.1) and (2.2) ; see, [27] under Lipschitzian condition, [17] under non-Lipschitzian condition, [30] under integrable condition.
- (iii) Assumption (Q1) ensures that there exists a unique Markov chain (Λ ∗ t ) t ≥ 0 (( ¯ Λ t ) t ≥ 0 ) associated with ( q ∗ ij ) ((¯ q ij ) respectively ) ; see, e.g. [2, Corollary 2.24].

As mentioned in the introduction, this comparison theorem can help us to generalize the corresponding results in [3], [11], [19], [21]. Precisely, one can remove Assumption 3.1 of birth-death type restriction in [3] and generalizes [3, Theorems 3.3, 3.4] there. Also, the exponential convergence results, [11, Theorems 2.1, 2.3], for two stochastic lattice models for moist tropical convection in climate science studied can be generalized by considering more general jumping processes besides birth-death processes used in [11].

As an illustrative example, we apply Theorem 2.1 to investigate the stability of statedependent RSP s. The stability of stochastic processes with regime-switching has been studied in many works. We refer the readers to the monographs [12, 27] for surveys on this topic, and also to [20] for some recent results on the stability of state-dependent RSP s based on M -matrix theory, Perron-Frobenius theorem and the Friedholm alternative.

Theorem 2.3 Let ( X x,i t , Λ x,i t ) be the solution to (2.1) and (2.2) with initial value ( x, i ) . Assume that the conditions of Theorem 2.1 hold and S is a finite state space. Suppose that there exist a function ρ ∈ C 2 ( R d ) , constants β i ∈ R for i ∈ S , constants p, ˜ c &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where L ( i ) ρ ( x ) = d ∑ k =1 b k ( x, i ) ∂ k ρ ( x )+ 1 2 d ∑ k,l =1 a kl ( x, i ) ∂ k ∂ l ρ ( x ) , a kl ( x, i ) = d ∑ j =1 σ kj ( x, i ) σ lj ( x, i ) . Through reordering S , without loss of the generality we may assume that ( β i ) i ∈S is nondecreasing. Let (¯ q ij ) be defined as in Theorem 2.1. Assume that (¯ q ij ) is irreducible, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where (¯ µ i ) i ∈S denotes the unique invariant measure of (¯ q ij ) . Then there exists p ′ ∈ (0 , p ] such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.4 In Theorem 2.3, via condition (2.4) , we characterize the stability property of the process ( X t ) at each fixed state i ∈ S by a constant β i ∈ R , which is measured under a common Lyapunov type function ρ . Then, under the help of the auxiliary Markov chain (¯ q ij ) , the average condition (2.5) yields the stability of ( X t ) .

Next, we provide an example to illustrate the application of Theorem 2.3.

## Example 2.1 Consider

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where (Λ t ) is a jumping process on S = { 1 , 2 , 3 } with the state-dependent transition rate matrix ( q ij ( x )) i,j ∈S given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Take ρ ( x ) = x 2 in (2.4) to yield β i = 2 b i + σ 2 i , i ∈ S . By virtue of Theorem 2.1, direct calculation yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and its unique invariant probability measure is (¯ µ 1 , ¯ µ 2 , ¯ µ 3 ) = ( 1 6 , 7 30 , 3 5 ) . Then, by Theorem 2.3, if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the process ( X t ) is stable in the sense that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.1 Construction of the coupling process

In the spirit of Skorokhod [24] in the study of processes with rapid switching, Ghosh et al. [8] presented a representation of Markov chain in terms of a Poisson random measure and studied the stability of RSP s. This kind of representation theorem was widely applied in the study of various properties of RSP s.

Before giving out our precise representation theorem for establishing the comparison theorem, let us recall the construction in [8] for comparison. When S = { 1 , 2 , . . . , N } is a finite state space, let ∆ ij ( x ) be a consecutive, left-closed, right-open intervals on [0 , ∞ ), each having length q ij ( x ). More precisely,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and so on. Define a function h : R d ×S × R → R by

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, (Λ t ) is a jumping process satisfying (2.2) as a solution to the following SDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( X t ) satisfies (2.1), N (d t, d z ) is a Poisson random measure with intensity d t × d z .

Now we shall introduce our construction of the coupling process in three steps. We assume the conditions (Q1) (Q2) hold in this section.

Step 1 . Construction of intervals For every fixed x ∈ R d and i, j ∈ S , we define the intervals Γ ij ( x ), Γ ∗ ij and ¯ Γ ij in the following way. Starting from 0, the intervals Γ ij ( x ) for j &lt; i are defined on the positive half line, while Γ ij ( x ) for j &gt; i are defined on the negative half line. Precisely,

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where c i is given in (Q2). Analogously, by replacing q ij ( x ) in (2.9) and (2.10) with ¯ q ij and q ∗ ij respectively, we can define the intervals ¯ Γ ij and Γ ∗ ij . Here and in the sequel, we put Γ ij ( x ) = ∅ if q ij ( x ) = 0 and Γ ii ( x ) = ∅ for the convenience of notation. Such convention applies also to intervals ¯ Γ ij and Γ ∗ ij .

The sort order of intervals Γ ij ( x ), ¯ Γ ij and Γ ∗ ij according to j &gt; i or j &lt; i will play important role in the argument below. The assumption on the existence of c i is used here such that on the negative half line, the first interval starting from 0 is associated with the state j ∈ S satisfying j = max { k ∈ S ; k &gt; i, q ik ( x ) &gt; 0 } . The common starting point 0 of Γ ij ( x ), ¯ Γ ij and Γ ∗ ij for different i ∈ S also plays an important role in our construction of the order-preservation coupling process.

Step 2. Explicit construction of Poisson random measure Here we use the method of [10, Chapter I, p.44] to present a concrete construction of the Poisson random measure. Denote by m (d x ) the Lebesgue measure over R . Let ξ k , k = 1 , 2 , . . . , be random variables taking values in [ -K 0 , K 0 ] with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and τ k , k = 1 , 2 , . . . , be non-negative random variables such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume that all ξ k , τ k , k ≥ 1, are mutually independent. Let ζ n = τ 1 + τ 2 + · · · + τ n , n = 1 , 2 , . . . , and ζ 0 = 0, (2.11)

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ p ( s ) := p ( s ) -p ( s -). The finiteness of K 0 means that lim n →∞ ζ n = ∞ a.s., that is, during each finite time period, there exists a finite number of jumps for ( p ( t )). Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As a consequence, p ( t ) and N p (d t, d z ) are respectively a Poisson point process and a Poisson random measure with intensity measure d t m (d x ). It is always assumed that p ( t ) is independent of the Brownian motion ( B t ) in (2.1).

Step 3. Construction of coupling processes Define three functions ϑ , ϑ ∗ and ¯ ϑ as follows:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, consider the following SDEs:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and Λ 0 = ¯ Λ 0 = Λ ∗ 0 = i 0 ∈ S . Here recall that ( X t ) satisfies (2.1).

The fact that the solution to (2.14) satisfies (2.2) can be checked directly using the property that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we verify ( ¯ Λ t ) and (Λ ∗ t ) given by (2.15) and (2.16) are the jumping processes associated with (¯ q ij ) and ( q ∗ ij ) respectively. According to Itˆ o's formula, for any bounded measurable function F on S ,

Denoted by ¯ P t F ( i 0 ) = E F ( ¯ Λ t ) with ¯ Λ 0 = i 0 , we obtain from above integral equation that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

where ¯ QF ( i ) = ∑ j ∈S ,j = i ¯ q ij ( F ( j ) -F ( i )), and the corresponding differential form is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Due to (Q1), the Kolmogorov forward equation (2.18) admits a unique solution, and hence ( ¯ Λ t ) is a continuous-time Markov chain with transition rate matrix ¯ Q = (¯ q ij )(cf. [2, Corollary 2.24]). The corresponding conclusion for (Λ ∗ t ) can be proved by the same method.

Consequently, through the previous three steps, we have completed the construction of the desired Markov chains (Λ ∗ t ) and ( ¯ Λ t ) used in Theorem 2.1. □

Remark 2.5 Our constructed coupling process ( X t , Λ t , Λ ∗ t , ¯ Λ t ) in terms of a common Poisson random measure presents a good order relation, and is not restricted to be of birth-death type. Let us compare it with the coupling constructed in [3](presented in the argument of [3, Lemma 3.9]). In [3], the constructed Markov chain ( L t ) and the original jumping process (Λ t ) will move independently from each other until the time when they meet together. During their meeting time, the coupling is designed in a way such that Λ t ≥ L t . After the meeting time, the two processes Λ t and L t locate at different states and then they move independently once again until the next meeting time. However, the restriction of jumping in a birth-death type could ensure that Λ t ≥ L t after the meeting time.

## 2.2 Proofs of the comparison theorem and its application

Let us first present the proof of the comparison theorem.

Proof of Theorem 2.1 . We only give out the proof of Λ t ≤ ¯ Λ t for all t ≥ 0 almost surely, and the corresponding solution for Λ t and Λ ∗ t can be proved in the same way.

According to the representation of (2.14) and (2.15), the processes (Λ t ) and ( ¯ Λ t ) have no jumps outside D p . So, we only need to prove

By the definition of ¯ q ij , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the sort order of the intervals Γ ij ( x ) and ¯ Γ ij , it holds that, for i &lt; k ∈ S ,

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assuming i = Λ ζ n -1 ≤ ¯ Λ ζ n -1 = k for some n ≥ 1, we are going to show that Λ ζ n ≤ ¯ Λ ζ n , whose proof is divided into four cases.

(i) If Λ ζ n = m ≥ k , by (2.14) and the construction of the Poisson random measure N p (d t, d z ), one gets

By (2.20), this yields that

Together with (2.15), this means that ¯ Λ ζ n must jump into the set { l ∈ S ; l ≥ m } . Whence, Λ ζ n ≤ ¯ Λ ζ n .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(ii) If Λ ζ n = m with i &lt; m &lt; k , (2.14) implies

ξ n ∈ Γ im ( X ζ n ) , and hence ξ n &lt; 0 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

≤ ≤ ¯ Λ ¯ Λ ′

So,

which means that ¯ Λ ζ n cannot jump into the set { j ∈ S ; j ≤ k } , and hence Λ ζ n ≤ ¯ Λ ζ n . But, if Λ ζ n = m with m i and ¯ Λ ζ n i , this situation is studied in the next case (iii).

(iii) If Λ ζ n = m with m ≤ i and ¯ Λ ζ n &gt; i , it holds obviously that Λ ζ n ≤ ζ n . If ζ n = m ≤ i , (2.15) and (2.21) yield that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Whence, Λ ζ n jumps into { j ∈ S ; j ≤ m ′ } . Hence, it still holds Λ ζ n ≤ ¯ Λ ζ n .

(iv) If ¯ Λ ζ n = m with i &lt; m &lt; k , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So, it holds Λ ζ n ≤ i &lt; m = ¯ Λ ζ n .

Consequently, if Λ ζ n -1 ≤ ¯ Λ ζ n -1 , we have Λ ζ n ≤ ¯ Λ ζ n for n ≥ 1. By induction on n , we prove (2.19) holds and finally

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof of Theorem 2.1 is complete.

Proof of Theorem 2.3 For each i ∈ S , denote by ( X ( i ) t ) the solution to the SDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and ( P ( i ) t ) its associated semigroup. According to Itˆ o's formula and Gronwall's inequality, it follows from (2.4) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ζ n , N p (d t, d z ), and ( ¯ Λ t ) be defined as those in the beginning of this section. Let E N p [ · ] = E [ · | F N p ] be the conditional expectation w.r.t. the σ -algebra F N p = σ { p ( s ); s ≥ 0 } . The mutual independence of N p and ( B t ) yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Theorem 2.1, β Λ s ≤ β ¯ Λ s a.s.. Furthermore, since ( ¯ Λ s ) depends only on N p , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, as ¯ Λ s ≡ ¯ Λ ζ n -1 for s ∈ [ ζ n -1 , ζ n ) by (2.15),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Setting m t := sup { n ∈ N ; ζ n ≤ t } , deducing recursively, we obtain

Consequently,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and further by H¨ older's inequality, for p ′ ∈ (0 , 1],

According to [1, Propositions 4.1, 4.2], (2.5) yields that there exist p ′ ∈ (0 , 1], C, η &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining this with (2.4), (2.24), the desired conclusion follows immediately. □

## 3 Perturbation of continuous-time Markov chain

Given two transition rate matrices Q = ( q ij ) i,j ∈S and ˜ Q = (˜ q ij ) i,j ∈S on S = { 1 , 2 , . . . , N } , 2 ≤ N ≤ ∞ , there are two continuous-time Markov chains (Λ t ) and ( ˜ Λ t ) associated with Q and ˜ Q respectively with Λ 0 = ˜ Λ 0 , the purpose of this section is to estimate the following quantity

̸

in terms of the difference between Q and ˜ Q . The quantity (3.1) plays important role in the study of regime-switching processes. For instance, in [22], it is the key point to show the stability of the process ( X t ) under the perturbation of Q . In [19], it is the basis for proving the Euler-Maruyama's approximation of state-dependent regimeswitching processes. Also, as mentioned in the introduction, it was used in [23] to study the smooth dependence of initial values for state-dependent RSP s. In this section, we shall improve the estimate of the quantity (3.1), and apply it to develop the perturbation theory associated with the regime-switching processes.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the classical perturbation theory of Markov chains, there are a lot of researches on the upper estimation of the total variation distance ‖ P t -˜ P t ‖ var between the semigroups P t and ˜ P t associated with (Λ t ) and ( ˜ Λ t ) respectively; see, e.g. [4, 13, 14, 15] and references therein. For instance, Mitrophanov [13, 14] showed that

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall that the ℓ 1 -norm of a matrix A = ( a ij ) i,j ∈S is defined by ‖ A ‖ ℓ 1 = sup i ∈S ∑ j ∈S | a ij | , and the total variation distance between any two probability measures µ and ν on S is defined by

However, the estimate (3.2) and its method to establishing it is not applicable to (3.1). Moreover, notice that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

where the infimum is over all couplings ( ξ, ˜ ξ ) with marginal distribution P t and ˜ P t respectively. The method in [4, 13, 14] cannot be extended to dealing with (3.1) because the total variation norm plays an essential role in establishing (3.2). In [22], we provided an estimate of (3.1) through constructing a coupling process (Λ t , ˜ Λ t ) using Skorokhod's representation, where the intervals were constructed as in [8]. Consequently, [22] can only cope with jumping processes in a finite state space and the obtained estimate is not satisfactory especially for large time t .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this section, we shall use the following assumptions:

- (H1) K 0 := sup { q i , ˜ q j ; i, j ∈ S} &lt; ∞ .

(H2) There exists a c 0 ∈ N such that q ij = ˜ q ij = 0 for all i, j ∈ S with | j -i | &gt; c 0 .

Theorem 3.1 Assume that (H1) and (H2) hold, then there exist processes (Λ t ) and ( ˜ Λ t ) such that for all t &gt; 0

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

which implies that

Also, for all t &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 3.2 In [22, Lemma 2.2], given two transition rate matrices Q and ˜ Q on a finite state space S = { 1 , 2 , . . . , N } , a coupling process (Λ t , ˜ Λ t ) was constructed and satisfies

̸

There is an important drawback in (3.6) , that is the appearance of N 2 on the right-hand side of (3.6) , which restricts the application of this result to the Markov chains on an infinite state space. This drawback has been removed in Theorem 3.1, and further a lower estimate of 1 t ∫ t 0 P (Λ s = ˜ Λ s )d s is provided in current work.

̸

## 3.1 Construction of the coupling process

In this part, we shall introduce the coupling process (Λ t , ˜ Λ t ) on S ×S that will be used in the proof of Theorem 3.1. Similar to Section 2, it is also constructed using the Skorokhod representation theorem. However, there are several subtle differences to fit the current purpose.

Step 1 . Construction of intervals Due to (H1) and (H2), we let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for 2 ≤ k ≤ c 0 +1, and

By (H1), q 1 k ≤ K 0 and ˜ q 1 k ≤ K 0 , and hence

Moreover,

For n ≥ 2, define

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define, similarly, ˜ Γ nk by replacing q nk with ˜ q nk in (3.9). Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

So Γ nk ⊂ U n and ˜ Γ nk ⊂ U n for all k, n ∈ S with | k -n | ≤ c 0 . Compared with the intervals constructed in [8], the starting point of each interval Γ nk constructed above does not depend on any other intervals Γ ij , i, j ∈ S with i = n , j = k . We construct Γ nk in this way in order to remove the term N 2 appeared in (3.6).

̸

Step 2. Construction of Poisson random measure Denote by m (d x ) the Lebesgue measure over the real line R . Let ξ ( k ) i , k, i = 1 , 2 , . . . , be U k -valued random variables with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and τ ( k ) i , k, i = 1 , 2 , . . . , be non-negative random variables such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume all ξ ( k ) i , τ ( k ) i to be mutually independent. Denote by ζ ( k ) n = τ ( k ) 1 + . . . + τ ( k ) n for k, n ≥ 1 and ζ ( k ) 0 = 0 for k ≥ 1. We define

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As a consequence, we get a Poisson random process (˜ p ( t )) and its associated Poisson random measure N ˜ p (d t, d x ) with intensity measure d t m (d x ).

The construction of (˜ p ( t )) is more complicated than that of ( p ( t )) in Section 2, which is caused by the fact that the union of Γ nk for n, k = 1 , 2 , . . . may be unbounded.

Step 3. Construction of coupling processes Define two functions ϑ , ˜ ϑ associated with Γ ij and ˜ Γ ij , i, j ∈ S , by

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Then, the desired coupling process (Λ t , ˜ Λ t ) is given as the solutions of the following SDEs:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 3.3 The coupling process (Λ t , ˜ Λ t ) constructed above is different to the basic coupling of (Λ t ) and ( ˜ Λ t ) (see [2, p.11]). Indeed, The transition rate matrix ¯ Q = (¯ q ( ij )( kℓ ) ) i,j,k,ℓ ∈S of (Λ t , ˜ Λ t ) is given as follows: for i, j, k, r ∈ S , which are different to each other,

̸

The transition rate matrix of the basic coupling is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i, j, k ∈ S , and i, j not necessary to be different.

By the previous construction of Γ ij , ˜ Γ ij , and N p (d t, d x ), the following properties hold: (i) The processes (Λ t ) and ( ˜ Λ t ) could jump only when the Poisson process (˜ p ( t )) jumps.

̸

## 3.2 Proof of Theorem 3.1 and its application

- (ii) If Λ t = ˜ Λ t = k , for δ &gt; 0, Λ t + δ = ˜ Λ t + δ may happen only when ζ ( k ) n ∈ [ t, t + δ ) and ξ ( k ) n ∈ Γ kj ∆ ˜ Γ kj for some n ≥ 1, where A ∆ B := ( A \ B ) ∪ ( B \ A ) for Borel sets A , B .

## Proof of Theorem 3.1 .

- (i) Upper estimate For δ &gt; 0, let

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we use the representation (3.15) and (3.16) of (Λ t ) and ( ˜ Λ t ) to estimate α ( δ ). Noting that Λ 0 = ˜ Λ 0 = i 0 for some i 0 ∈ S , by (3.14), (3.15) and (3.16), we have

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since H := m ( U i 0 ) = 2 c 0 K 0 &lt; ∞ , there exists a C &gt; 0 independent of the choice of i 0 ∈ S such that

Moreover,

and hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

In light of (3.19) and (3.20), we get

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, let us consider the time 2 δ .

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

where we have used the time-homogeneity of Markov chain (Λ t , ˜ Λ t ) to get the estimate P (Λ 2 δ = ˜ Λ 2 δ ∣ Λ δ = ˜ Λ δ ) ≤ α ( δ ). Analogously, using the time-homogeneity of (Λ t ) and ( ˜ Λ t ),

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Deducing inductively, we get

̸

Therefore, for t &gt; 0, setting K ( t ) = [ t δ ] , t k = kδ for k ≤ K and t K +1 = t , by (3.22),

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Using the inequality e -x ≤ 1 -x + 1 2 x 2 for x ≥ 0, we further get

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Therefore, the upper estimates (3.3) and (3.4) have been proved.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (ii) Lower estimate We will estimate the difference by induction.

Due to (3.19),

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

Then

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

where we have used (3.21) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since m ( U i ∪ U j ) ≤ M = 4 c 0 K 0 for all i, j ∈ S . Setting

γ ( δ ) = e -Mδ -δ ‖ Q -˜ Q ‖ ℓ 1 -Cδ 2 , which is positive when δ is small enough , we rewrite the previous estimate in the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Repeating this procedure, we obtain that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by (3.26), for K ∈ N ,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

Since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

by taking K = [ t δ ] in the previous estimation and letting δ downward to 0, we finally get

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

□

Next, we consider the application of Theorem 3.1. First, let us consider its application to the perturbation theory on the invariant probability measures of continuous time Markov chains on infinite state spaces. There were many works on the perturbation theory of Markov chains, such as, [15], [28] and references therein. We refer the readers to the recent review paper Zeifman, Korolev and Satin [29] for more discussions on this topic.

Let P t and ˜ P t denote the semigroup w.r.t. the transition rate matrix Q and ˜ Q respectively. Assume that there exist invariant probability measures π = ( π i ) i ∈S and ˜ π = (˜ π i ) i ∈S associated respectively with P t and P t , i.e.

˜ Corollary 3.4 Assume (H1) and (H2) hold. Suppose that there exists a function η : [0 , ∞ ) → [0 , 2] satisfying ∫ ∞ 0 η s d s &lt; ∞ such that for some i 0 ∈ S

Then, it holds

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. For any bounded function h on S with | h | ∞ := sup i ∈S | h i | ≤ 1, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we have used (3.4) in Theorem 3.1. By taking t = ( 2 ∫ ∞ 0 η s d s/ ‖ Q -˜ Q ‖ ℓ 1 ) 1 / 2 , we arrive at

which is the desired conclusion.

□

Remark 3.5 When S is a finite state space, the stability of π in terms of the perturbation of Q has been studied in Freidlin and Wentzell [7] and Faggionato et al. [6]. [7] proved it through expressing π as a polynomial of transition probabilities. This result was applied in [5] to establish the averaging principle for multiple time-scale systems. [6] proved a similar result by Perron-Frobenius Theorem to express π in terms of a nonzero right eigenvector of Q -matrix with eigenvalue 0.

Second, we can apply Theorem 3.1 to improve all the main results [22, Theorems 1.1-1.4]. Here we only state the improvement of [22, Theorem 1.1] to save space.

Consider the regime-switching system ( X t , Λ t ) satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and (Λ t ) is a Markov chain on S = { 1 , 2 , . . . , N } , 2 ≤ N ≤ ∞ . In realistic application, sometimes one can only get an estimation ˜ Q of the original transition rate matrix Q of (Λ t ). ˜ Q determines another Markov chain ( ˜ Λ t ). Correspondingly, the studied system ( X t ) turns into ( ˜ X t ) satisfying

It is necessary to measure the difference between X t and ˜ X t caused by the difference between Q and ˜ Q . We shall characterize the difference between X t and ˜ X t via the Wasserstein distance between their distributions.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any two probability measures µ , ν on R d , define the L 2 -Wasserstein distance between them by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C ( µ, ν ) denotes the set of all the couplings of µ , ν on R d × R d .

Corollary 3.6 Assume that (A1) , (A2) , (H1) , and (H2) hold. Denote by L ( X t ) and L ( ˜ X t ) the distribution of X t and X t respectively. Then

where p &gt; 1 and C ( p, t ) is a positive constant depending only on p and t .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. This result can be proved along the line of [22, Theorem 1.1] by replacing the upper bound of [22, Lemma 2.2] with the upper bound given in Theorem 3.1. The constant C ( p, t ) can be explicitly expressed as in [22]. □

## References

- [1] J. Bardet, H. Guerin, F. Malrieu (2010). Long time behavior of diffusions with Markov switching, ALEA Lat. Am. J. Probab. Math. Stat. 7, 151-170.
- [2] M. Chen (2004). From Markov chains to non-equilibrium particle systems , 2nd ed. Singapore: World Scientific.
- [3] B. Cloez, M. Hairer (2015). Exponential ergodicity for Markov processes with random switching, Bernoulli 21, 505-536.
- [4] J. Daleckii, M. Krein (1974). Stability of solutions of differential equations in Banach space , American Math. Society.
- [5] A. Budhiraja, P. Dupuis, A. Ganguly (2018). Large deviations for small noise diffusions in a fast Markovian environment, Electron. J. Probab. 23, 1-33.
- [6] A. Faggionato, D. Gabrielli, M. Crivellari (2010). Averaging andd large deviation principles for fully-coupled piecewise deterministic Markov processes and applications to molecular motors, Markov Process. Related Fields 16, 497-548.

- [7] M. Freidlin, A. Wentzell (1998). Random perturbations of dynamical systems, vol. 260, Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften, 2nd ed. Springer-Verlag, New York.
- [8] M. Ghosh, A. Arapostathis, S. Marcus (1997). Ergodic control of switching diffusions, SIAM J. Control Optim. 35, 1952-1988.
- [9] N. Ikeda, S. Watanabe (1977). A comparison theorem for solutions of stochastic differential equations and its applications, Osaka J. Math. 14, 619-633.
- [10] N. Ikeda, S. Watanabe (1989). Stochastic differential equations and diffusion processes , 2nd ed. North-Holland Mathematical Library. 24.
- [11] A. Majda, X. Tong (2016). Geometric ergodicity for piecewise contracting processes with applications for tropical stochastic lattice models, Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 69, 1110-1153.
- [12] X. Mao, C. Yuan (2006). Stochastic Differential Equations with Markovian Switching , Imperial College Press, London.
- [13] A. Mitrophanov (2003). Stability and exponential convergence of continuous-time Markov chains, J. Appl. Prob. 40, 970-979.
- [14] A. Mitrophanov (2004). The spetral gap and perturbation bounds for reversible continuous-time Markov chains, J. Appl. Prob. 41, 1219-1222.
- [15] A. Mitrophanov (2005). Sensitivity and convergence of uniformly ergodic Markov chains, J. Appl. Prob. 42, 1003-1014.
- [16] D. Nguyen, G. Yin, C. Zhu (2017). Certain properties related to well posedness of switching diffusions, Stoch. Proc. Appl. 127, 3135-3158.
- [17] J. Shao (2015). Strong solutions and strong Feller properties for regime-switching diffusion processes in an infinite state space, SIAM J. Control Optim. 53, 2462-2479.
- [18] J. Shao (2015). Criteria for transience and recurrence of regime-switching diffusion processes, Electron. J. Probab. 20, no. 63, 1-15.
- [19] J. Shao (2018). Invariant measures and Euler-Maruyma's approximations of statedependent regime-switching diffusions, SIAM J. Control Optim. 56, 3215-3238.
- [20] J. Shao, F. Xi (2014). Stability and recurrence of regime-switching diffusion processes, SIAM J. control Optim. 52, 3496-3516.

- [21] J. Shao, F. Xi (2019). Stabilization of regime-switching processes by feedback control based on discrete time observations II: state-dependent case, SIAM J. Control Optim. 57, no. 2, 1413-1439.
- [22] J. Shao, C. Yuan (2019). Stability of regime-switching processes under perturbation of transition rate matrices, Nonlinear Analysis: Hybrid Systems 33, 211-226.
- [23] J. Shao, K. Zhao (2021). Continuous dependence for stochastic functional differential equations with state-dependent regime-switching on initial value, Acta Math. Sin. Eng. Ser. 37, 389-407.
- [24] A. Skorokhod (1989). Asymptotic Methods in the Theory of Stochastic Differential Equations , American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI.
- [25] J. Wang (2013). Stochastic comparison for L´ evy-type processes, J. Theoret. Probab. 26, no. 4, 997-1019.
- [26] F. Xi (2008). Feller property and exponential ergodicity of diffusion processes with state-dependent switching, Sci. China A 51, 329-342.
- [27] G. Yin, C. Zhu (2010). Hybrid switching diffusions: properties and applications , Vol. 63, Stochastic Modeling and Applied Probability, Springer, New York.
- [28] A. Zeifman, D. Isaacson (1994). On strong ergodicity for nonhomogeneous continuous-time Markov chains, Stochastic Process. Appl. 50, 263-273.
- [29] A. Zeifman, V. Korolev, Y. Satin (2020). Two approaches to the construction of perturbation bounds for continuous time Markov chains, Mathematics 8(2), 253.
- [30] S. Zhang (2019). On invariant probability measures of regime-switching diffusion processes with singular drifts, J. Math. Anal. Appl. 478, 655-688.