## A Global Maximum Principle for Controlled Conditional Mean-field FBSDEs with Regime Switching

Tao Hao ∗ , Jiaqiang Wen † , Jie Xiong ‡

Abstract. This paper is devoted to a global stochastic maximum principle for conditional mean-field forward-backward stochastic differential equations (FBSDEs, for short) with regime switching. The control domain is unnecessarily convex and the driver of backward stochastic differential equations (BSDEs, for short) could depend on Z . Different from the case of non-recursive utility, the first-order and second-order adjoint equations are both high-dimensional linear BSDEs. Based on the adjoint equations, we reveal the relations among the terms of the first- and second-order Taylor's expansions. A general maximum principle is proved, which develops the work of Nguyen, Yin, and Nguyen [22] to recursive utility. As applications, the linear-quadratic problem is considered and a problem with state constraint is studied.

Key words: Regime switching, conditional mean-field FBSDE, maximum principle, adjoint equation, variational equation.

AMS subject classifications. 60H10, 60H30.

## 1 Introduction

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let T &gt; 0 and (Ω , F , F , P ) be a filtered probability space satisfying the usual conditions, on which a 1dimensional standard Brownian motions W and a continuous-time Markov chain α ( · ) with a finite state space I = { 1 , 2 , · · · , I } are defined. The generator of Markov chain α ( · ) is denoted by Λ = ( λ ij ) i,j ∈I , which satisfies λ ij ⩾ 0, for i = j ∈ I and ∑ j ∈I λ ij = 0, for every i ∈ I . For each s &gt; 0, we set

where N is the set of all P -null subsets, and denote F α = ( F α s ) s ∈ [0 ,T ] , F = ( F s ) s ∈ [0 ,T ] .

In this paper, we consider the following forward-backward control system:

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∗ School of Statistics and Mathematics, Shandong University of Finance and Economics, Jinan 250014, China (Email: taohao@sdufe.edu.cn ). This author is supported by Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (Grant No. ZR2020MA032), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 11871037, 72171133).

† Department of Mathematics, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China (Email: wenjq@sustech.edu.cn . This author is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant No. 12101291) and Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (grant Nos. 2022A1515012017).

‡ Department of Mathematics and SUSTech International center for Mathematics, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518055, China (Email: xiongj@sustech.edu.cn ). This author is supported by SUSTech Start up fund Y01286120 and National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant No. 61873325).

The precise assumptions on the coefficients b, σ, f, Φ refer to Section 3. The cost functional is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The purpose of present paper is to give a necessary condition to the optimal control ¯ v ( · ), which minimizes the cost functional J ( v ( · )) over V 0 ,T (see Definition 2.1).

Let us explain the motivation to investigate the equation (1.1) for the angle of particle system. Consider an interacting particle system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where { W i ; 1 ⩽ i ⩽ N } is N independent standard 1-dimensional Brownian motions. In many applications, the state process X i,N is observable while the Brownian motion W i , which is used to model the distribution of X i,N , may not be observable. Hence, the closed-loop form of the control v i is usually used, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here ψ is a deterministic function depending on the time, the stage, the average state and the switching state. In order to reduce the computation complexity of the above particle system, generally speaking, let N → ∞ and consider its limit. As stated in many literatures, for example, [4, 5], according to the law of large numbers, one usually has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

But notice that the appearance of α ( · ) in all the dynamics of (1.4) can lead to the dynamic of each particle depending on the history of this process. Consequently, both the mean-field term 1 N ∑ N j =1 X j,N and its limit (as N → ∞ ) depend on the history of α . Thereby, as N → ∞ , we obtain the conditional mean-field SDE (1.1), see [20] for more details.

Next, let us overview the history of general maximum principles. As we know, to derive maximum principles, namely, necessary conditions for optimality, is an important approach in solving optimal control problems. Its history can be traced back to the work by Boltyanski-Gamkrelidze-Pontryagin [2] in 1956 on the Pontryagin's maximum principle for deterministic control systems. They introduced the spike variation, and considered the first-order term in a kind of Taylor expansion with respect to this perturbation. However, if the diffusion term in stochastic control systems depends on control, the approach introduced by [2] does not work. The reason is that the order of ∫ t + ε t σ ( t ) dW t is √ ε but not ε . Later, Peng [17] considered the second-order term in the Taylor expansion of the variation to solve this difficulty, and obtained the global maximum principle for classical stochastic optimal control problems.

In 1993, Peng [18] generalized the classical stochastic optimal control problem to one where the cost functional is defined by Y (0), where ( Y ( · ) , Z ( · )) is the solution to the following BSDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The notion of recursive utilities in continuous time is firstly proposed by Duffie, Epstein [10]. El Karoui, Peng and Quenez [12] developed this notion, and defined a more general class of stochastic recursive utilities in economic theory by solutions of BSDEs.

When the control domain is convex, one can use the technique of convex variation to obtain a local stochastic maximum principle, see, for example, Dokuchaev and Zhou [8], Ji and Zhou [16], Wu [25], Xu [27]. However, if the control domain is nonconvex, an essential difficulty is how to construct the first-order and second-order expansions for the BSDE (1.5). It is proposed as an open problem in Peng [19].

A method for solving this problem is to regard Z ( · ) as a control process and the terminal condition Y ( T ) = Φ( X v ( T )) as a constraint, and apply the Ekeland variational principle to obtain the maximum principle, see Wu [25], Yong [28]. But the maximum principle obtained by this method contains unknown parameters. In 2017, Hu [13] firstly brought in a new second-order Taylor expansion for the BSDE (1.5), and solved the open problem proposed by Peng completely. Hu, Ji and Xue [14] generalized Hu's work to the fully coupled forward-backward stochastic control systems. Hu, Ji and Xu [15] obtained a global stochastic maximum principle for forward-backward stochastic control systems with quadratic generators.

As for stochastic maximum principle for mean-field control systems, we refer to Andersson and Djehiche [1] for a local maximum principle for SDEs of mean-field type, to Buckdahn, Djehiche and Li [6] for a global stochastic maximum principle for SDEs of mean-field type, to Buckdahn, Li and Ma [7] for a global stochastic maximum principle for general mean-field systems. Recently, Nguyen, Yin, Hoang [20] proved the laws of large numbers for systems with mean-field interactions and Markovian switching. Making use of this result, Nguyen, Nguyen and Yin [21] obtained a local maximum principle for mean-field type control problems of switching diffusion. Subsequently, Nguyen, Yin and Nguyen [22] relaxed the convexity assumption on control domain to the non-convex case.

In this paper, we develop the work of Nguyen, Yin and Nguyen [22] to recursive utilities. It is nontrivial. This is reflected in the following three aspects.

- (i) For the non-recursive utilities case, the purpose of constructing first-order adjoint equation is to use the following equality

where X 1 ,ε ( · ) and Y 1 ,ε ( · ) are the solutions to the first-order variational equations of SDE (1.1) and BSDE (1.2); p ( · ) is the solution to the first-order adjoint equation. According to the fact

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Φ( t ) is an F t -measurable stochastic process, the first-order adjoint equation can be written as a linear conditional mean-field BSDE (see [22] for example). However, the above approach is not suitable for the recursive utilities case, since f depends on ( y, z ). In fact, we need the following slightly 'stronger' relation, P -a.s., t ∈ [0 , T ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From this, one can know that the first-order adjoint equation should be a high-dimensional BSDE (without conditional mean-field term) (see (2.3)-(2.4)).

- (ii) Due to the appearance of p 1 ( · ) in our method, it comes naturally to deal with the term p 1 ( t ) E [ X 2 ,ε ( t ) | F α t -] when deducing the second-order expansion of BSDEs. But the order of the term E [( X 1 ,ε ( t )) 2 | F α t -] appearing in E [ X 2 ,ε ( t ) | F α t -] is O ( ε ), but not o ( ε ). This leads to the order of p 1 ( t ) E [ X 2 ,ε ( t ) | F α t -] being O ( ε ), but not o ( ε ). Based on the point above, our second-order adjoint equation is used to deal not only with the resulting impact of ( X 1 ,ε ( t )) 2 , but also with that of E [( X 1 ,ε ( t )) 2 | F α t -] . This means that in our case the second-order adjoint equation should also be a highdimensional BSDE, see (2.5). Note that the first component of (2.5) is just the second-order adjoint equation (4.2) [22] for the non-recursive utilities case.
- (iii) Since the diffusion term σ depends on control, the first- and second-order variational equations for the BSDE (1.2) (see (3.7), (4.2)) involve the term p 0 ( t ) δσ ( t, v ( t )) 1 E ε ( t ) in the variation of z . But, since its order is O ( ε ) for any order expansion of f , we need to consider a new second-order Taylor expansion, and introduce an auxiliary BSDE (4.3) to handle this obstacle.

Compared with the existing literatures, three points should be lighten. First, since the coefficient f depends on ( y, z ) and the conditional mean-field term, we establish two pair of new equalities to reveal the relations among those terms of the first- and second-order Taylor expansions of conditional mean-field FBSDEs, see (3.8), (4.4). Second, different to the non-recursive utilities case, the first- and second-order adjoint equations in our case are two high-dimensional linear BSDEs (without conditional mean-field term) (see (2.3), (2.5)). Third, a global maximum principle for conditional mean-field FBSDE (1.1)-(1.2) is proved, which extends the work of Nguyen et al. [21] from the non-recursive utilities case to the recursive utilities case (Theorem 2.5).

This paper is arranged as follows. In Section 2, the first- and second-order adjoint equations as well as the maximum principle are shown. The first-order Taylor expansion of the FBSDE (1.1)-(1.2) and some estimates are supplied in Section 3. The Section 4 is devoted to the second-order Taylor expansion of the FBSDE (1.1)-(1.2). We study the linear-quadratic case in Section 5. A problem with state constrain is investigated in Section 6. In Section 7, some concluding remarks are listed. In appendix, we supply some proofs.

## 2 Main result

In this section, we give the main result-stochastic maximum principle. Throughout this paper, let V be a given nonempty subset of R .

Definition 2.1. An F t -adapted process v ( · ) with values in V is called an admissible control, if it satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By V 0 ,T we denote the set of all admissible controls.

Next, we introduce two spaces which are used frequently: for β ⩾ 2 ,

- S β F (0 , T ; R n ) is the family of R n -valued F -adapted c` adl` ag processes ( ϕ t ) 0 ⩽ t ⩽ T with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- H 2 , β 2 F (0 , T ; R n ) is the family of R n -valued F -progressively measurable processes ( ϕ t ) 0 ⩽ t ⩽ T with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ( b, σ ) : [0 , T ] × R × R × V ×I → R satisfy

- Assumption 1. (i) There exists a constant L &gt; 0 such that, for t ∈ [0 , T ] , x, x ′ , ¯ x, ¯ x ′ ∈ R , v ∈ V, i ∈ I and for ϕ = b, σ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (ii) The function ϕ = b, σ is twice continuously differential with respect to ( x, x ′ ); the derivatives ϕ x , ϕ x ′ , ϕ xx , ϕ xx ′ , ϕ x ′ x ′ are continuous with respect to ( x, x ′ , v ), and are bounded by a constant L &gt; 0.

For each v ∈ V 0 ,T , under the item (i) of Assumption 1 the conditional mean-field SDE (1.1) possesses a unique solution X v ( · ) ∈ S 8 F (0 , T ; R ) . Moreover, for any 2 ⩽ β ⩽ 8, there exists a constant C &gt; 0 depending on L, T, β such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

See Lemma 2.4 [22].

Let the mappings f : [0 , T ] × R × R × R × R × V ×I → R and Φ : R × R ×I → R satisfy

Assumption 2. (i) There exists some constant L &gt; 0 such that, for t ∈ [0 , T ] , x, x ′ , ¯ x, ¯ x ′ ∈ R , y, ¯ y ∈ R , z, ¯ z ∈ R , v, ¯ v ∈ V, i ∈ I ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (ii) The functions f, ϕ are twice continuously differential with respect to ( x, x ′ , y, z ) and ( x, x ′ ), respectively; Df and D 2 f , the Hessian matrix of f with respect to ( x, x ′ , y, z ), are continuous with respect to ( x, x ′ , y, z, v ); Φ x , Φ x ′ , Φ xx , Φ xx ′ , Φ x ′ x ′ are continuous with respect to ( x, x ′ ) .
- (iii) The first-order derivatives of f, Φ in ( x, x ′ ) are bounded by L (1 + | x | + | x ′ | + | v | ), L (1 + | x | + | x ′ | ), respectively; D 2 f and all the second-order derivatives of Φ in ( x, x ′ ) are bounded by L .

Assumption 3. b x ( · ) , σ x ( · ) , b xx ( · ) are F α -adapted.

- Remark 2.2. (i) Assumptions 1 -3 covers the linear-quadratic cases with deterministic coefficients and with F α -adapted coefficients.
- (ii) Assumptions 1 -3 covers the case of a recursive utility and a linear wealth (see Duffie and Skiadas [11] and Schroder and Skiadas [23]), in which the function f does not depend on z . In addition, Assumptions 1 -3 also covers the case of the large investor (see [12]), in which f ( t, y, c ) = -βy + u ( c ).

Lemma 2.3. Under Assumption 1 and the item (i) of Assumption 2 , the equation (1.2) exists a unique solution ( Y v ( · ) , Z v ( · )) ∈ S 4 F (0 , T ; R ) ×H 2 , 2 F (0 , T ; R ) . Moreover, for 1 &lt; β ⩽ 4 , there exists a constant C &gt; 0 depending on L, T, β such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The proof is immediate from (2.1) and Lemma 8.2 in Appendix.

The control ¯ v ( · ) ∈ V 0 ,T satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is called an optimal control. Let ¯ X ( · ) := X ¯ v ( · ) , ( ¯ Y ( · ) , ¯ Z ( · )) := ( Y ¯ v ( · ) , Z ¯ v ( · )) be the solutions to the equation (1.1) and the equation (1.2) with the optimal control ¯ v ( · ), respectively. (¯ v ( · ) , ¯ X ( · ) , Y ¯ v ( · ) , Z ¯ v ( · )) is called an optimal pair. The aim of the present paper is to give a necessary condition of the optimal control problem (1.1)-(1.2)-(1.3)-(2.2).

For a stochastic process or a random variable ξ , by ̂ ξ := E [ ξ | F α t -] we denote its optimal filtering estimate in the sense of Xiong [26]. Denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here and thereafter the superscript ⊺ denotes the transpose of vectors or matrices. Let us consider the following first-order adjoint equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is a 2-dimensional linear BSDE. Under Assumptions 1 -3 , according to Lemma 8.1, it possesses a unique solution ( p, q ) ∈ S 2 F (0 , T ; R 2 ) ×H 2 , 1 F (0 , T ; R 2 ) such that, for 1 &lt; β ⩽ 8,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.4. (i) If b, σ, f, Φ are independent of x ′ , i.e., the case without conditional mean-field term, then p 1 = q 1 ≡ 0 . Our first-order adjoint equation reduces to that of classical optimal control problem, see (15) and (25) [13].

(ii) If f is independent of ( y, z ) , i.e., the non-recursive utilities case, our first-order adjoint equation (2.3) is just the equation (4.1) [22]. In fact, by setting p ( t ) := p 0 ( t ) + E [ p 1 ( t ) | F α t -] and q ( t ) := q 0 ( t ) one can easily check this argument.

By D 2 xyz f we denote the Hessian matrix of f with respect to ( x, y, z ), i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The second-order adjoint equation is

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a 2-dimensional linear BSDE. Under Assumptions 1 -3 , thanks to Lemma 8.1, it possesses a unique solution ( P, Q ) ∈ S 2 F (0 , T ; R 2 ) ×H 2 , 1 F (0 , T ; R 2 ) such that for 1 &lt; β ⩽ 8,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define the Hamiltonian associated with random variables ξ, ξ ′ ∈ L 1 (Ω , F , P ; R ), for ( t, y, z, v, i, p 0 , p 1 , q 0 ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R × R × V ×I × R × R × R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 2.5. Let Assumptions 1 -3 be in force. Let ¯ v ( · ) ∈ V 0 ,T be an optimal control, and ¯ X ( · ) ( ¯ Y ( · ) , ¯ Z ( · )) the corresponding state processes of (1.1) and (1.2) with ¯ v ( · ) , respectively. Then the maximum principle

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds true, where (( p 0 , p 1 ) , ( q 0 , q 1 )) and (( P 0 , P 1 ) , ( Q 0 , Q 1 )) are the solutions to the first- and second-order adjoint equations (2.3) and (2.5), respectively.

Associate with an optimal seven-tuple ( ¯ X ( · ) , ¯ v ( · ) , p 0 ( · ) , p 1 ( · ) , q 0 ( · ) , P 0 ( · ) , P 1 ( · )) one can define an H -function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Corollary 2.6. We make the same assumption as in Theorem 2.5, then P -a.s., a.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3 First-order expansion

Since the control domain is unnecessarily convex, we borrow the approach of spike variation to study the variational equations. Precisely, let ε &gt; 0 and E ε ⊂ [0 , T ] be a Borel set with Borel measure | E ε | = ε , and define

Let (¯ v ( · ) , ¯ X ( · ) , ¯ Y ( · ) , ¯ Z ( · )) be an optimal pair and X ε ( · ) := X v ε ( · ), ( Y ε ( · ) , Z ε ( · )) := ( Y v ε ( · ) , Z v ε ( · )) the solutions to the equations (1.1) and (1.2) with v ε ( · ), respectively. Recall that ̂ ξ := E [ ξ | F α t -]. Set, for φ = b, σ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

φ x ′ ( t ) , φ x ′ x ( t ) , φ x ′ x ′ ( t ) , δφ x ( t, v ) , δφ x ′ ( t, v ) , Φ x ′ ( T ) , Φ xx ( T ) , Φ xx ′ ( T ) , Φ x ′ x ′ ( T ) can be understood similarly. For convenience, we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 3.1. ([22]) Under Assumptions 1 -Assumptions 3 , for any 2 ⩽ β ⩽ 8 , there exists a constant C β &gt; 0 depending on β, T, L such that

Proof. The item i) is an immediate consequence of Gronwall lemma; the item ii) comes from Proposition 3.1 [22].

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 3.2. Let Assumptions 1 -3 hold true, for any 2 ⩽ β ⩽ 4 , there exists a constant C β &gt; 0 depending on β, T, L such that

Proof. Notice that

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Φ ρ x ′ ( T ) , f ρε x ′ ( s ) , f ρε y ( s ) , f ρε z ( s ) , δf z ( s, v ( s )) , · · · can be defined similarly.

According to Lemma 8.2, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the one hand, since the first-order derivatives of Φ are bounded by L (1 + | x | + | x ′ | ), H¨ older inequality and the item i) allows to show One the other hand, the item (i) of Assumption 2 implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, since | f ρε x ( s ) | + | f ρε x ′ ( s ) | ⩽ L (1 + | ¯ X ( s ) | + | X ε ( s ) | + | ̂ X ε ( s ) | + | ̂ ¯ X ( s ) | + | v ε ( s ) | ), we derive

Finally, combining (3.2) and (3.3), we prove the desired result.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we introduce the first-order variational equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is a linear conditional McKean-Vlasov equation (Recall that ̂ X 1 ,ε ( t ) = E [ X 1 ,ε ( t ) | F α t -]). Under Assumption 1 , it possesses a unique solution X 1 ,ε ( · ) ∈ S β F (0 , T ; R ). Applying Lemma 5.4 [26] to (3.4) and recall that b x ( · ) is F α -adapted, we obtain

For the solutions to (3.4) and (3.5) we have the following moment estimates.

Proposition 3.3. Let Assumption 1 and Assumption 3 be in force. For any 2 ⩽ β ⩽ 8 , there exist a constant C β &gt; 0 depending on β and a function ρ : (0 , + ∞ ) → (0 , + ∞ ) with ρ ( ε ) → 0 as ε ↓ 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Recall b x , ̂ b x ′ are bounded and ̂ δb ( t, v ( t )) ⩽ L E [(1 + | ¯ X ( s ) | + | ˆ ¯ X ( s ) | + | v ( s ) | + | ¯ v ( s ) | ) | F α t -], the items i) and iii) follow from Gronwall lemma. The items ii) and iv) refer to Proposition 3.1 [22].

We now consider the first-order variational BSDE on [0 , T ]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under Assumption 2 , for 2 ⩽ β ⩽ 4 the above linear BSDE exists a unique solution ( Y 1 ,ε , Z 1 ,ε ) ∈ S β F (0 , T ; R ) ×H 2 , β 2 F (0 , T ; R ) .

The following lemma reveals the relation of ( Y 1 ,ε ( t ) , Z 1 ,ε ( t )) and X 1 ,ε ( t ) , ̂ X 1 ,ε ( t ). Lemma 3.4. Let Assumptions 1 -3 be in force, then we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 3.5. In the above lemma we use Assumption 3. As we know, for non-recursive utilities case (see [22]), Assumption 3 is not required. Because for non-recursive utilities case, the equality

Proof. Applying Itˆ o's formula to p 0 ( t ) X 1 ,ε ( t )+ p 1 ( t ) ̂ X 1 ,ε ( t ), we obtain (3.8) from the uniqueness of (3.7).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is sufficient for proving the maximum principle. However, for recursive utilities case since the generator f depends on ( y, z ) , we could need the following slightly 'stronger' relation: for t ∈ [0 , T ] , P -a.s.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we have the following estimates.

Proposition 3.6. Under Assumptions 1 -3 , for 2 ⩽ β ⩽ 4 , there exist a constant C β &gt; 0 depending on β , and a function ρ : (0 , + ∞ ) → (0 , + ∞ ) with ρ ( ε ) → 0 as ε ↓ 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof refers to Appendix.

In some way, Assumption 3 could be regarded as the cost of establishing the 'stronger' relation (3.8).

Denote

## 4 Second-order expansion

This section concerns the second-order expansion of FBSDE (1.1)-(1.2). We consider the following secondorder variational equations

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 4.1. Applying Lemma 5.4 [26] to (4.1) and recall that b x ( · ) , b xx ( · ) are F α -adapted, we obtain

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 4.2. Suppose Assumption 1 and Assumption 2 hold, for 2 ⩽ β ⩽ 4 there exist a constant C β &gt; 0

depending on β and a function ρ : (0 , + ∞ ) → (0 , + ∞ ) with ρ ( ε ) → 0 as ε → 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The item i) comes from standard estimate for ordinary differential equation and Proposition 3.3; the items ii) -iii) come from (3.8) and (3.10) [22]. The proof of item iv) refers to Appendix.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In order to give the relation between X 2 ,ε ( · ) , ̂ X 2 ,ε ( · ) and ( Y 2 ,ε ( · ) , Z 2 ,ε ( · )), we first introduce the following BSDE:

It is a linear BSDE and exists a unique solution ( ˜ Y ( t ) , ˜ Z ( t )) t ∈ [0 ,T ] ∈ S 2 F (0 , T ; R ) ×H 2 , 1 F (0 , T ; R ) .

Lemma 4.3. Under Assumptions 1 -3 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and making use of the uniqueness of the equation (4.2), we have (4.4). The calculation is tedious, but direct.

Remark 4.4. From (3.8) and (4.4), we have, for t ∈ [0 , T ] , P -a.s.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we are in a position to give the proof of Theorem 2.5. Proof of Theorem 2.5 From (4.5), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider the following SDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying Itˆ o's formula to Γ( t ) ˜ Y ( t ), integrating from 0 to T and then taking expectation, it follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the Lebesgue differentiation theorem, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since Γ( t ) &gt; 0 , t ∈ [0 , T ], we get the wished result. □

## 5 Linear-quadratic case

In this section we focus on the linear-quadratic case. Recall that ̂ ξ := E [ ξ | F α t -] denotes its optimal filtering estimate. Consider the following linear forward-backward control system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̂ where A 1 ( · ) , A 2 ( · ) , · · · , D 2 ( · ) are F α -adapted bounded processes. For convenience, we write A 1 ( t, α ( t -)) , A 2 ( t, α ( t -)) · · · D 2 ( α ( T )) as A 1 , A 2 · · · D 2 . It is easy to check that the coefficients in (5.1) and (5.2) satisfy Assumptions 1 -3 .

In this setting, the first-order adjoint equation becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with P 1 ( t ) = Q 1 ( t ) ≡ 0 , t ∈ [0 , T ].

From Theorem 2.5, we have

Theorem 5.1. Let ¯ v be the optimal control, and let (( p 0 ( · ) , p 1 ( · )) , ( q 0 ( · ) , q 1 ( · ))) and ( P 0 ( · ) , Q 0 ( · )) be the solutions to the first-order adjoint equation (5.3) and the second-order adjoint equation (5.4), respectively. Then the following maximum principle holds true

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 6 Application to problems with state constraint

As an illustrative application, in this section we investigate the corresponding problem with state constraint. More precisely, we consider the forward-backward control system (1.1)-(1.2), the cost functional (1.3) as well as the state constrain:

where Ψ : R × R × R → R .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assumption 4. The function Ψ is twice continuously differentiable with respect to ( x, x ′ , y ), and the Hessian matrix of Ψ with respect to ( x, x ′ , y ), denoted by D 2 Ψ, is bounded.

For any v ( · ) ∈ V 0 ,T , we denote X v ( · ) , ( Y v ( · ) , Z v ( · )) the solutions to the equation (1.1) and the equation (1.2), respectively. The set of admissible controls is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ¯ v ( · ) ∈ V 0 ,T be the optimal control and ¯ X ( · ) , ( ¯ Y ( · ) , ¯ Z ( · )) the optimal trajectories. For arbitrary constant κ &gt; 0, we consider the following cost functional on V 0 ,T :

Clearly,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we use Ekeland's variational principle to study stochastic maximum principle. For this, let us introduce the metric on V 0 ,T :

̸

Let ( V 0 ,T , d ) be a complete space, otherwise, one can adopt the argument in Tang and Li [24], Wu [25] to derive the same result. According to Ekeland's variational principle, there exists a v κ ( · ) ∈ V 0 ,T such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For arbitrary ε &gt; 0 and v ∈ V 0 ,T , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where E ε ⊂ [0 , T ] is a Borel subset with its Borel measure | E ε | = ε . Clearly, d ( v κ,ε ( t ) , v κ ( t )) ⩽ ε. By ( X κ ( · ) , Y κ ( · ) , Z κ ( · )) and ( X ε ( · ) , Y ε ( · ) , Z ε ( · )) we denote the solutions to the forward-backward control system (1.1)-(1.2) with v κ ( · ) and v κ,ε ( · ), respectively. From the item iii) of (6.2) and Taylor expansion, we have

where

By

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we denote the solutions to the first-order adjoint equation (2.3) and the second-order adjoint equation (2.5) but with ( X κ ( · ) , Y κ ( · ) , Z κ ( · ) , v κ ( · )) instead of ( ¯ X ( · ) , ¯ Y ( · ) , ¯ Z ( · ) , ¯ v ( · )).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the one hand, by making the similar analyse as (4.6), we can obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

and f κ y ( t ) = ∂ y f ( t, X κ ( t ) , ̂ X κ ( t ) , Y κ ( t ) , Z κ ( t ) , v k ( t ) , α ( t -)). f κ z ( t ) , δf κ ( t ) , · · · can be understood similarly. On the other hand, inspired by the previous maximum principle in Section 3, we consider the following two BSDEs:

and

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

According to (6.5)-(6.8), similar to the proof of the previous maximum principle we can deduce

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, (6.3) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, let us consider the following SDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, applying Itˆ o's formula to Υ κ ( t ) ˜ Y κ ( t ) one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define the Hamiltonian, for ξ, ξ ′ , ¯ ξ, ¯ ξ ′ ∈ L 1 (Ω , F , P ; R ), t ∈ [0 , T ], y, z, ˜ p 0 , ˜ p 1 , ˜ q 0 , ˜ P 0 , ˜ P 1 , p 0 , p 1 , q 0 , P 0 , P 1 , γ ∈ R , and v ∈ V , i ∈ I , Thanks to (6.9) and (6.10), we derive

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall | E ε | = ε , one has from the arbitrariness of ε , for all v ∈ V , P -a.s, a.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the definitions of λ κ and µ κ (see (6.4)), we know | λ κ | 2 + | µ κ | 2 = 1 . Consequently, there exists a subsequent of ( λ κ , µ κ ), still denoted by ( λ κ , µ κ ), converging to ( λ, µ ) with | λ | 2 + | µ | 2 = 1, as κ → ∞ . According to the item ii) of (6.2), one could choose a subsequent of ( λ κ , µ κ ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and ( ˜ P, ˜ Q ) = (( P 0 , P 1 ) ⊺ , ( Q 0 , Q 1 ) ⊺ ) is the solution of BSDE:

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 6.1. Let Assumptions 1 -4 be in force. Let ¯ v be the optimal control of the problem (1.1)-(1.2)(1.3)-(2.2)-(6.1). By ¯ X, ( ¯ Y , ¯ Z ) we denote the corresponding solutions to (1.1) and (1.2) with the optimal control ¯ v , respectively. Then there exists two constants λ, µ satisfying | λ | 2 + | µ | 2 = 1 such that, for v ∈ V , P -a.s., a.e., satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the above BSDE involves the martingale term of regime switching, the first- and second-order adjoint equations in [22] are also (conditional mean-field) BSDEs with regime switching. In our case the BSDE (1.2) is a classical BSDE (without the martingale term of regime switching), hence, the the first- and second-order adjoint equations are also classical BSDEs.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 7 Concluding remarks

i) If f is independent of ( y, z ), the relation (1.6) can be replaced by the following 'weaker' relation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, notice that (7.1) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

According to the item ii) of Remark 2.4, our adjoint equation (2.3) is just the equation (4.1) [22]. In the meantime, our second-order adjoint equation (2.5) naturally reduces to the BSDE (4.2) [22], i.e., P 1 = Q 1 = 0. ii) In [22], the cost functional is of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If we define

then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is an ( F , P )-martingale. From the martingale representation theorem (Proposition 3.9 [9]), for each t ∈ [0 , T ] there exists a unique pair ( Z ( · ) , K ( · )) ∈ H 2 F (0 , T ; R n × d ) ×K 2 F (0 , T ; R n ), where K 2 F (0 , T ; R n ) is the family of k = ( k ij ) i,j ∈I such that the F -progressively measurable process k ij satisfies k ii = 0 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 8 Appendix

## 8.1 A basic estimate for BSDEs

In this subsection let γ &gt; 1. Consider the following BSDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume

satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assumption 5. (i) There exists some constant L &gt; 0 such that for t ∈ [0 , T ], y, y ′ ∈ R m , z, z ′ ∈ R m × d , i ∈ I ,

Lemma 8.1. Under Assumption 5 , for ξ ∈ L γ (Ω , F T , P , R m ) , the BSDE (8.1) exists a unique solution ( Y ( · ) , Z ( · )) ∈ S γ F (0 , T ; R m ) ×H 2 , γ 2 F (0 , T ; R m × d ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 8.2. Assume F, ¯ F satisfy Assumptions 5 and ξ, ¯ ξ ∈ L γ (Ω , F T , P , R m ) . Let ( Y ( · ) , Z ( · )) and ( ¯ Y ( · ) , ¯ Z ( · )) be the solutions to the equation (8.1) with parameters ( ξ, F ) and ( ¯ ξ, ¯ F ) , respectively. Then there exists some positive constant C depending on γ, T, L such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, for ¯ ξ = ¯ F ≡ 0 ,

The proofs of the above two lemmata are similar to Proposition 3.2, Theorem 4.2 [3]. We omit them.

## 8.2 Proof of Proposition 3.6

For i), from (8.2), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us estimate the terms

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The other terms can be calculated similarly.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

First, as for the term E [ ( ∫ E ε | q 0 ( t ) δσ ( t, v ( t )) | dt ) β ] , since | δσ ( t, v ( t )) | ⩽ L (1 + | ¯ X ( t ) | + | ̂ ¯ X ( t ) | + | v ( t ) | + | ¯ v ( t ) | ), we have from H¨ older inequality

where ρ ( ε ) = C β { E [( ∫ E ε | q 0 ( t ) | 2 dt ) 4 β 8 -β ]} 8 -β 8 { sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] E [ 1+ | ¯ X ( t ) | 8 + | ˆ ¯ X ( t ) | 8 + | v ( t ) | 8 + | ¯ v ( t ) | 8 ]} β 8 → 0 as ε → 0.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we focus on the term E [ ( ∫ E ε | p 1 ( t ) ̂ δb ( t, v ( t )) | dt ) β ] . Notice that | δb ( t, v ( t )) | ⩽ L (1+ | ¯ X ( t ) | + | ̂ ¯ X ( t ) | + | v ( t ) | + | ¯ v ( t ) | ), it follows from H¨ older's inequality

Next, for ii), it follows from the definition of δ 2 Y ( s ) and (3.1)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thanks to Lemma 8.2, it yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We estimate it term by term.

a) Thanks to Φ x , Φ x ′ being uniformly Lipschitz continuous in ( x, x ′ ), H¨ older inequality and the fact | Φ ρ x ( T ) | + | Φ ρ x ′ ( T ) | ⩽ L (1 + | ¯ X ( T ) | + | X ε ( T ) | + | ̂ ¯ X ( T ) | + | ̂ X ε ( T ) | ) , we obtain from Lemma 3.2 and Proposition 3.3

b) Notice | f ρε x ( s ) | + | f ρε x ′ ( s ) | ⩽ L (1 + | ¯ X ( s ) | + | X ε ( s ) | + | ̂ ¯ X ( s ) | + | ̂ X ε ( s ) | + | v ε ( s ) | ), thanks to the item ii) of (3.6) and H¨ older inequality, one gets

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now analyse E [( ∫ T 0 I 2 ( s ) | ds ) 4 ] . First, let us estimate those terms in I 2 without involving 1 E ε .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

c) Notice | f ρε z ( s ) -f z ( s ) | ⩽ L ( | δ 1 X ( s ) | + | δ 1 ̂ X ( s ) | + | δ 1 Y ( s ) | + | δ 1 Z ( s ) | + | δf z ( s, v ( s )) | 1 E ε ( s )) and | δf z ( s, v ( s )) | ⩽ L (1 + | ¯ X ( s ) | + | ̂ ¯ X ( s ) | + | v ( s ) | + | ¯ v ( s ) | ), we have from H¨ older inequality, Lemma 3.2 as well as the item i) of Proposition 3.6,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to (8.6), it yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we estimate those terms in I 2 involving 1 E ε .

d) Since | δσ ( s, v ( s )) | ⩽ L (1 + | ¯ X ( s ) | + | ˆ ¯ X ( s ) | + | v ( s ) | + | ¯ v ( s ) | ), it follows from H¨ older inequality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Dominated convergence theorem allows to show that { E [( ∫ E ε | q 0 ( s ) | 2 ds ) 4 } 1 2 converges to zero, as ε → 0. Define ρ ( ε ) := C β { E [( ∫ E ε | q 0 ( s ) | 2 ds ) 4 ]} 1 2 , we have E [ ( ∫ E ε | q 0 ( s ) δσ ( s, v ( s )) | ds ) 4 ] ⩽ ε 2 ρ ( ε ) . Similarly, we can deduce

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, it yields

Finally, it follows from (8.3), (8.4), (8.5) and (8.9) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 8.3 Proof of Lemma 4.2

Denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and for l = x, x ′ , y, z

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the boundness of Φ xx , Φ xx ′ , Φ x ′ x ′ , H¨ older inequality, Lemma 3.2 and (3.6), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we focus on M 1 ( t ). Let us first analyse those terms in M 1 ( t ) involving 1 E ε ( t ).

Dominated convergence theorem can show { E [ | Φ ˜ ρρε xx ( T ) -Φ xx ( T ) | 4 ]} 1 2 → 0 as ε → 0. Thereby, it yields from Proposition 3.3 that E [ | M 2 ( T ) | 2 ] ⩽ ε 2 ρ ( ε ) .

a) Notice | δf z ( t, v ( t ) , p 0 δσ ( t )) | ⩽ L (1 + | ¯ X ( t ) | + | ̂ ¯ X ( t ) | + | v ( t ) | + | ¯ v ( t ) | ), we obtain from (3.8),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From H¨ older inequality, (3.9) and Proposition 3.3, we get from Dominated convergence theorem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The other terms can be estimated with the similar argument. Consequently, one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Analogously, we can show

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

b) Let us now concern those terms in M 1 ( t ) involving the second-order derivatives of f . First,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We analyse them one by one.

c) For I 1 ( t ), from the boundness of the second-order derivatives of f with respect to ( x, x ′ , y, z ) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, it follows from Lemma 3.2, Proposition 3.3, Lemma 3.4 and Proposition 3.6

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

d) As for I 2 ( t ), thanks to the boundness of the derivatives of f with respect to ( x, y, z ), Lemma 3.2, Proposition 3.3, Lemma 3.4 and Proposition 3.6 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

e) Next, we analyse I 3 ( t ). Thanks to the boundness of σ x , σ x ′ and D 2 xyz f ˜ ρρε , H¨ older inequality, Proposition 3.3, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We just estimate the term E T 0 | X 1 ,ε ( t ) X 1 ,ε ( t ) q 0 ( t ) q 1 ( t ) dt 2 , since the other terms are analogous.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, one has E [ ( ∫ T 0 | I 3 ( t ) | dt ) 2 ] ⩽ ε 3 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

f) From the continuity of the second-order derivatives of f with respect to v , Dominated Convergence Theorem allows to show E [ ( ∫ T 0 | I 4 ( t ) | dt ) 2 ] ⩽ ε 2 ρ ( ε ) . Hence, we have

## References

- [1] D. Andersson and B. Djehiche, A maximum principle for SDEs of mean-field type, Appl. Math. Optim., 63 (2011), 341-356.
- [2] V. G. Boltyanski, R. V. Gamkrelidze and L.S. Pontryagin, On the theory of optimal processes, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 10 (1956), 7-10 (in Russian).
- [3] PH. Briand, B. Delyon, Y. Hu, E. Pardoux and L. Stoica, L p solutions of backward stochastic differential equations, Stoch. Process. Appl., 108 (2003), 109-129.
- [4] R. Buckdahn, B. Djehiche, J. Li and S. Peng, Mean-field backward stochastic differential equations. A limit approach, Ann. Probab., 37(4) (2009), 1524-1565.
- [5] R. Buckdahn, J, Li and S. Peng, Mean-field backward stochastic differential equations and related partial differential equations, Stoch. Process. Appl., 119(10) (2009), 3133-3154.
- [6] R. Buckdahn, B. Djehiche and J. Li, A general stochastic maximum principle for SDEs of mean-field type, Appl. Math. Optim., 64 (2011), 197-216.
- [7] R. Buckdahn, J. Li and J. Ma, A stochastic maximum principle for general mean-field systems, Appl. Math. Optim., 74 (2016), 507-534.
- [8] M. Dokuchaev and X.Y. Zhou, Stochastic controls with terminal contingent conditions. J. Math. Analysis Appl., 238 (1999), 143-165.
- [9] C. Donnelly and A.J. Heunis, Quadratic risk minimization in a regime-switching model with portfolio constraints, SIAM J. Control Optim., 50 (2012), 2431-2461.
- [10] D. Duffie, and L. Epstein, Stochastic differential utility, Econometrica, 60 (1992), 353-394.
- [11] D. Duffie, and C. Skiadas, Continuous-time security pricing: a utility gradient approach, J. Math. Econom., 23 (1994), 107-131.
- [12] N. El Karoui, S. Peng and MC. Quenez, A dynamic maximum priciple for the optimization of recursive utilities under constraints, Ann. Appl. Probab., 11 (2001), 664-693.
- [13] M. Hu, Stochastic global maximum principle for optimization with recursive utilities, Probab. Uncert. Quant. Risk, 2(1) (2017), 1-20.
- [14] M. Hu, S. Ji and X. Xue, A global stochastic maximum principle for fully coupled forward-backward stochastic systems, SIAM J. Control Optim., 56(6) (2018), 4309-4335.
- [15] M. Hu, S. Ji and R. Xu, A global stochastic maximum principle for forward-backward stochastic control systems with quadratic generators, SIAM J. Control Optim., 60(3) (2022), 1791-1818.
- [16] S. Ji and X.Y. Zhou, A maximum principle for stochastic optimal control with terminal state constrains and its applications, Comm. Inf. Syst., 6 (2006), 321-337.
- [17] S. Peng, A general stochastic maximum principle for optimal control problems, SIAM J. Control Optim., 28(4) (1990), 966-979.
- [18] S. Peng, Backward stochastic differential equations and applications to optimal control, Appl. Math. Optim., 27(2) (1993), 125-144.
- [19] Peng, S, Open problems on backward stochastic differential equations. In: Chen, S, Li, X, Yong, J, Zhou, XY (eds.) Control of distributed parameter and stocastic systems, pp. 265-273, Boston: Kluwer Acad. Pub, 1998.
- [20] S.L. Nguyen, G. Yin and T.A. Hoang, Laws of large numbers for systems with mean-field interactions and Markovian switching, Stoch. Process Appl., 130 (2020), 262-296.
- [21] S.L. Nguyen, D.T. Nguyen and G. Yin, Stochastic maximum principle for switching diffusions using conditional mean-field and applications to control problems, ESAIM Contr. Optim. Calc. Var., 26 (2020), 1-26.

- [22] S.L. Nguyen, G. Yin and D.T. Nguyen, A general stochastic maximum principle for mean-field controls with regime switching, Appl. Math. Optim., 84 (2021), 3295-3294.
- [23] M. Schroder and C. Skiadas, Optimal consumption and portfolio selection with stochastic differential utility, J. Econ. Theory, 89 (1) (1997), 68-126.
- [24] S. Tang and X. Li, Necessary conditions for optimal control of stochastic systems with random jumps, SIAM J. Control Optim., 32 (1994), 1447-1475.
- [25] Z. Wu, A general maximum principle for optimal control of forward-backward stochastic systems, Automatica, 49 (2013), 1473-1480.
- [26] J. Xiong, An introduction to stochastic filtering theory. London: Oxford University Press, 2008.
- [27] W. Xu, Stochastic maximum principle for optimal control problem of forward and backward system, The ANZIAM Journal, 37 (1995), 172-185.
- [28] J. Yong, Optimality variational principle for controlled forward-backward stochastic differential equations with mixed initial-terminal conditions, SIAM J. Control Optim., 48(6) (2010), 4119-4156.