sde\_switched5a-ayv.tex

## On higher order moments and rates of convergence for SDEs with switching

Alexander Veretennikov June 26, 2023

## Abstract

Second order recurrence of a d -dimensional diffusion with an additive Wiener process, with switching, and with one recurrent and one transient regime and constant switching intensities is established under suitable conditions. The approach is based on embedded Markov chains and a priori bounds for the moments of X t at moments of jumps of the discrete component, as well as on certain simple martingale properties.

Keywords: diffusion, switching, positive recurrence, 2-recurrence

MSC codes: 60H10, 60J60

## 1 Introduction

We are interested in the second order recurrence, or 2-recurrence for the process ( X t , Z t ) with a continuous component X and discrete one Z described by the stochastic differential equation in I R d

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∗ Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Moscow, Russia; email: ayv@iitp.ru

† This study was funded by the Foundation for the Advancement of Theoretical Physics and Mathematics 'BASIS'.

∗†

for the component X , while Z t is a continuous-time Markov process on the state space S = { 0 , 1 } with constant positive intensities of respective transitions λ 01 =: λ -, &amp; λ 10 =: λ + ; the trajectories of Z are assumed to be c` adl` ag; the jumps for Z are independent of W and of the trajectory of the component X . Positive recurrence for such systems was recently studied in [9, 10], and the history and other references are briefly commented in the end of this section. The second order recurrence is useful because it provides a certain rate of convergence better than what follows from the mere positive recurrence; of course, it will require some additional qualitative assumptions in comparison to the conditions for the positive recurrence. On the other hand, the assumptions required for such recurrence is - quite naturally - weaker than what is needed for the exponential convergence (see [3]). The notations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

will be used. The condition of the boundedness of the function b suffices for the process ( X t , Z t ) to be well-defined as a strong solution; see [8, 9, 10] for some details; see also [2, section 2.2] concerning the links between semi-linear parabolic systems and SDEs with switching. The process ( X,Z ) is a Feller one and strong Markov's.

The SDE solution is assumed ergodic under the regime Z = 0 and transient under Z = 1. We are looking for sufficient conditions for the second order recurrence of the strong Markov process ( X t , Z t ). Such a problem was considered in [3] for the exponentially recurrent case; positive recurrence was studied in [9] and [10]; for other references see [1], [5], [6], [7], and the references therein. Under weak ergodic and transient conditions the setting was earlier investigated in [9] for the case of the constant intensities λ 0 , λ 1 (i.e., not depending on x ). The result from [9] will be used essentially; however, the upper bounds for the second moment of X from [9] do not suffice, and some kind of similar lower bounds for the second moments of the diffusion component will be established under additional assumptions: it turns out that they are also needed for the upper bound of the second order recurrence.

The paper consists of the sections: Introduction, Main results (section 2), Auxiliaries I (section 3), Auxiliaries II (section 4), Auxiliaries III (section 5), and Proof of main result, which is theorem 1 (section 6).

Sometimes we will drop the indices from the expectations writing E instead of E x,z where there is no confusion. Sometimes we will drop just the index z where appropriate.

## 2 Main results

In [9] and in [10] the following result was established (in fact, in [9] for d = 1 and constant λ -, λ + , and in [10] for d ≥ 1 and for variable coefficients λ -, λ + ).

Proposition 1 ([9]) Let the drift b = ( b + , b -) be bounded and Borel measurable, and let there exist r -, r + , M &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

Then the process ( X,Z ) is positive recurrent; moreover, there exists C &gt; 0 such that for all M 1 large enough and all x ∈ R d and for z = 0 , 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, the process ( X t , Z t ) has a unique invariant measure, and for each nonrandom initial condition x, z there is a convergence to this measure in total variation when t →∞ .

For studying the second order recurrence we assume a bit more restrictive condition:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that (6) implies (4). In fact, for the proof, really for simplicity of the presentation, we assume even a bit more, namely,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that (7) implies (6). Also, it will be assumed the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

NB: Of course,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This condition is the natural part of (8) in a combination with (3); so, it will not be repeated each time in the statements.

The next theorem is the main result of the paper.

Theorem 1 Let conditions (2), (3), (7), (8) be satisfied. Then the process ( X,Z ) is 2-recurrent, that is, there exists C &gt; 0 such that for any M 1 large enough and all x ∈ R d and for z = 0 , 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 1 It is likely that conditions (2), (3), (6), (8) suffice for the 2-recurrence of the process ( X,Z ) : namely, there exist C, δ &gt; 0 such that for any M 1 large enough and all x ∈ R d and for z = 0 , 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(Of course, the less δ the greater C here.) An accurate justification of this bound will be one of the goals, among others, for the further studies.

Remark 2 (On convergence) The bound (10) leads to the rate of convergence of the marginal distributions of the couple ( X t , Z t ) in total variation towards the unique invariant measure via the coupling inequality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In principle, such a link is well-known in the recurrent Markov processes theory. The estimate (11) is particularly useful for the probabilistic representations of solutions of Poisson equations in the whole space R d . We postpone the details and the proof till futher publications.

## 3 Auxiliaries I

Here we state some auxiliary results similar to those established earlier in [9, 10], although, slightly different, which will be used in what follows.

Denote ‖ b ‖ = sup x,z | b ( x, z ) | . Let M 1 ≫ M (the value M 1 to be specified later). Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where T n for each n ≥ 1 is defined by induction as

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

NB: In [10] a bit different definition for τ was used, namely, inf( T n ≥ 0 : | X T n | ≤ M 1 ) ; in the present setting, given the new goal, the version (12) is more convenient, as it is now not suitable to stop at 'odd' stopping times T 2 n +1 .

To prove the main theorem (not in this section) it suffices to evaluate from above the value E x,z τ 2 because apparently τ M 1 ≤ τ .

Let ǫ &gt; 0 , 0 &lt; q &lt; 1 be any values satisfying the equality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(see (4)). Also, in the proof of the theorem it suffices to assume | x | &gt; M and even | x | &gt; M 1 . The proofs of most of the lemmata and corollaries in this section follow from [10]; if not, they are provided in what follows.

Lemma 1 1. Under the assumptions (2) and (4) for any δ &gt; 0 there exists M 1 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

Let

2. More than that, for any δ &gt; 0 there exists M 1 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. 1. The proof of the first part of this lemma (i.e., of the bound (14)) may be found in [10].

2. The proof of (15) is quite similar: the only change is that one random interval [0 , T 1 ] must be replaced by the union of two: [0 , T 2 ] = [0 , T 1 ] ∪ [ T 1 , T 2 ], which does not affect the calculus too much. Lemma 1 follows. QED

Let us denote by X i t , i = 0 , 1 the solutions of the equations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The index z may be dropped for expectations and probabilities for each X i .

Lemma 2 If M 1 is large enough, then under the assumptions (2) and (4) for any | x | &gt; M 1 for any k = 0 , 1 , . . .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

also,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Along with next lemma 3, this lemma 2 will be used later on in lemma 13. Note that with a new definition of τ the identity holds

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

because τ may only be equal to some T n with an even index, n = 2 k .

Proof. The proof of (17) coincides verbatim with the proof of the bound (12) in [10, Lemma 2], even though the setting in [10] is a bit more general in the sense that the intensities may be variable with a possible dependence on the component X t at each time. The proof of (18) is also similar, but there is some difference because of the 'another indicator' 1( τ &gt; T 2 k ) in place of 1( τ &gt; T 2 k +1 ). Let us show the full proof of (18). It suffices to consider the case k = 0.

Under the condition Z 0 = 1 the process X t coincides with X 1 t until the moment T 0 . Hence, we have on [0 , T 0 ] as well as on [ T 1 , T 2 ] by Itˆ o's formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the latter inequality on the set ( | X t | &gt; M ) due to the assumptions (3). Further, since 1( | X t | &gt; M ) = 1 -1( | X t | ≤ M ), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, for | x | &gt; M 1 (which is equivalent to τ &gt; T 0 in the case T 0 = 0) we get,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For a fixed ǫ &gt; 0 let us choose δ = λ -1 + ǫ/ (2 M ‖ b ‖ ). Then we get due to (20),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting here X T 2 k +1 instead of X T 1 , and writing E x ( ·|F T 2 k +1 ) instead of E x ( ·|F T 1 ), and multiplying by 1( τ &gt; T 2 k +1 ) = 1( τ &gt; T 2 k ) (see (19)), we obtain the bound (18), as required. QED

Corollary 1 If M 1 is large enough, then under the assumptions (2) and (4) for any | x | &gt; M 1 for any k = 0 , 1 , . . .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 3 If M 1 is large enough, then under the assumptions (2) and (4) for any k = 0 , 1 , . . .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

Also,

Along with lemma 2, this lemma 3 will be used in what follows in lemma 13.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Corollary 2 If M 1 is large enough, then under the assumptions (2) and (4) for any k = 0 , 1 , . . .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 4 Under the assumptions (2) and (4) for any k = 0 , 1 , . . .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 5 Under the assumptions (2) and (4) for any k = 0 , 1 , . . .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

NB: The lemmata in this section suffice for an upper bound of E τ . They will also be used in the second order bound in the next sections.

## 4 Auxiliaries II: fourth moments of Xt

In this section new auxiliary results will be established which will be required for the proof of the main theorem.

Potentially, the recurrence in terms of the 4 + δ moment of the marginals of the process X should lead to a bound for the second order moment of τ ; the author is not sure whether the exact forth moment suffices, although, it might be. This section is devoted to the bounds for the fourth moment of X , and the sixth moment will be esstimated in the next section. Recall that the additional stronger assumptions (6), (8) are required for this section. We are going to evaluate from below and from above the differences of the fourth moment of the diffusion component X t on 'positive' and 'negative' intervals between the consequtive jumps of the Z -component, i.e., where Z = 0 and Z = 1.

Lemma 6 Let the assumptions (3) and (8) be satisfied. Then there exists C &gt; 0 such that for any x, z, t

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

NB: For what follows it is important/useful to keep the senior coefficients equal to one in all right hand sides here: 1 × x 2 in (25), 1 × x 4 in (27), et al. The constants C in the right hand sides are less important for what follows.

Proof. By Itˆ o's formula,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that due to the assumptions (3) and (8), and by virtue of the local boundedness of the drift we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To justify (26) we conclude using (29)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is needless to say that all constants C are or may be different here. Now (29) and (25) imply (27) as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as required. Similarly,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which shows (28). Lemma 6 is proved. QED

Lemma 7 If | x | &gt; M 1 , then there exists C &gt; 0 such that on the positive interval under the assumptions (2), (3), (6), and (8)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or, equivalently,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. For | x | &gt; M 1 we have

E x, 1 ( X 4 T -x 4 ) = E x, 1 ∫ T 0 (4 X 3 s b ( X s ) ︸ ︷︷ ︸ ≤ r + X 2 s 1( X 2 s &gt;M 2 )+ C, ≥ R + X 2 s 1( X 2 s &gt;M 2 ) -C +(2 d +4) X 2 s ) ds ≤ (4 r + +6) E x, 1 ∫ T 0 ( X 2 s + C ) ds = (4 r + +(2 d +4)) E x, 1 ∫ T 0 ( X 2 s ∧ τ + C ) ds = (4 r + +(2 d +4)) E x, 1 ∫ ∞ 0 1( s &lt; T )( X 2 s ∧ τ + C ) ds = (4 r + +(2 d +4)) ∫ ∞ 0 E x, 1 1( s &lt; T )( X 2 s + C ) ds = (4 r + +(2 d +4)) ∫ ∞ 0 E x 1( s &lt; T ) E x, 1 ( X 2 s + C ) ds ≤ (4 r + +(2 d +4)) ∫ ∞ 0 exp( -λ + s )( x 2 + Cs ) ds + C λ + = (4 r + +(2 d +4)) λ + ︸ ︷︷ ︸ =: κ + x 2 + C =: κ + x 2 + C, with some C . This justifies the estimate (31). The lemma is proved. QED

Lemma 8 If | x | &gt; M 1 , then there exists C &gt; 0 such that on the negative interval under the assumptions (2), (3), (6), and (8)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with a certain C . This shows (33). Lemma 8 is proved. QED

Lemma 9 Under the assumptions (2), (3), (6), and (8), it is possible to choose M 1 &gt; &gt; M so that

and, moreover,

Similarly,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, hence, by induction,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We evaluate after two steps (if M 1 is large enough)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Adding up, we get for x 2 &gt; M 2 1 , if M 1 is large enough,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Due to the assumption (8), it is possible to choose M 1 so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the value of the constant C from the previous inequality. Then on x 2 &gt; M 2 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with a certain c &gt; 0, as required. The lemma follows. QED

Corollary 3 Under the assumptions assumptions (2), (3), (6), and (8), if M 1 is large enough, then for any k = 0 , 1 , . . .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

NB: Similar inequalities may be also proved for the case z = 1. However, since our ultimate goal is just an estimate for the second moment of τ (for any value of z ), this is not necessary, as in the end the bound for E x, 1 τ 2 will be derived from the bound on E x, 0 τ 2 .

## 5 Auxiliaries III: sixth moments for Xt

The following is the analogue of lemma 8 for E X 6 T .

Lemma 10 Suppose the assumptions (2), (3), (7), and (8) hold true. In this case, if | x | &gt; M 1 , then on the negative interval for some C, C -&gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. By Itˆ o's formula,

dX 6 t = 3 X 4 t [(2 X t b ( X t , Z t ) + d +4) dt +2 X t dW t ] . So, we have on the set τ &gt; 0 with | x | &gt; M 1 : E x, 0 ( X 6 T -x 6 ) = E x, 0 ∫ T 0 (6 X 4 s X s b ( X s ) ︸ ︷︷ ︸ ≤-r -X 4 s + C 1( X 2 s ≤ M ) +(3 d +12) X 4 s ) ds ≤ ( -6 r -+(3 d +12)) E x, 0 ∫ T 0 X 4 s ds + C E x, 0 ∫ T 0 X 4 s 1( | X s | ≤ M ) ds =( -6 r -+(3 d +12)) E x, 0 ∫ ∞ 0 1( s&lt;T ) X 4 s ds + C ∫ ∞ 0 E x, 0 1( s&lt;T ) E x ( X 1 s ) 4 1(( X 1 s ) 2 ≤ M 2 ) ds =( -6 r -+(3 d +12)) ∫ ∞ 0 E x, 0 1( s&lt;T ) X 4 s ds + C ∫ ∞ 0 E x, 0 1( s&lt;T ) E x, 0 X 4 s 1( X 2 s ≤ M 2 ) ds = ( -6 r -+(3 d +12)) ∫ ∞ 0 E x, 0 1( s &lt; T ) E x, 0 X 4 s ︸ ︷︷ ︸ ≥ x 4 -Cx 2 s -Cs 2 -Cs ds + C ∫ ∞ 0 exp( -λ -s ) E x, 0 X 4 s 1( X 2 s ≤ M 2 ) ds ︸ ︷︷ ︸ ≤ M 4 /λ -≤ ( -6 r -+(3 d +12)) ∫ ∞ 0 exp( -λ -s )( x 4 -Cx 2 s -Cs 2 -Cs ) ds + C + C ∫ ∞ 0 exp( -λ -s ) E x, 0 X 4 s 1( X 2 s ≤ M 2 ) ds = -(6 r --(3 d +12)) λ -︸ ︷︷ ︸ =: κ -x 4 + C -x 2 + C =: -κ -x 4 + C -x 2 + C.

This shows (35). Lemma 10 is proved. QED

The next lemma is the analogue of lemma 7.

Lemma 11 If | x | &gt; M 1 , then on the positive interval under the assumptions (2), (3), (7), and (8), for some C, C + &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. For | x | &gt; M 1 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This justifies the estimate (36). Lemma 11 follows. QED

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 12 Suppose that the assumptions (2), (3), (7), and (8) hold true. Then it is possible to choose M 1 &gt; &gt; M so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

≤

E

X

1(

T

2

n

&lt; τ

)

X

6

2

T

∧

and, moreover,

Similarly,

E

n

2

X

T

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and (by induction)

∧

τ

1(

T

2

n

&lt; τ

)

X

6

n

2

T

+2

∧

τ

T

n

2

∧

τ

n

τ

-

c

E

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We evaluate after two steps (if M 1 is large enough) on the positive interval

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

X

T

n

2

∧

τ

1(

T

2

n

&lt; τ

)

X

4

n

2

T

∧

τ

,

(it was used that 1( τ &gt; T 1 ) = 1( τ &gt; T 0 )), and on the negative interval

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Adding up, we get for x 2 &gt; M 2 1 , if M 1 is large enough

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We can choose M 1 so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for C is from the term Cx 2 in (37). Then on x 2 &gt; M 2 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with a certain c &gt; 0, as required. Lemma 12 is proved. QED

Corollary 4 Under the assumptions (2), (3), (7), and (8) for any m ≤ 3 and for any n = 0 , 1 , . . . ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The bound follows straightforwardly from lemma 12 and from H¨ older's inequality. QED

## 6 Second moment for τ via E X 6 t

Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is expected that under the appropriate conditions, the same as for ( X t ), the Markov process ( Y n ) is recurrent and ergodic and that the moment properties of the stopping time N will help establish similar properties for the stopping time τ which is our ultimate goal. Indeed, and the process

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a square integrable discrete time martingale with the compensator

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that E η i = λ -1 -+ λ -1 + . Hence, the moments of the random variable τ may be evaluated on the basis of the moments of the random variable N ; in particular, since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we have a bound

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, more generally, for any m&gt; 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with an appropriate c m . The bound on E N is based on the following

Lemma 13 Under the assumptions of theorem 1, for any z = 0 , 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also, for any z = 0 , 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Consider the case z = 0; then T 0 = 0 and Y 0 = x . The first inequality in (39) is trivial because 1( n +1 &lt; N ) ≤ 1( n &lt; N ). Further, due to the inequality (23), and since the process X T 2 k = Y k is markovian, then (23) may be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Denoting

we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Because of the markovian property of ( Y n ), this is equivalent to the second inequality in (39), as required. Summing up from k = 0 to k = K , and taking expectations, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, in the case of | x | &gt; M 1 the desired bound (40) follows from the monotone convergence theorem as K ↑ ∞ . If | x | ≤ M 1 , then N = 0 = E x,z N .

Consider now the case z = 1. Then T 0 &gt; 0 a.s. and Y 0 = X T 0 . Still, the bound (41) is valid, but now it is unlikely that Y 2 0 = x 2 . We estimate,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or, in other words, So, by virtue of (41) we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, we obtain (40) in both cases, z = 0 , 1. Lemma 13 is proved. QED

Proof of theorem 1. It is necessary to estimate the value E x,z N 2 for each x, z . Let us multiply both sides of the inequality (39) by n +2 and use once the inequality n +2 &gt; n +1:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or, equivalently,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So, we estimate,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so that for ǫ &lt; c and denoting κ n := E 1( n &lt; N )( n +1) | Y n | 2 , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

therefore, with chosen c and ǫ we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In other words,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By virtue of (38) and (40), and since x 2 ≤ x 6 +1 for any x , this imples the desired bound (9). Theorem 1 is proved QED

## References

- [1] Anulova, S., Veretennikov, A.: Exponential Convergence of degenerate Hybrid Stochastic Systems with full Dependence. In: Modern Stochastics and Applications, Springer, Optimization and Its Applications 90, Springer International Publishing Switzerland, 159-174 (2014). doi: 10.1007/978-3-31903512-3 10
- [2] Belopolskaya, Ya.I.: Stochastic differential equations. Applications to mathematical physics and financial mathematics. Lan', St-Petersburg, et al. (2018). (in Russian)
- [3] Cloez, B., Hairer, M.: Exponential ergodicity for Markov processes with random switching, Bernoulli 21(1), 505-536 (2015). DOI: 10.3150/13-BEJ577
- [4] Khasminskii, R.Z.: Stochastic stability of differential equations. 2nd ed. Springer, Berlin (2012).

- [5] Khasminskii, R.Z.: Stability of regime-switching stochastic differential equations. Probl. Inf. Transm. 48, 259-270 (2012). doi: 10.1134/S0032946012030064
- [6] Mao, X., Yin, G., Yuan, C.: Stabilization and destabilization of hybrid systems of stochastic differential equations, Automatica, 43, 264-273 (2007) doi: 10.1016/j.automatica.2006.09.006
- [7] Shao, J., Yuan, C.: Stability of regime-switching processes under perturbation of transition rate matrices. Nonlinear Analysis: Hybrid Systems 33, 211-226 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nahs.2019.02.009
- [8] Veretennikov, A.Yu.: On strong solutions and explicit formulas for solutions of stochastic integral equations, Math. USSR-Sb. 39(3), 387-403 (1981). doi: 10.1070/SM1981v039n03ABEH001522
- [9] Veretennikov, A.Yu.: On Positive Recurrence of One-Dimensional Diffusions with Independent Switching. In: Shiryaev A.N., Samouylov K.E., Kozyrev D.V. (Eds), Recent Developments in Stochastic Methods and Applications. ICSM-5 2020. Springer Proc. in Mathem. &amp; Stat., Springer, Cham, vol 371, 242 - 252 (2021). doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-83266-7 18.
- [10] Veretennikov, A.Yu.: Positive recurrence of a solution of an SDE with variable switching intensities. Stoch PDE: Anal. Comp., 10, 1165-1179 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40072-022-00265-7
- [11] Veretennikov, A.Yu.: On Polynomial Mixing and Convergence Rate for Stochastic Difference and Differential Equations, Theory of Probability &amp; Its Applications, 44(2), 361-374 (2000). doi: 10.1137/S0040585X97977550