## SEQUENTIAL BAYESIAN LEARNING FOR HIDDEN SEMI-MARKOV MODELS

Patrick Aschermayr, Konstantinos Kalogeropoulos

Department of Statistics

LSE

p.aschermayr@lse.ac.uk ; k.kalogeropoulos@lse.ac.uk

January 26, 2023

## ABSTRACT

In this paper, we explore the class of the Hidden Semi-Markov Model (HSMM), a flexible extension of the popular Hidden Markov Model (HMM) that allows the underlying stochastic process to be a semi-Markov chain. HSMMs are typically used less frequently than their basic HMM counterpart due to the increased computational challenges when evaluating the likelihood function. Moreover, while both models are sequential in nature, parameter estimation is mainly conducted via batch estimation methods. Thus, a major motivation of this paper is to provide methods to estimate HSMMs (1) in a computationally feasible time, (2) in an exact manner, i.e. only subject to Monte Carlo error, and (3) in a sequential setting. We provide and verify an efficient computational scheme for Bayesian parameter estimation on HSMMs. Additionally, we explore the performance of HSMMs on the VIX time series using Autoregressive (AR) models with hidden semi-Markov states and demonstrate how this algorithm can be used for regime switching, model selection and clustering purposes.

K eywords Hidden semi-Markov Models, Sequential Monte Carlo, Model Selection, Mode-based clustering

## 1 Introduction

Discrete State Space Models (SSM) provide a flexible class of models with applications in ecology, economics, finance, robotics and signal processing [Bulla and Bulla, 2006, Lindsten and Sch¨ on, 2013, Chopin and Papaspiliopoulos, 2020, Corenflos et al., 2021], among others. They can handle structural breaks, shifts, or time-varying parameters and still have an interpretable structure. Moreover, such models are generative and allow for multi-step forecasting. However, analytical forms of the likelihood function are only available in special cases, and standard parameter optimization routines are often challenging to implement. Given the observed data e 1: T = ( e 1 , . . . , e T ) and parameter θ , the major challenge in the estimation of SSMs is thus the generally intractable likelihood function p θ ( e 1: T ) , which integrates over the latent state trajectory s 1: T such that p θ ( e 1: T ) = ∫ p θ ( e 1: T , s 1: T ) ds 1: T .

A flexible discrete SSM on which we focus in this paper is known as Hidden Semi-Markov Model. HSMMs have a flexible state duration distribution, well suited for processes that remain in any particular state for an extended period of time, and can be considered as generalizations of the well-known basic Hidden Markov Model introduced in Baum and Petrie [1966]. HSMMs have been employed in ecology, epidemiology, finance [Bulla and Bulla, 2006, Pohle et al., 2021, Visani et al., 2021] and many other fields [Yu, 2016], but are typically used more sporadically than their standard HMM counterparts because the likelihood function is significantly more costly to evaluate. In the HMM case, the likelihood has computational complexity of O ( K 2 T ) , where K = number of latent states, T = number of data points, see Baum and Petrie [1966]. For the HSMM, this is a much more expensive operation of order O ( K 2 ( d max -d min ) 2 T ) [Murphy, 2002, Dewar et al., 2012], where d min and d max denote the minimal and maximal state duration in a latent regime. In practice, ( d max -d min ) &gt;&gt; K , as described in more detail in Section 2, which often leads to computationally expensive inference algorithms. Such considerations have led to the use of approximate methods in applications where HSMMs provide valuable models, see for example Hadj-Amar et al. [2022] and Xiao et al. [2018].

In this paper, we follow an alternative route aiming to construct efficient computational schemes that operate on the joint space of latent states and parameters using Sequential Monte Carlo (SMC) methods that are exact, in the sense that they are only amenable to Monte Carlo error. The fundamental building block of the proposed schemes is the Particle Filter (PF), see for example Doucet and Johansen [2011] and the references therein. Traditionally, SMC samplers such as PFs have been used to estimate the underlying state sequence of SSMs, while standard Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) samplers facilitate Bayesian inference for the model parameters. More recently, combining these methods is becoming increasingly popular, see Daviet [2018] and Buchholz et al. [2020]. A natural computational framework that jointly infers the latent state sequence and model parameter is known as Particle MCMC (PMCMC) [Andrieu et al., 2010, Andrieu and Roberts, 2009]. To our knowledge, PMCMC has not been used for HSMMs, so we work within this framework aiming to construct an efficient implementation. In particular, we focus on the Particle Gibbs (PGIBBS) version to implement parameter updates, conditional on the latent state trajectory, via Hamiltonian MCMC [Neal, 2012] variants. Given that SSMs are typically used in applications with data of sequential nature, it is essential to explore techniques where previous parameter estimates can be reused once the data is updated. An example for that is provided by the Sequential Monte Carlo Squared (SMC2) algorithm, introduced in Chopin et al. [2012], which can be viewed as an extension of the main SMC framework of Chopin [2002] and Del Moral et al. [2006]; see also Dai et al. [2020] for some recent work that includes a survey of applications in different contexts. Other similar approaches

## SEQUENTIAL BAYESIAN LEARNING FOR HIDDEN SEMI-MARKOV MODELS

include Fearnhead and Taylor [2010] and Crisan and Miguez [2017]. More information on these methods is provided in the Section 3.

The major motivation of this paper is thus to develop methods to estimate HSMMs (1) in a computationally feasible time and (2) in a sequential manner. The contribution of this paper is two-fold: First, we offer Sequential Monte Carlo schemes on Hidden Semi-Markov Models by tailoring ideas from Andrieu et al. [2010] and Chopin et al. [2013] for batch and sequential estimation. This offers several benefits over standard deterministic filtering techniques, including computational efficiency. The developed SMC schemes can also facilitate Bayesian model choice and assessment of predictive performance in an efficient manner. Second, we propose a novel class of models by linking Autoregressivetype models with HSMMs to better describe data consisting of financial and econometric time series. Sequential estimation of such models is particularly important as AR HSMMs have the potential to detect substantial changes in the data, which we illustrate in a case study on data that evolves rapidly during the Covid-19 pandemic.

The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 formally introduces HSMMs via a suitable formulation to apply sequential Monte Carlo methods such as Particle Filtering. It also provides justification for the use of PFs instead of deterministic filtering techniques. In Section 3, the developed methodology of this paper is presented, which includes the model choice criteria available from by-products of the estimation process. Section 4 explores the performance of the developed methods via simulation based experiments. In Section 5, we focus on the performance of HSMMs, estimated with the developed methodology of this paper, on real-world applications such as financial time series of the VIX index. Comparisons of different HSMMs as well as benchmark HMMs are conducted. Model selection, and in particular choice of the number of states using SMC2, is also put into test. Finally, Section 6 concludes with some relevant discussion.

## 2 Hidden Semi-Markov Model

A standard Hidden Markov Model may be specified via a bivariate stochastic process { e t , s t } t =1 , 2 ,... , where s t is an unobserved Markov chain and e t is an observed sequence of independent random variables, conditional on s t . The model is fully specified by the transition distribution f θ , s t ∼ f θ ( s t | s t -1 ) , t ≥ 2 , the corresponding initial distribution π θ , s 1 ∼ π θ ( s 1 ) , and the observation distribution g θ , e t ∼ g θ ( e t | s t ) , t ≥ 1 . Directly computing the likelihood function of this model involves summing up over all possible state sequences,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, various filtering techniques have been proposed that take into account the memory of the latent state variable to reduce the computational costs to O ( K 2 T ) . One shortcoming of HMMs is their explicit distributional assumption regarding the duration in any particular state. To give insight into this issue, we denote p ( s t + k = j, s t +1: t + k -1 = i | s t = i ) , the probability a state remains in any current state until it switches, as state duration distribution. In the HMM case, this probability is implicitly geometric. Set p ( s t = i | s t -1 = i ) = T ii , and assume there are only 2 states, then

## SEQUENTIAL BAYESIAN LEARNING FOR HIDDEN SEMI-MARKOV MODELS

for a homogeneous Markov chain, using the chain rule and the Markov assumption, it holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In general, for t + k steps, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the geometric distribution has to be interpreted as the length of state duration up to and including the transition to the other state. For processes that tend to stay in any particular state for a long-time horizon, this may be a poor modelling choice. Alternatively, the state duration could be explicitly modelled. A Hidden Semi-Markov Model, see [Murphy, 2002, Yu, 2010, 2016], is a generalization of an HMM, which may be viewed as a HSMM with Geometric state duration distribution. A graph structure and a comparison to the standard HMM can be seen in figures 1a and 1b. A specific formulation of the HSMM that explicitly defines the duration distribution is known as Explicit-duration Hidden Markov Model (EDHMM). Transitions are allowed only at the end of each state, resulting in the following definition:

Definition 2.1. Hidden semi-Markov Model (HSMM) A hidden semi-Markov model is a bivariate stochastic process { e t , z t } t =1 , 2 ,... , where z t = { s t , d t } is an unobserved semi-Markov chain and, conditional on z t , e t is an observed sequence of independent random variables. The model is fully specified by the transition distribution f θ ( s t | s t -1 , d t -1 ) of s t

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the corresponding initial distribution π θ of z t , and the observation distribution g θ , e t ∼ g θ ( e t | s t ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where δ ( a, b ) is and indicator function and equals 1 if a = b and 0 otherwise.

Popular choices for the duration distribution h θ are the Poisson or the Negative Binomial distribution, for greater flexibility at the cost of an additional model parameter per state. The observation distribution g θ can be set according to the specifics of the application at hand, which includes higher order data dependency such as g θ ( e t | s t , e t -k : t -1 ) , for t ≥ 1 . An example for an excellent data dependency use case is provided in Section 5.1, where AR(1) models are used in each latent regime. The joint distribution of an EDHMM given the parameter can be stated as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the duration distribution h θ of d t The likelihood can be obtained by integrating out both s 1: T and d 1: T . Due to the additional latent variables d 1: T , this is a much more computationally expensive operation than in the standard HMM case. In order to gain more insight on this, we can shrink the graphical model structure of a HMM and HSMM to a single time step. In order to compute the likelihood of observation e t +1 given the current state s t , a sum over all possible state transitions has to be taken, as can be seen in equation (1). This resembles a standard mixture model computation, with the transition matrix of the HMMreplacing the mixture component weights.

Figure 1: Figure 1a depicts a K -state Bayesian HMM, parameter θ and hyper-parameter { β, γ } . The shaded nodes e t denote the observed data at time t , while the unshaded nodes indicate the latent state s t . θ i,s denotes the parameter at state i for latent state s , and β i the corresponding hyper-parameter. f is the transition distribution s , g is the observation distribution for e . π denotes the initial distribution for s . Figure 1b depicts a K -state Bayesian HSMM, parameter θ and hyper-parameter { α, β, γ } . The shaded nodes e t denote the observed data at time t , while the unshaded nodes indicate latent duration d t and state s t . θ i,d denotes the parameter at state i for latent duration d , and α i the corresponding hyper-parameter. h and f are the transition distributions for d and s , g is the observation distribution for e . π denotes the initial distribution for d and s .

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the HSMM, however, the duration variable means an additional sum over a random variable that has at worst an infinite number of terms in the case of duration distributions with countably infinite support, shown in equation (2).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that ∑ z t +1 = ∑ d t +1 ∑ s t +1 , which sums up all possible durations over all states, has at worst an infinite number of terms if the duration distributions have countably infinite support, and at best a large number of terms for long sequences, see Dewar et al. [2012]. The standard approach to tackle this problem is to set up a minimum and maximum duration d min and d max , where the computational complexity of the forward-backward algorithm reduces to O ( T ( K ( d max -d min ) 2 ) , compared to the original O ( TK 2 ) in the HMM, see Murphy [2002]. Choosing an appropriate maximum duration varies depending on the underlying data. If the truncation is too small, then inference will typically fail, if is too large then calculations might become infeasible. Hence, ( d max -d min ) may increase the computational complexity to burdensome levels, which requires the modeler to set d max too small. Other approaches include [Johnson and Willsky, 2013, Johnson, 2014], who decrease computational complexity by censoring the initial or end time. To give a numerical example, in order to appropriately estimate a HSMM, we assume that at least a single state transition has to occur, hence d max &lt; T , but ( d max -d min ) &gt;&gt; K . The computational costs for a 5 -state HMM and 1000 data points would be O (5 2 × 1000) , while for the HSMM, assuming d max = 500 and d min = 0 , O (5 2 × 500 2 × 1000) for a single likelihood call.

Alternatively, a particle filter can be used for the likelihood computation in O ( NT ) operations, even if the model has HSMM dynamics. Exact inference is retained, subject to Monte Carlo error, using the Particle MCMC algorithm [Andrieu et al., 2010]. N denotes the number of particles used in the filter, and we observed that it is sufficient to set N = T 2 for sequential Monte Carlo schemes on HSMMs, see Section 3 for more detail.

## 3 Bayesian Inference on Hidden Semi-Markov Models

In a Bayesian framework, the typical goal is to infer the posterior distribution of the model parameter θ given the observed data e 1: T , p ( θ | e 1: T ) = p θ ( e 1: T ) p ( θ ) p ( e 1: T ) . This is a challenging task for SSMs as it involves integrating s 1: T over the likelihood p θ ( e 1: t ) = ∫ p θ ( e 1: T , s 1: T ) ds 1: T , which is typically intractable or costly to evaluate. Hence, usually the full posterior distribution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is inferred. If s 1: T is continuous, the target distribution p ( s 1: t , θ | e 1: t ) ∝ p ( e 1: t | s 1: t , θ ) × p ( s 1: t | θ ) × p ( θ ) can theoretically be estimated via MCMC. However, in this case, a state trajectory of p ( s 1: T | θ ) has to be sampled while evaluating the target function, usually resulting in very poor outcomes of this strategy. Alternatively, classic Gibbs sampling strategies could be applied, which iterate the estimation process between sampling the latent states given the continuous model parameter and vice versa. However, for the latent state trajectory proposal step, a forward-backward algorithm would have to be employed again, as other choices such as one-at-a-time updates or overlapping blocks are known to cause slow mixing [Kalogeropoulos et al., 2010, Golightly, 2009] of the Markov chain.

A more general attempt to jointly target the full joint posterior p ( s 1: T , θ | e 1: T ) can be shown as follows:

- 1. propose θ ⋆ ∼ f ( θ ⋆ | θ ) and s ⋆ 1: T ∼ p θ ⋆ ( s ⋆ 1: T | e 1: T ) ,
- 2. accept ( θ ⋆ , s ⋆ 1: T ) with acceptance probability

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The last term in equation (3) has been simplified by using the Basic Marginal Likelihood Identity (BMI) of Chib [1995]. This framework allows to jointly sample θ and s 1: t , but the in general intractable likelihood function is still contained in step 3. While this term can be computed analytically for the discrete HSMM via the so-called forwardbackward algorithms, they are prohibitively expensive to run, as described in Section 2. Going forward, we introduce the algorithmic machinery known as Particle MCMC [Andrieu et al., 2010], which replaces the likelihood evaluation with an estimate ˆ p θ ( e 1: T ) from a Particle Filter.

## 3.1 Particle Filtering

Particle Filters are often used to solve filtering equations in the form of π t ( x 1: t ) = τ t ( x 1: t ) z t . The goal is to sequentially sample a sequence of random variables, x t , t ∈ (1 , ..., T ) that come from a sequence of target probabilities π t ( x 1: t ) with the same computational complexity at each time step. If it impossible to directly sample from π t , a similar proposal distribution q t can be used, s.t. π t ( x 1: t ) &gt; 0 ⇒ q t ( x 1: t ) &gt; 0 . The fraction of τ t ( x 1: t ) and q t ( x 1: t ) is known as un-normalized weight function w t ( x 1: t ) = τ t ( x 1: t ) q t ( x 1: t ) , s.t. the target distribution can be rewritten as π t ( x 1: t ) = w t ( x 1: t ) q t ( x 1: t ) z t . This method is recognized as Importance Sampling (IS). Often, the variable of interest is the normalizing constant z t = ∫ τ t ( x 1: t ) dx 1: t = ∫ w t ( x 1: t ) q t ( x 1: t ) dx 1: t , which can be approximated via the un-normalized weight functions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This technique does, unfortunately, rapidly degenerate as t becomes larger. A technique to sequentially sample from such distributions is called Sequential Importance Sampling (SIS), which keeps the computational costs fixed given additional time steps by decomposing the joint distribution as τ t ( x 1: t ) = τ t -1 ( x 1: t -1 ) τ t ( x t | x 1: t -1 ) . Similarly, the importance distribution can be decomposed as q t ( x 1: t ) = q 1 ( x 1 ) ∏ t n =2 q n ( x n | x 1: n -1 ) . The associated unnormalized weights can then be computed recursively via w t ( x 1: t ) = w 1 ( x 1 ) ∏ t k =1 α k ( x 1: k ) , where the incremental importance weights α t ( x 1: t ) are given as α t ( x 1: t ) = τ t ( x t | x 1: t -1 ) q t ( x t | x 1: t -1 ) .

In most state space models, the memory for q t ( x t | x 1: t -1 ) is limited, so the target distribution can be evaluated and sampled from via the methods above at fixed computational costs. The only freedom in this framework is choosing an appropriate q t . Unfortunately, it can be shown that the variance of the corresponding weights grows with t , and we refer to this problem as weight degeneracy. Due to weights degeneracy, the variance for the estimator of the normalizing constant ˆ z is also increasing with t . To alleviate this obstacle, a resampling step for the particle trajectories x 1: t that normalizes the corresponding weights can be applied. Algorithms that do so at each iteration are known as Sequential Importance Resampling (SIR). However, this creates a new challenge known as sample path degeneracy, which refers to the problem that continuously resampling particle paths ultimately ends with very few unique trajectories. Balancing weight and sample path degeneracy is an ongoing research topic, and the most common method is to resample trajectories only at specific iterations, for example, if the Effective Sample Size (ESS)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of the particles is less than an a priori set threshold. For a discussion on several different resampling techniques, see Douc and Cappe [2005]. Adaptive resampling mitigates the exploding variance of the particle weights and keeps sample path degeneracy in check. Algorithms that apply this machinery are commonly referred as Particle Filters. They have a fixed computational complexity that is both linear in time T and in number of particles N , O ( NT ) , and return an estimate of the normalizing constant ˆ z t and a particle path of ˆ π ( x 1: t ) . In the SSM case, the joint distribution and the normalizing constant are of the form τ t ( x 1: t ) = p θ ( s 1: t , e 1: t ) and z t = p θ ( e 1: t ) . An approximation for the likelihood can be computed via the weights ˆ z t = 1 N ∑ N n =1 w t ( s n 1: t , e 1: t ) , which can be decomposed in the following recursive form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The incremental weight α is defined as α t ( s 1: t , e 1: t ) = p θ ( e t | s 1: t ,e 1: t -1 ) p θ ( s t | s 1: t -1 ,e 1: t -1 ) q ( s t | s 1: t -1 ,e 1: t ) , and the full likelihood estimate can be expressed as ˆ z T = 1 N ∑ N n =1 ∏ T k =1 α k ( s n 1: k , e 1: k ) , which is usually the preferred method in particle filter software implementations as this avoids memory allocations. This permits the estimation of the incremental likelihood p θ ( e t | e 1: t -1 ) ≈ 1 N ∑ N n =1 α t ( s n 1: t , e 1: t ) as well, which becomes relevant in the model selection Section 3.5. p θ ( e t | s 1: t , e 1: t -1 ) and p θ ( s t | s 1: t -1 , e 1: t -1 ) are model distributions, and have usually limited memory. The only free distribution to choose is q ( s t | s 1: t -1 , e 1: t ) , which should ideally look like p θ ( s t | s 1: t -1 , e 1: t ) . A common and simple choice is known as Bootstrap Particle Filter (BPF), which takes q ( s t | s 1: t -1 , e 1: t ) = p θ ( s t | s 1: t -1 , e 1: t -1 ) , reducing the incremental weight to α t ( s 1: t , e 1: t ) = p θ ( e t | s 1: t , e 1: t -1 ) . Another popular approach is the so called Auxiliary Particle Filter (APF) [Pitt and Shephard, 1999], which assumes α t ( s 1: t , e 1: t ) to be independent of s t (in the Bootstrap Particle Filter, this does not hold!). See [Kantas et al., 2015, Doucet and Johansen, 2011] for a more indepth review. A pseudo algorithm implementation for a standard PF can be found in Algorithm 1, where the auxiliary variable a i t refers to the ancestor path of a particular particle s i at time t. Hence a particle trajectory can be recursively defined as s i 1: t = ( s a i t 1: t -1 , s i t ) . Resampling the whole particle trajectory is equivalent to sampling a new ancestor path. Note that it is usually much faster to sample ancestors one at a time and then recursively recover the resampled particle path than to resample the whole particle trajectory at each iteration. A variant of this algorithm is known as Conditional Particle Filter (CPF), where a single particle path, s ′ 1: T , is chosen a priori as reference trajectory. This implementation tracks a slightly different target distribution, ˆ p ( s 1: T | s ′ 1: T , e 1: T ) , and is used in Section 4 and 5. A pseudo algorithm for this Conditional Particle Filter (CPF) with ancestor sampling can be found in Algorithm 2, and a more thorough review can be read in [Lindsten et al., 2014, 2015].

Once a particle filter has been run, observed and latent data can be forecasted by first sampling a new state s T +1 ∼ p θ ( · | s 1: T , e 1: T ) and then a new data point given this state e T +1 ∼ p θ ( · | s 1: T +1 , e 1: T ) . s T +1 can be sampled by

## SEQUENTIAL BAYESIAN LEARNING FOR HIDDEN SEMI-MARKOV MODELS

forward propagating algorithm 1 or 2 from T to T +1 , thereby reusing particles from 1 to T . This can be repeated for multiple time steps as well, resulting in a very fast procedure to sample from predictive distributions.

## 3.2 Particle Markov Chain Monte Carlo

The most common Bayesian inference technique for model parameter θ is known as Markov Chain Monte Carlo. Basic familiarly with this concept is assumed, and we refer to Craiu and Rosenthal [2014] for a more detailed review about standard MCMC techniques. A pseudo algorithm for a basic Metropolis step can be found in Algorithm 3. The major difficulty in algorithm 3 is finding a good proposal distribution f , which often results in slow mixing. A MCMC kernel that automatically tunes its proposal distribution at the cost of additional tuning hyper-parameter is known as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC), see [Neal, 2012] for an introduction and [Betancourt, 2018] for a review on this topic. A pseudo algorithm can be seen in Algorithm 4. The additional tuning hyper-parameter can be configured on the fly in the famous extension No U-Turn Sampling (NUTS), which was proposed by Hoffman and Gelman [2014]. Notable improvements for this algorithm are suggested in Betancourt [2016].

Note that both the HMC and NUTS kernel require the target density to be fully differentiable with respect to the model parameter θ . In the SSM case, targetting the marginal posterior distribution p ( θ | e 1: T ) ∝ p θ ( e 1: T ) p ( θ ) is difficult or impossible via MCMC, as the latent variables in p θ ( e 1: T ) = ∫ s 1: T p θ ( e 1: T , s 1: T ) have to be integrated out in the proposal ratio. However, p θ ( e 1: T , s 1: T ) is usually computable pointwise, so p ( s 1: T , θ | e 1: T ) can be targeted. In the Particle Metropolis Hastings (PMH) case, formally introduced in [Andrieu et al., 2010] and shown in pseudo Algorithm 5, a particle filter is used to obtain approximations for p θ ( e 1: T ) and p θ ( s 1: T | e 1: T ) as substitutes for the analytical solutions to target p ( s 1: T , θ | e 1: T ) jointly. In this setting, [Andrieu and Roberts, 2009] have shown the puzzling result that one can do so and still target the exact posterior distribution of interest. A major difficulty for this method is finding a good MCMC kernel K mcmc ( e 1: T , θ ) , because the θ proposal will be accepted based on the particle filter likelihood estimate, so tuning might be very noisy. Moreover, gradient based MCMC sampler do not work in this case as p θ ( e 1: T ) typically cannot be evaluated pointwise. A common critique on PMH is thus that this algorithm is ill-suited for a higher dimensional model parameter θ . A PMCMC variant that can mitigate this is known as Particle Gibbs with ancestors sampling (PGAS), see [Lindsten et al., 2014, 2015]. A pseudo algorithm is shown in Algorithm 6. To account for sampling from an approximation via a particle filter and to preserve the invariance principle, a slightly adjusted ˆ p θ ⋆ ( s ⋆ 1: T | s 1: T , e 1: T ) distribution is used to sample from the state trajectory. This method does not jointly estimate the state sequence and model parameter, but the state sequence is fixed when the new model parameter θ ⋆ ∼ p θ ( θ ⋆ | s 1: T , e 1: T ) are sampled. In this step, more advanced HMC style MCMC kernels can be used as p θ ⋆ ( e 1: T | s 1: T ) , which is easy to evaluate, replaces p θ ⋆ ( e 1: T ) in the acceptance ratio. Hence, more advanced MCMCkernels, such as the NUTS sampler, can be used to estimate model parameter θ in the PGAS setting.

## 3.3 Sequential Monte Carlo Squared

In a times series setting, forecasting is of major relevance. The standard way for prediction in a Bayesian setting is simple: obtain the posterior predictive distribution by integrating out the model parameter θ and, in the SSM case, the state trajectories s 1: T ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Once a sample for p ( s 1: T , θ | e 1: T ) is obtained, the predictive distributions for s T +1 | s 1: T , e 1: T , θ and e T +1 | s T +1 , s 1: T , e 1: T , θ are trivial to sample from. A major drawback of the PMCMC machinery is that, even though this algorithm primarily works for models suited to times series settings, it only works as batch estimation. Once additional data is observed, the algorithm needs to be run again to target p ( s 1: T +1 , θ | e 1: T +1 ) . A method that uses PMCMC in a sequential setting is known as Sequential Monte Carlo Squared, see Chopin et al. [2012]. SMC based algorithm often expand in the density region, known as density tempering or annealing, or the data dimension, known as data tempering or annealing, see Gunawan et al. [2021]. SMC2 is a data tempering algorithm and moves a collection of particles that consist of the model parameters and latent states by incrementally adding data to the estimation process. At the beginning, particles are drawn from the prior. Subsequent particles are explored iteratively by using multiple Particle Filter and particle MCMC sampler. At each iteration, N Particle Filter are used to obtain the incremental likelihood estimates ˆ p θ n ( e 1: t | e 1: t -1 ) = ˆ Z t = 1 N ∑ N n =1 α θ n ( s n 1: t , e 1: t ) and state trajectories s n 1: t ∼ ˆ p θ n ( s n 1: t | e 1: t ) for n = 1 , . . . , N . If the estimates ˆ p θ n ( e 1: t | e 1: t -1 ) are getting too noisy, the particles are jittered via PMCMC. Note that either the Particle Gibbs or the Particle Metropolis Hastings variant can be chosen for the PMCMC kernel. The density at the final iteration is the posterior distribution of interest. A pseudo algorithm can be seen in Algorithm 7.

A powerful feature of the SMC2 algorithm is that at each iteration, an unbiased estimate of the incremental marginal likelihood ˆ p ( e t | e 1: t -1 ) is obtained at practically no extra costs, see equation (5). From here on, it is straight forward to obtain an estimate for the marginal likelihood, ˆ p ( e 1: T ) = ∏ T t =1 ˆ p ( e t | e 1: t -1 ) , for model comparison or Bayes Factor (BF) calculations. Moreover, this machinery is highly parallelizable, a feature that is typically difficult to include in standard MCMC techniques, and most SMC2 iterations can be performed online as the particle filter can be propagated forward if no resampling step has been taken at the previous iteration. Additionally, during the propagation step, samples for s t +1 and e t +1 for posterior predictive distribution analysis can be obtained at each time index.

## 3.4 Tuning Configurations

## 3.4.1 Particle Filter tuning

In our setup, we used a bootstrap particle filter with transition distribution equal to the model dynamics as defined in Section 2. The particle resampling method was chosen to be systematic, and the resampling threshold for the ESS calculation was set to 75% . The only free tuning parameter in this case is the number of particles N . The higher N , the lower the variance for the log likelihood estimate, but the higher the computational costs per PMCMC iteration. We note that ultimately, the Particle MCMC samples are drawn from the correct target distribution, only subject to Monte Carlo error, independent of N . However, the mixing of the MCMC chains might be slower if less particles are used. In this case, a larger N might lead to better results at a fixed computational time horizon. Often, people set N equal to the number of data points received, but in practice, significantly less particles may be used. As a sanity check, we performed two experiments to provide insight. First, we computed a likelihood estimate for a range of parameter values for θ = { µ, σ, r, φ } of a 2-state HSMM for 1000 data points. µ and σ represent the parameter for a Normal distribution given a latent state, r and φ are the parameter of a Negative Binomial duration distribution. The transition distribution has no unknown parameter in the 2-state HSMM case, as the diagonal elements of the transition matrix are separately modeled by the duration. The true parameter can be seen as vertical grey lines on each subplot in Figure 5, which shows the log likelihood estimate for a range of each parameter that was chosen based on the 95% Credible Interval (CI) of a PMCMC run in Section 4, keeping all other parameter fixed. It can be seen that the variance is reasonably similar for N = 500 , 1000 or 2000 . Second, we directly examined the particle filter performance during a PMCMC run for the model defined above. The Partial Autocorrelation Function (PACF) plot of the log likelihood PF estimates for a varying number of particles can be seen in Figure 6. As there is little difference in the likelihood estimate variance between PFs with 500 and 2000 particles and the PACF look reasonably similar for the same particle range, we will use N = T 2 for our analysis going forward.

## 3.4.2 PMCMCtuning

Once a particle filter is designed, only a suitable MCMC kernel has to be chosen. As discussed in Section 3, more advanced gradient based MCMC sampler do not work in the Particle Metropolis Hastings case, as p θ ( e 1: T ) typically cannot be evaluated pointwise. Thus, we will use Particle Gibbs with ancestors sampling and target θ ⋆ ∼ p θ ( θ ⋆ | s 1: T , e 1: T ) in the MCMC step. As gradients for p θ ⋆ ( e 1: T | s 1: T ) can easily be calculated in this case, we choose the NUTS MCMC variant [Hoffman and Gelman, 2014, Betancourt, 2016] as MCMC kernel, as other kernels often take significantly more proposal steps to move toward the typical set. This is especially relevant for PMCMC on our model, as we will run a comparatively expensive particle filter after each MCMC proposal.

## 3.4.3 SMC2 tuning

As described in pseudo-algorithm 7, SMC2 has a particle filter and a PMCMC algorithm assigned for each particle. These particles may be propagated in parallel, so the number of SMC2 are typically chosen to be a multiple of the available computer cores. Initial model parameter drawn from the prior distributions, and the associated PF and PMCMC algorithm will be initiated based on the starting data of length t 0 &lt;&lt; T . Another tuning parameter is the number of jittering steps in the resampling step. As a guideline, we will continue jittering until the maximum parameter correlation is below 75% .

## 3.5 Model Selection

Once parameter are estimated, how should the performance of a model be evaluated? A powerful method for comparison is to validate models based on their marginal likelihood p ( e 1: T ) = ∫ p ( e 1: T , θ ) dθ = ∏ T t =1 p ( e t | e 1: t -1 ) . This distribution is typically intractable or very costly to evaluate, but during an SMC2 run, an estimate for p ( e t | e 1: t -1 ) can be obtained at practically no extra cost at each time step. In the particle filter propagation step in algorithm 7, the incremental weight given current model parameter θ m is computed via

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α t,θ n is defined as in Section 3.1 and M is the number of particles that are used for the particle filter associated to continuous parameter vector θ n . After all particles have been propagated forward, a Monte Carlo estimator for p ( e t | e 1: t -1 ) is obtained by weighting these likelihood increments from equation (4) with the corresponding normalized particle weight w n ∝ w n -1 ˆ p θ n ( e t | e 1: t -1 ) associated to parameter θ n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moving forward, we refer to p ( e t +1 | e 1: t ) as (one step ahead) Predictive Likelihood (PL) at t +1 , PL t +1 , see Kastner [2016]. After the final iteration, the marginal likelihood estimate can then be computed as ˆ p ( e 1: t ) = ∏ t i =1 ˆ PL t . Based on the cumulative sums of log PLs, model choice can be performed via the so called Cumulative Log Predictive Bayes Factor (CLPBF). To compare model A and B , for u &gt; 0 , the CLPBF is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A positive CLPBF indicates evidence in favor for model A and, if t = 0 and u = T , this factor is known as log Bayes Factor. Note that in Section 3.4.3, we mentioned that we usually use t 0 &gt; 1 data points to initialize the jitter kernels and then record all future PL increments going forward, hence the resulting estimate will be the slightly different ˆ p ( e t 0 +1: T | e 1: t 0 ) = ∏ T t = t 0 +1 ˆ PL t . The t 0 data points can be seen as training data for the jitter kernels to be initialized in a reasonable parameter region.

## 4 Simulation and Experimental Results

This section consists of simulation experiments conducted to study the performance of the PF, the PMCMC and the SMC2 algorithm on Hidden Semi-Markov Models. We first generate 1000 data points from a HSMM with Negative Binomial state duration distributions. A plot with sampled observed and latent data is shown in figure 7, which also depicts a PF estimate of the latent parameter for known continuous model parameter. The advantages of explicitly modelling duration are visible on the third subplot, in which durations in each state vary drastically. The last subsection shows how the number of hidden states in the data can be estimated using SMC2.

## 4.1 Model Dynamics and Prior Assignments

The model consists of parameter: θ = { µ, σ, p, r, φ } , where the data e t ∼ N ( µ s t , σ s t ) has a normal distribution given the latent state. The latent states have the same dynamics as explained in Section 2, latent state and duration

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

.

The µ parameter have truncated Normal priors with equal variance and different means, µ 1 ∼ Normal ( -100 , 0) ( µ = -2 , σ = 10 5 ) , µ 2 ∼ Normal (0 , 100) ( µ = 2 , σ = 10 5 ) . We assigned a truncated Normal prior for the variances σ ∼ Normal (0 , 10) ( µ = 2 , σ = 10 5 ) and for the Negative Binomial parameter, r ∼ Normal (0 , 100] ( µ = 10 , σ = 10 5 ) . The second duration distribution parameter, φ , has equal mass from 0 to 1, φ ∼ Beta ( α = 1 , β = 1) . Similarly, we assigned a Dirichlet prior for the transition probabilities, p , that favors equal weights, p ∼ Dirichlet ( α 1 = α 2 = ... = α k = k ) , where k = number of latent states.

## 4.2 Estimation

If parameter θ are unknown, both the PMCMC and SMC2 machinery can be used. As the latter builds on the former, we first show estimation results for the Particle MCMC run. The traceplots of four chains for the continuous model parameter can be seen in figure 8, and for the latent state sequence in figure 9. After parameter are initialized from the prior distributions, they rapidly converge to the values used to generate the sample data. Common MCMC output statistics are summarized in Table 1. SMC2 results can be seen in figure 10 for the model parameter and in figure 11 for the latent variables. Just as in the PMCMC case, samples converge fast toward the typical set. Common MCMC output statistics of the final SMC2 iteration for the continuous model parameter are displayed in Table 2.

Table 1: Posterior output statistics of 4 PMCMC chains for a HSMM on simulated data in Section 4. 2000 iterations were run with 1000 iterations burnin, resulting in 4000 total samples. Initial parameter have been sampled from the prior distribution.

| θ  True  Mean  MCSE  SD  Rhat  Q2.5  Q25.0  Q50.0  Q75.0  Q97.5  µ  1  -2.0  -2.03  0.01  0.39  1.00  -2.50  -2.18  -2.0  -1.85  -1.55  µ  2  2.0  1.78  0.00  0.22  1.00  1.59  1.72  1.78  1.84  1.96  σ  1  4.0  4.01  0.00  0.27  1.00  3.72  3.91  4.00  4.11  4.32  σ  2  2.0  2.07  0.00  0.17  1.00  1.93  2.014  2.06  2.11  2.23  r  1  10.0  13.64  0.01  4.06  1.00  5.46  10.64  14.01  17.09  19.72  r  2  15.0  13.18  0.23  8.04  1.00  4.12  8.03  11.26  15.99  32.96  φ  1  0.3  0.37  0.00  0.08  1.00  0.18  0.32  0.38  0.43  0.48  φ  2  0.3  0.25  0.00  0.09  1.00  0.10  0.18  0.24  0.31  0.48   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2: Posterior output statistics for 100 SMC chains on a HSMM at final iterations on simulated data in Section 4.

| θ  True  Mean  MCSE  SD  Q2.5  Q25.0  Q50.0  Q75.0  Q97.5  µ  1  -2.0  -2.04  0.01  0.42  -2.86  -2.28  -2.05  -1.82  -1.06  µ  2  2.0  1.7  0.00  0.17  1.42  1.63  1.73  1.83  2.10  σ  1  4.0  4.03  0.00  0.22  3.61  3.90  4.02  4.16  4.48  σ  2  2.0  2.00  0.00  0.18  1.42  1.94  2.02  2.1  2.30  r  1  10.0  9.38  0.19  5.99  0.09  4.94  9.68  14.19  19.40  r  2  15.0  23.68  0.63  22.03  1.00  8.50  16.03  31.50  87.74  φ  1  0.3  0.26  0.00  0.13  0.02  0.16  0.27  0.36  0.48  φ  2  0.3  0.41  0.00  0.21  0.06  0.24  0.37  0.55  0.88   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 4.3 Determining the number of states

Before estimating model parameter for a given data set, the researcher has to choose the number of hidden states in a discrete SSM, which is often challenging a priori. To tackle this problem, we choose methods from the overfitting mixtures literature, see Rousseau and Mengersen [2011], Fruehwirth-Schnatter [2006], Fruehwirth-Schnatter et al. [2018]. In particular, Rousseau and Mengersen [2011] show that the posterior distribution of a mixture model is much more stable if the prior weights of the mixture components are concentrated on the boundary regions of the parameter space. We borrow this concept for SSMs and show that by assigning appropriate prior weights on the transition matrices of a HSMM, we can choose more states than necessarily describe the data and still have an interpretable structure, as superfluous latent states will never be visited during the estimation process. As an experiment, we fit a 2-, 3-, and 5-state HSMM to data that was generated by a 3-state HSMM. The parameter used to generate the data can be seen in Table 3, and the corresponding data in plot 2. In Section 3, we mentioned that the Predictive Likelihood can be estimated as a by-product of the inference procedure in SMC2. Hence, we tracked the cumulative log PL for each model at each iteration, and plotted the results in figure 2. It can be seen that the 3- and 5-state HSMMs Predictive Likelihood perfectly align, and we conclude that it is possible to determine the number of states via SMC2, and even check for differences during the data propagation. All estimates for the model parameter can be seen in Table 3. In this table, state 2 and 4 are almost never visited and act as superfluous regimes. The remaining state estimates contain the correct parameter in the 95% Credible Intervals.

Figure 2: Cumulative log Predictive Likelihood of 2-, 3- and 5-state HSMM, as discussed in Section 3. The underlying data has been generated by a 3-state HSMM, and the 5-state HSMM returns PL levels as the HSMM that generated the data, while the 2-state HSMM is not flexible enough to detect the data structure. Hence, we can 'overfit' the number of states and let the algorithm decide the number of states itself in case no prior knowledge is available. The bottom plot shows the whole data sequence, while the bottom graph depicts the cumulative log PL as defined in Section 3.5 of the last 500 iterations.

<!-- image -->

Table 3: Parameter estimates for 5-state HSMM. The first column depicts the parameter for the 3 state HSMM that were used to generate the data. State 2 and 4 are hardly visited, and are the superfluous states. p i,j denotes the transition probability from state i to j . p i,i is separately modeled by the duration distribution. The transition probabilities p form a simplex, so the probability to transition to the final state is determined by all other states.

| θ  True  Mean  MCSE  SD  Q2.5  Q25.0  Q50.0  Q75.0  Q97.5  µ  1  -5.0  -4.73  0.03  1.48  -8.21  -5.43  -4.66  -3.97  -1.6  µ  2  -  -1.5  0.1  4.18  -8.8  -4.46  -1.04  0.09  8.64  µ  3  0.0  -0.44  0.07  2.06  -6.06  -0.19  -0.05  0.07  2.93  µ  4  -  -1.56  0.11  5.36  -9.25  -5.65  -3.19  2.56  9.35  µ  5  5.0  4.95  0.0  0.03  4.9  4.94  4.96  4.97  5.01  σ  1  2.5  2.95  0.03  1.38  1.13  2.26  2.7  3.2  7.69  σ  2  -  3.27  0.08  2.32  0.76  1.56  2.42  4.11  9.24  σ  3  1.5  1.92  0.05  1.33  1.27  1.46  1.55  1.67  6.9  σ  4  -  4.43  0.06  2.68  0.46  2.4  3.59  6.68  9.62  σ  5  0.5  0.52  0.0  0.06  0.45  0.49  0.51  0.53  0.69  λ  1  5.0  4.53  0.04  1.7  1.38  3.4  4.46  5.53  8.36  λ  2  -  10.14  0.17  6.71  1.55  5.08  9.33  12.23  27.51  λ  3  10.0  10.76  0.1  3.58  3.16  9.89  10.8  11.65  21.89  λ  4  -  11.72  0.23  8.77  1.36  4.01  8.9  18.78  29.02  λ  5  30.0  30.92  0.04  1.59  27.72  29.84  30.98  32.03  33.89  p  1  ,  1  -  p  1  ,  2  -  0.15  0.01  0.22  0.0  0.0  0.05  0.26  0.77  p  1  ,  3  0.2  0.27  0.01  0.26  0.0  0.05  0.25  0.46  0.87  p  1  ,  4  -  0.08  0.0  0.18  0.0  0.0  0.01  0.09  0.74  p  1  ,  5  0.8  0.50  p  2  ,  1  -  0.19  0.01  0.25  0.0  0.01  0.07  0.27  0.9  p  2  ,  2  -  p  2  ,  3  -  0.2  0.01  0.26  0.0  0.0  0.07  0.31  0.92  p  2  ,  4  -  0.13  0.01  0.23  0.0  0.0  0.02  0.14  0.89  p  2  ,  5  -  p  3  ,  1  0.2  0.17  0.0  0.17  0.0  0.03  0.13  0.26  0.59  p  3  ,  2  -  0.1  0.01  0.16  0.0  0.0  0.03  0.14  0.59  p  3  ,  3  -  p  3  ,  4  -  0.07  0.0  0.14  0.0  0.0  0.01  0.07  0.49  p  3  ,  5  0.8  0.67  p  4  ,  1  -  0.23  0.01  0.29  0.0  0.01  0.08  0.37  0.95  p  4  ,  2  -  0.22  0.01  0.29  0.0  0.0  0.07  0.36  0.94  p  4  ,  3  -  0.24  0.01  0.29  0.0  0.01  0.11  0.4  0.94  p  4  ,  4  -  p  4  ,  5  -  p  5  ,  1  0.2  0.2  0.0  0.15  0.0  0.07  0.19  0.3  0.51  p  5  ,  2  -  0.18  0.01  0.26  0.0  0.0  0.04  0.24  0.82  p  5  ,  3  0.8  0.57  0.01  0.28  0.0  0.47  0.67  0.78  0.89  p  5  ,  4  -  p  5  ,  5  -   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 5 Applications on VIX Times Series Data

This section consists of two interesting applications for State Space Models. The first contains a case study on model selection and prediction for a financial data set, the other displays how SSMs can be used for clustering purposes.

## 5.1 Prediction and Model Selection on Financial Volatility

In this Section, we are modeling VIX index data directly via HSMMs and other popular benchmark models. The VIX index is derived from options with near-term expiration dates on the US major equity S&amp;P 500 index, and is a popular indicator for future short term volatility expectations. V olatility is often modeled indirectly based on (log) stock prices via Stochastic Volatility (SV) models and its autoregressive nature is well recognized, see e.g. [Hull and White, 1987, Kim et al., 1998, Kastner, 2016]. We incorporate this behaviour in our model by assigning autoregressive weights to the location parameters in each latent regime. The corresponding model can be viewed as a separate AR(1) model in each state, where a latent variable following a semi-Markov chain governs the regime changes and durations. Multiple duration distribution choices, such as the negative Binomial and Poisson distribution, are tested and benchmarked against HMM and AR(1) models.

For real data collection, we first obtain 1000 daily end-of-day data points of this instrument, which can be seen in figure 12, as of January 1st 2022 from the Thomson Reuters database. Notably, the Covid-19 epidemic is included in the data, which causes the evidence to be much more volatile from the start of 2020 and to transition to a different regime from there onward. Common ideas to address this issue are to assign change points across the times series before estimating the model parameter. Such methods have an easily interpretable structure, but lack the information from a stochastic process governing the model dynamics, which enhances inference capabilities for the data. For example, due to the discrete state space formulation of our proposed model, parameter interpretation is straightforward, while the HSMM dynamics allow to incorporate significantly more decision-making tools, such as regime change and duration forecasting.

## 5.1.1 Model Dynamics and Prior Assignments

The AR(1) HSMM with Negative Binomial duration consists of parameter: θ = { µ, σ, w, p, r, φ } , where the data e t ∼ N ( w s t × e t -1 + µ s t , σ s t ) has a normal distribution given the latent state and the previous data point.

The latent states have the same dynamics as explained in Section 2, latent state and duration

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The µ parameter have truncated Normal priors with equal variance and different means, µ 1 ∼ Normal (0 , 10) ( µ = 3 , σ = 10 5 ) , µ 2 ∼ Normal (0 , 10) ( µ = 1 , σ = 10 5 ) . We assigned a truncated Normal prior for the variances σ 1 , 2 ∼ Normal (0 , 10) ( µ = 0 . 2 , σ = 10 5 ) and for the Negative Binomial parameter, r 1 ∼ Normal (0 , 100] ( µ = 5 , σ = 10 5 ) , r 2 ∼ Normal (0 , 100] ( µ = 2 . 5 , σ = 10 5 ) . The second duration distribution parameter φ has equal mass from 0 to 1, φ 1 , 2 ∼ Beta ( α = 1 , β = 1) . Similarly, we assigned a Dirichlet prior for the transition probabilities p that favors equal weights, p ∼ Dirichlet ( α 1 = α 2 = ... = α k = k ) , where k = number of latent states. The autoregressive parameter, w , is bounded between -1 and 1 by assigning a truncated prior, w 1 , 2 ∼ Normal ( -1 , 1) ( µ = 0 , σ = 10 5 ) . The intuition behind the prior assignment is that there is a single state with a large constant that mimics sudden jumps in the index, while the other state has a much smaller constant, but possibly a higher autoregressive weight w . This assumption is confirmed in the actual estimates, visible in figure 13. The AR(1) HSMM with Poisson duration only differentiates with respect to the duration parameter, θ = { µ, σ, w, p, λ } . In this case, the latent duration has a Poisson distribution,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

d t ∼   δ ( d t , d t -1 -1) d t -1 &gt; 0 Poisson ( λ s t ) d t -1 = 0 , where λ ∼ Normal (0 , 100] ( µ = 20 , σ = 10 5 ) . rameter θ = { µ, σ, w, p } , has the same data dynamics and latent state dynamics s t ∼ Categorical ( p s t -1 ) . All prior configurations are assigned from the previous models. The AR(1) Model with parameter θ = { µ, σ, w } does not have latent variables, and data dynamics e t ∼ Normal ( w × e t -1 + µ, σ ) . The priors for µ are set to µ ∼ Normal (0 , 10) ( µ = 2 . 0 , σ = 10 5 ) , where the location parameter has been set as the mean of the location parameter for the 2 states in the state space models defined above. σ and w have the same prior as the other models.

## 5.1.2 Results

A detailed methodology for model comparison can be found in section 3.5. The SMC2 machinery with the tuning configurations discussed in Section 3 is used to estimate model parameter. Results for our proposed model can be seen in Figure 13 and Table 4 for model parameter. The traceplots show all model parameter estimates at each point in time with the corresponding 95% credible interval. There is a clear distinction between a lower and higher volatility state, in which the latter has volatility levels of roughly four times the normal state. Interestingly, there seems to be a regime shift at the time COVID-19 makes significant headlines in the global markets, which is captured very fast during the estimation process, and would be impossible for standard batch estimation methods. At the start of March 2020, the volatility parameter in the high-volatility state changes from 0 . 15 to 0 . 20 within days, and continues to be around this level until the end of the times series, making the regime change easily recognizable. Figure 14 shows the filtered state trajectory of the latent variables at each time step. A re-scaled posterior mean of the latent variable at each time index is shown against the real data in the bottom sub-plot, which displays the clear distinction between a volatile and a stable state in the times series. There is more variation at the initial stages before more data is added to the algorithm. Figure 15 depicts model predictions against the realized data at each time step. The Cumulative Log Predictive Bayes Factor as discussed in Section 3 is shown in figure 3. The top plot in this figure shows the CLPBF of the AR(1) HSMM with negative Binomial duration distribution against the other models, which is positive and in favor of the proposed model consistently over time against all other models. Diagnostics at the final time period are summarized in Table 5.

Table 4: Posterior output statistics for 100 SMC chains on HSMM in chapter 5 at final iterations in SMC2 run.

| θ  Mean  MCSE  SD  Q2.5  Q25.0  Q50.0  Q75.0  Q97.5  µ  1  1.03  0.00  0.06  0.92  0.99  1.02  1.06  1.18  µ  2  0.11  0.00  0.06  0.038  0.07  0.08  0.11  0.31  σ  1  0.19  0.00  0.02  0.12  0.17  0.19  0.21  0.24  σ  2  0.06  0.0  0.00  0.04  0.06  0.05  0.06  0.06  w  1  0.68  0.0  0.01  0.65  0.68  0.69  0.69  0.7  w  2  0.96  0.00  0.03  0.88  0.96  0.97  0.97  0.98  r  1  8.39  0.38  11.57  0.15  0.64  2.82  11.01  42.44  r  2  0.41  0.03  0.44  0.14  0.24  0.33  0.46  1.01  φ  1  0.64  0.0  0.28  0.11  0.38  0.71  0.90  0.98  φ  2  0.03  0.00  0.02  0.01  0.02  0.02  0.03  0.06   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 5: Cumulative log Predictive Likelihood as defined in Section 3.5 for various discrete state space models fitted via SMC2 on data described in chapter 5.

| Names  Cum. Log PL  Diff. to  (  ⋆  )  (  ⋆  )  AR(1) HSMM - 2 states - Neg. Bin. Duration  550.85  0.00  AR(1) HSMM - 2 states - Poisson Duration  534.90  -15.94  AR(1) HMM - 2 states  542.1  -8.75  AR(1) Model  498.51  -52.33   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Figure 3: The top plot depicts the Cumulative Log Predictive Bayes Factor as defined in Section 3.5 of the winning model in Section 5 at each iteration. At the bottom, the corresponding log VIX index data is shown over time.

<!-- image -->

## 5.2 Clustering

Once parameter have been estimated, the latent state trajectory estimates can be used to cluster the log VIX data into different regimes. A re-scaled state posterior mean of the latent trajectory at the last SMC2 against the actual data can be seen at the top plot in Figure 4. State 1 corresponds to a short duration state with jumps and drastic changes in levels, while state 2 corresponds to a regime with more normal volatility levels that is observed for the majority of times. Based on the posterior mean, we clustered the changes in the index for each state, which can be seen in the bottom plot of Figure 4. Here, state 1 is clearly associated with drastic movements in either direction, while state 2 represents a more normal market environment.

## 6 Conclusions

In this paper, we discussed sequential parameter estimation techniques for State Space Models with a focus on Hidden Semi-Markov Models. We compared the forecasting accuracy of various models on financial data and concluded that the HSMM has a superior predictive performance against other popular discrete SSMs. Moreover, we demonstrated how by-products emerging from a SMC2 estimation run can be used to determine the number of latent regimes governing such models. While the additional duration variable in the HSMM typically causes parameter inference to be more challenging due to the increased computational costs of the likelihood function, it adds significantly more flexibility in modelling the latent process. Our proposed inference technique has the same computational costs for both the basic HMM and the HSMM and is particularly suitable for sequential data. As for future research topics, more optimized techniques to adaptively select the number of particles in a PF may lead to faster runs and improved mixing for both the PMCMC and SMC2 algorithm. Furthermore, as tuning the individual MCMC and PF kernels was handled independently during the SMC2 runs, adding information from all chains may drastically increase the tuning process for the individual jitter kernels.

## 7 Software

The data and code used to run the algorithms in this paper can be be seen in https://github.com/ paschermayr/Publish\_SequentialHSMM . For more detailed information about the implementations for running all algorithms and computing all tables can be found in https://github.com/paschermayr/Baytes. jl and its sub-libraries. The corresponding plots are defined in https://github.com/paschermayr/ BaytesInference.jl .

Figure 4: The top plot depicts a histogram for changes in log VIX data, conditioned on the most probable posterior latent state from the final SMC2 iteration. The bottom graph displays the log VIX data over time (black) alongside a re-scaled state posterior mean from the final SMC2 iteration (gold).

<!-- image -->

## References

- C. Andrieu and G. O. Roberts. The pseudo-marginal approach for efficient monte carlo computations. Ann. Statist. , 37(2):697-725, 04 2009. doi: 10.1214/07-AOS574. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/07-AOS574 .
- C. Andrieu, A. Doucet, and R. Holenstein. Particle markov chain monte carlo methods. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B , 72(3):269-342, 2010. URL https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:bla:jorssb: v:72:y:2010:i:3:p:269-342 .
3. L.E. Baum and T. Petrie. Statistical inference for probabilistic functions of finite state markov chains. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics , 37:1554-1563, 1966. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177699147.
4. Michael Betancourt. Identifying the optimal integration time in hamiltonian monte carlo, 2016.
5. Michael Betancourt. A conceptual introduction to hamiltonian monte carlo, 2018.
6. Alexander Buchholz, Nicolas Chopin, and Pierre E. Jacob. Adaptive tuning of hamiltonian monte carlo within sequential monte carlo, 2020.
- I. Bulla and J. Bulla. Stylized facts of financial time series and hidden semi-markov models. Computational Statistics &amp; Data Analysis , 51:2192-2209, 2006. doi: http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:csdana:v:51:y:2006:i:4:p: 2192-2209.
- S. Chib. Marginal likelihood from the gibbs output. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 90 (432):1313-1321, 1995. URL https://amstat.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/01621459. 1995.10476635 .
9. N Chopin, P E Jacob, and O Papaspiliopoulos. SMC 2: an efficient algorithm for sequential analysis of state space models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 75(3):397-426, oct 2012.
10. Nicolas Chopin. A sequential particle filter method for static models. Biometrika , 89(3):539-552, 08 2002. ISSN 0006-3444. doi: 10.1093/biomet/89.3.539. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/biomet/89.3.539 .
11. Nicolas Chopin and Omiros Papaspiliopoulos. An Introduction to Sequential Monte Carlo . Springer International Publishing, 2020. ISBN 978-3-030-47844-5. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-47845-2.
12. Nicolas Chopin, Pierre E. Jacob, and Omiros Papaspiliopoulos. Smc2: an efficient algorithm for sequential analysis of state-space models, 2013.
13. Adrien Corenflos, James Thornton, George Deligiannidis, and Arnaud Doucet. Differentiable particle filtering via entropy-regularized optimal transport, 2021.
14. Radu V. Craiu and Jeffrey S. Rosenthal. Bayesian computation via markov chain monte carlo. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application , 1(1):179-201, 2014. doi: 10.1146/annurev-statistics-022513-115540. URL https: //doi.org/10.1146/annurev-statistics-022513-115540 .
15. Dan Crisan and Joaquin Miguez. Nested particle filters for online parameter estimation in discrete-time state-space markov models, 2017.
16. Chenguang Dai, Jeremy Heng, Pierre E. Jacob, and Nick Whiteley. An invitation to sequential monte carlo samplers, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.11936 .
17. Remi Daviet. Inference with hamiltonian sequential monte carlo simulators, 2018.

- Pierre Del Moral, Arnaud Doucet, and Ajay Jasra. Sequential monte carlo samplers. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 68(3):411-436, 2006.
- M. Dewar, C. Wiggins, and F. Wood. Inference in hidden markov models with explicit state duration distributions. IEEE Signal Processing Letters , 19:235-238, Apr 2012. doi: 10.1109/LSP.2012.2184795.
- R. Douc and O. Cappe. Comparison of resampling schemes for particle filtering, 2005.
- A. Doucet and A. Johansen. A tutorial on particle filtering and smoothing: Fifteen years later, 2011.
- Paul Fearnhead and Benjamin M. Taylor. An adaptive sequential monte carlo sampler, 2010.
- S. Fruehwirth-Schnatter. Finite mixture and Markov switching models . Springer, 1st edition, 2006.
- Sylvia Fruehwirth-Schnatter, Gilles Celeux, and Christian P. Robert. Handbook of Mixture Analysis . Chapman &amp; Hall/CRC Handbooks of Modern Statistical Methods. CRC Press, Nov 2018.
- Andrew Golightly. Bayesian filtering for jump-diffusions with application to stochastic volatility. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics , 18(2):384-400, 2009. doi: 10.1198/jcgs.2009.07137. URL https: //doi.org/10.1198/jcgs.2009.07137 .
- David Gunawan, Robert Kohn, and Minh Ngoc Tran. Robust particle density tempering for state space models, 2021.
- Beniamino Hadj-Amar, Jack Jewson, and Mark Fiecas. Bayesian Approximations to Hidden Semi-Markov Models for Telemetric Monitoring of Physical Activity. Bayesian Analysis , pages 1 - 31, 2022.
- Matthew D. Hoffman and Andrew Gelman. The no-u-turn sampler: Adaptively setting path lengths in hamiltonian monte carlo. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 15(1):1593-1623, 2014.
- John Hull and Alan White. The pricing of options on assets with stochastic volatilities. The Journal of Finance , 42 (2):281-300, 1987.
- M. J. Johnson. Bayesian Time Series Models and Scalable Inference . PhD thesis, MIT, 2014.
- M. J. Johnson and A. S. Willsky. Bayesian nonparametric hidden semi-markov models. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 14:673-701, 2013. doi: https://arxiv.org/abs/1203.1365.
- Konstantinos Kalogeropoulos, Gareth O. Roberts, and Petros Dellaportas. Inference for stochastic volatility models using time change transformations. The Annals of Statistics , 38(2):784 - 807, 2010. doi: 10.1214/09-AOS702. URL https://doi.org/10.1214/09-AOS702 .
- Nikolas Kantas, Arnaud Doucet, Sumeetpal S. Singh, Jan Maciejowski, and Nicolas Chopin. On particle methods for parameter estimation in state-space models. Statistical Science , 30(3):328-351, Aug 2015. ISSN 0883-4237. doi: 10.1214/14-sts511. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/14-STS511 .
- Gregor Kastner. Dealing with stochastic volatility in time series using the r package stochvol. Journal of Statistical Software, Articles , 69(5):1-30, 2016. ISSN 1548-7660. doi: 10.18637/jss.v069.i05. URL https: //www.jstatsoft.org/v069/i05 .
- Sangjoon Kim, Neil Shephard, and Siddhartha Chib. Stochastic volatility: likelihood inference and comparison with ARCH models. The Review of Economic Studies , 65(3):361-393, 1998.
- Fredrik Lindsten and Thomas Sch¨ on. Backward simulation methods for monte carlo statistical inference. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 6:1-142, 01 2013. doi: 10.1561/2200000045.

## SEQUENTIAL BAYESIAN LEARNING FOR HIDDEN SEMI-MARKOV MODELS

- Fredrik Lindsten, Michael I. Jordan, and Thomas B. Sch¨ on. Particle gibbs with ancestor sampling, 2014.
- Fredrik Lindsten, Pete Bunch, Sumeetpal S. Singh, and Thomas B. Sch¨ on. Particle ancestor sampling for neardegenerate or intractable state transition models, 2015.
- Kevin Murphy. Hidden semi-markov models (hsmms), 01 2002.
- Radford M. Neal. Mcmc using hamiltonian dynamics, 2012.
- M. Pitt and N. Shephard. Filtering via simulation: Auxiliary particle filters. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 94(446):590-599, 1999. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/2670179 .
- Jennifer Pohle, Timo Adam, and Larissa T. Beumer. Flexible estimation of the state dwell-time distribution in hidden semi-markov models, 2021.
- Judith Rousseau and Kerrie Mengersen. Asymptotic behaviour of the posterior distribution in overfitted mixture models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 73(5):689-710, 2011. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9868.2011.00781.x.
- Gian Marco Visani, Alexandra Hope Lee, Cuong Nguyen, David M. Kent, John B. Wong, Joshua T. Cohen, and Michael C. Hughes. Approximate bayesian computation for an explicit-duration hidden markov model of covid-19 hospital trajectories, 2021.
- Qili Xiao, Yilin Fang, Quan Liu, and Shujuan Zhou. Online machine health prognostics based on modified durationdependent hidden semi-markov model and high-order particle filtering. The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology , 94(1):1283-1297, 2018.
- S. Yu. Hidden Semi-Markov Models: Theory, Algorithms and Applications . Elsevier, Boston, 2016.
- Shun-Zheng Yu. Hidden semi-markov models. Artificial Intelligence , 174(2):215-243, 2010. ISSN 0004-3702. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.artint.2009.11.011. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0004370209001416 . Special Review Issue.

## Acronyms

```
APF Auxiliary Particle Filter. 1, 8 AR Autoregressive. 1, 3, 4, 16 ARHSMM Autoregressive Hidden Semi-Markov Model. 1 BF Bayes Factor. 1, 10, 12 BMI Basic Marginal Likelihood Identity. 1, 7 BPF Bootstrap Particle Filter. 1, 8 CI Credible Interval. 1, 11, 14, 31, 34 CLPBF Cumulative Log Predictive Bayes Factor. 1, 12, 17, 18 CPF Conditional Particle Filter. 1, 8 CRPS Continuous Ranked Probability Score. 1 EDHMM Explicit-duration Hidden Markov Model. 1, 4 eGARCH Exponential Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity. 1 ESS Effective Sample Size. 1, 8 GARCH Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity. 1 HMC Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. 1, 9 HMM Hidden Markov Model. 1-6, 16, 19 HSMM Hidden Semi-Markov Model. 1-7, 11-17, 19, 28-32, 34-36 HSMM-eGARCH Hidden Semi-Markov Model with eGarch volatility dynamics. 1 IBIS Iterated Batch Importance Sampling. 1 IS Importance Sampling. 1, 7 MC Monte Carlo. 1, 10 MCMC Markov Chain Monte Carlo. 1, 2, 6, 9-11, 19 MJM Markov Jump Model. 1 NUTS No U-Turn Sampling. 1, 9 PACF Partial Autocorrelation Function. 1, 11, 27 PF Particle Filter. 1-3, 7, 8, 10-12, 19, 26, 27
```

PGAS

Particle Gibbs with ancestors sampling. 1, 9, 11

PGIBBS

Particle Gibbs. 1, 2

PL Predictive Likelihood. 1, 12-14, 18

PMCMC

Particle MCMC. 1, 2, 6, 7, 9-13, 19, 27, 29, 30

PMH

Particle Metropolis Hastings. 1, 9, 11

SIR

Sequential Importance Resampling. 1, 7, 8

SIS Sequential Importance Sampling. 1, 7

SMC

Sequential Monte Carlo. 1-3, 10, 32, 34, 35

SMC2

Sequential Monte Carlo Squared. 1-3, 10-14, 17-20, 31, 36

SSM

State Space Model. 1, 2, 6, 8, 9, 13, 15, 19

SV

Stochastic Volatility. 1, 16

SVM

Stochastic Volatility Model. 1

## A Plots

Figure 5: This graph shows Particle Filter likelihood estimates for a range of different parameter values. At each column, all parameter were kept constant except the labeled parameter at the x-axis. The different colors depict various amount of particles used for the computations: 100 (blue), 500 (green), 1000 (yellow), 2000 (orange) particles for sample data of size 1000.

<!-- image -->

Figure 6: This graph shows the Partial Autocorrelation Function of Particle Filter likelihood estimates that have been obtained during 1000 PMCMC steps after burnin. The Particle Filter in the PMCMC kernels were set to have a different amount of particles for each run.

<!-- image -->

Figure 7: The upper graph shows generated observed data by the HSMM depicted in section 4. The middle plot shows the hidden state (blue) and a sample of a filtered trajectory from a particle filter. The lower plot shows the remaining duration given the current state, and a sample of a filtered particles from a particle filter.

<!-- image -->

Figure 8: Traceplots of four Particle MCMC chains for continuous model parameter of a HSMM in section 4.

<!-- image -->

Figure 9: Particle MCMC posterior estimates of the filtered latent state trajectory of four chains for the HSMM in section 4. Parameter used to generate sample data are shown as dashed lines. The bottom plot shows re-scaled posterior means and the observed data.

<!-- image -->

Figure 10: Sequential Monte Carlo Squared posterior estimates of the continuous model parameter of 100 chains for the HSMM in section 4. The posterior mean and a 95% Credible Interval are provided for each parameter at each time index.

<!-- image -->

Figure 11: Sequential Monte Carlo posterior estimates of the filtered latent state trajectory of 100 chains for the HSMM in section 4 at each time index. The bottom plot shows the underlying observed data and re-scaled posterior mean of the latent state at the final iteration. Parameter used to generate sample data are shown as dashed horizontal lines.

<!-- image -->

Figure 12: Last 1000 end-of-day data points of the VIX Index used as data in Section 5. Data as of January 1st 2022 from the Thomson Reuters database.

<!-- image -->

Figure 13: Sequential Monte Carlo posterior estimates of the continuous model parameter of 100 chains for the AR(1) HSMMwith Negative Binomial duration distribution, discussed in section 5. The posterior mean and a 95% Credible Interval are provided for each parameter at each time index.

<!-- image -->

Figure 14: Sequential Monte Carlo posterior estimates of the filtered latent state trajectory of 100 chains for the AR(1) HSMM with Negative Binomial duration distribution, discussed in section 5. The bottom plot shows the underlying observed data and re-scaled posterior mean of the latent state at the final iteration.

<!-- image -->

Figure 15: Sequential Monte Carlo Squared posterior predictive samples for the AR(1) HSMM with Negative Binomial duration distribution, discussed in section 5. The Black line at the bottom table depicts the realized future value against predictions in gold. The top 2 graph are predictions for the state and duration variables, and the bottom plot shows predictions for the observed data.

<!-- image -->

## B Pseudo Algorithms

```
Algorithm 1: Standard particle filter input : data e 1: T , model parameter θ output : log-likelihood estimate ˆ ℓ ( θ ) = log ˆ p θ ( e 1: T ) and sample s 1: T ∼ ˆ p ( s 1: T | e 1: T ) tuning parameter: proposal distribution q , number of particles N function : particle filter pf ( e 1: T , θ ) // Initialization: 1 for n ← 1 to N do 2 Initiate particle s n 1 ∼ π θ ( s 1 ) . 3 Compute α n 1 ( s n 1 , e 1 ) = p θ ( e 1 | s n 1 ) p θ ( s n 1 ) q ( s n 1 | e 1 ) . 4 Normalize weights ˜ α i 1 ∝ α i 1 ( s n 1 , e 1 ) for i = 1 : N , s.t. ∑ N i =1 ˜ α i 1 = 1 . 5 Compute log-likelihood increment ˆ ℓ ( θ ) = log 1 N ∑ N i =1 α i 1 ( s i 1 , e 1 ) // Forward propagation: 6 for t ← 2 to T do 7 if Resampling required then 8 Sample ancestor a n t for particle trajectory s n 1: t -1 for n = 1 to N according to normalized weights ˜ α t -1 . 9 else 10 Set a n t = n for n = 1 to N . 11 for n ← 1 to N do 12 Sample s n t ∼ q ( s n t | s a n t 1: t -1 , e 1: t ) . 13 Set s n 1: t := ( s a n t 1: t -1 , s n t ) . 14 Calculate incremental weight: α t ( s n 1: t , e 1: t ) = p θ ( e t | s n 1: t , e 1: t -1 ) p θ ( s n t | s n 1: t -1 , e 1: t -1 ) q ( s n t | s n 1: t -1 , e 1: t ) 15 Normalize weights ˜ α i t ∝ α i t ( s i 1: t , e 1: t ) for i = 1 to N , s.t. ∑ N i =1 ˜ α i t = 1 . 16 Add incremental weights to log-likelihood: ˆ ℓ ( θ ) = ˆ ℓ ( θ ) + log 1 N ∑ N i =1 α i t ( s i 1: t , e 1: t ) . // Return log-likelihood estimate and particle trajectories: 17 Draw k with P ( k = i ) ∝ ˜ α i T . 18 return ˆ ℓ ( θ ) and s k 1: T .
```

## Algorithm 2: Conditional particle filter with ancestor sampling

```
input : Reference s ′ 1: T , data e 1: T , model parameter θ output : Log-likelihood estimate ˆ ℓ ( θ ) = log ˆ p θ ( e 1: T ) and sample s 1: T ∼ ˆ p ( s 1: T | s ′ t : T , e 1: T ) tuning parameter: proposal distribution q , number of particles N function : particle filter cpf ( s ′ 1: T , e 1: T , θ ) // Initialization: 1 for n ← 1 to N -1 do 2 Initiate particle s n 1 ∼ π θ ( s 1 ) . 3 Compute α n 1 ( s n 1 , e 1 ) = p θ ( e 1 | s n 1 ) p θ ( s n 1 ) q ( s n 1 | e 1 ) . 4 Set s N 1 := s ′ 1 and compute α N 1 ( s N 1 , e 1 ) ∝ p θ ( e 1 | s N 1 ) p θ ( s N 1 ) q ( s N 1 | e 1 ) . 5 Normalize weights ˜ α i 1 ∝ α i 1 ( s n 1 , e 1 ) for i = 1 : N , s.t. ∑ N i =1 ˜ α i 1 = 1 . 6 Compute log-likelihood increment ˆ ℓ ( θ ) = log 1 N ∑ N i =1 α i 1 ( s i 1 , e 1 ) // Forward propagation: 7 for t ← 2 to T do 8 if Resampling required then 9 Sample ancestor a n t for particle trajectory s n 1: t -1 for n = 1 to N -1 according to normalized weights ˜ α t -1 . 10 Set a N t = k , with P ( k = i ) ∼ α i t -1 ( s i 1: t -1 , e 1: t -1 ) p θ ( s ′ t : T , e t : T | s i 1: t -1 , e 1: t -1 ) . 11 else 12 Set a n t = n for n = 1 to N . 13 for n ← 1 to N do 14 Sample s n t ∼ q ( s n t | s a n t 1: t -1 , e 1: t ) . 15 Set s n 1: t := ( s a n t 1: t -1 , s n t ) . 16 Calculate incremental weight: α t ( s n 1: t , e 1: t ) = p θ ( e t | s n 1: t , e 1: t -1 ) p θ ( s n t | s n 1: t -1 , e 1: t -1 ) q ( s n t | s n 1: t -1 , e 1: t ) 17 Normalize weights ˜ α i t ∝ α i t ( s i 1: t , e 1: t ) for i = 1 to N , s.t. ∑ N i =1 ˜ α i t = 1 . 18 Add incremental weights to log-likelihood: ˆ ℓ ( θ ) = ˆ ℓ ( θ ) + log 1 N ∑ N i =1 α i t ( s i 1: t , e 1: t ) . // Return log-likelihood estimate and particle trajectories: 19 Draw k with P ( k = i ) ∝ ˜ α i T . 20 return ˆ ℓ ( θ ) and s k 1: T .
```

## Algorithm 3: Metropolis Hastings (MH) Kernel

input :

data e 1: T , current model parameter θ

output :

model parameter θ ∼ p ( θ | e 1: T )

tuning parameter:

proposal distribution f

function

: MCMCKernel K mh ( e 1: T , θ )

- 1 Propose θ ⋆ ∼ f ( θ ⋆ | θ ) .

## 3 return θ .

- 2 Set θ := θ ⋆ with acceptance probability min (1 , a ( θ ⋆ , θ )) , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Algorithm 4: Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) Kernel

input :

data e 1: T , current model parameter θ

output :

model parameter θ ∼ p ( θ | e 1: T )

tuning parameter:

Mass matrix M , stepsize ϵ , number of leapfrog steps L .

function

: MCMCKernel K HMC ( e 1: T , θ )

- 1 Sample ρ ∼ MvNormal (0 , M ) and set ( θ ⋆ , ρ ⋆ ) := ( θ, ρ ) .
- 2

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- for i ← 1 to L do
- 4 Set θ := θ ⋆ with acceptance probability min (1 , a ( θ ⋆ , θ )) , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 5 return θ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Algorithm 5: Particle Metropolis Hastings Kernel

input :

current state trajectory s 1: T , data e 1: T , current model parameter θ

output :

model parameter θ and state trajectory s 1: T , ( θ, s 1: T ) ∼ p ( θ, s 1: T | e 1: T )

tuning parameter:

MCMCkernel K mcmc , particle filter pf , number of iterations N

function :

PMCMC kernel K pmh ( e 1: T , s 1: T , θ )

- 1 Propose θ ⋆ ∼ K mcmc ( e 1: T , θ )
- 3 Set ( θ, s 1: T ) := ( θ ⋆ , s ⋆ 1: T ) with acceptance probability min (1 , a ( θ ⋆ , θ )) , where
- 2 Run particle filter pf to obtain ˆ p θ ⋆ ( e 1: T ) and s ⋆ 1: T ∼ ˆ p θ ⋆ ( s ⋆ 1: T | e 1: T ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 4 return ( θ, s 1: T )

## Algorithm 6: Particle Gibbs Kernel

input :

reference trajectory s 1: T , data e 1: T , current model parameter θ

output :

model parameter θ and state trajectory s 1: T , ( θ, s 1: T ) ∼ p ( θ, s 1: T | e 1: T )

tuning parameter:

conditional particle filter cpf

function

: PMCMC kernel K pgibbs ( e 1: T , s 1: T , θ )

- 1 Propose θ ⋆ ∼ p θ ( θ ⋆ | s 1: T , e 1: T )
- 3 Set ( θ, s 1: T ) := ( θ ⋆ , s ⋆ 1: T )
- 2 Run a conditional particle filter cpf to obtain s ⋆ 1: T ∼ ˆ p θ ⋆ ( s ⋆ 1: T | s 1: T , e 1: T ) .
- 4 return ( θ, s 1: T )

```
Algorithm 7: Sequential Monte Carlo Squared algorithm input : Data e 1: T output : model parameter θ and state trajectory s 1: t , ( θ i , s i 1: t ) i =1: N ∼ p ( θ i , s i 1: t | e 1: t ) for t = 1 to T tuning parameter: number of particles N , N particle filter ( pf i ) i =1: N , N PMCMC kernel ( K pmcmc,i ) i =1: N function : SMC2 sampler smc 2 ( e 1: T ) // Initialization: 1 for n ← 1 to N do 2 Initiate parameter vector θ n ∼ p ( θ n ) . 3 Run particle filter pf n to obtain s n 1: t 0 ∼ ˆ p θ n ( s n 1: t 0 | e 1: t 0 ) . // Transition: 4 for t ← t 0 +1 to T do 5 if Resampled at t-1 then 6 for n ← 1 to N do 7 Run particle filter pf n to obtain ˆ p θ n ( e 1: t | e 1: t -1 ) and s n 1: t ∼ ˆ p θ n ( s n 1: t | e 1: t ) . 8 else 9 for n ← 1 to N do 10 Propagate particle filter pf n forward to obtain ˆ p θ n ( e 1: t | e 1: t -1 ) and s n t ∼ ˆ p θ n ( s n t | s n 1: t -1 , e 1: t ) . 11 Set s n 1: t := ( s n 1: t -1 , s n t ) . 12 Normalize incremental weights ˜ α n t ∝ ˆ p θ n ( e 1: t | e 1: t -1 ) for n = 1 to N , s.t. ∑ N n =1 ˜ α n t = 1 . 13 Compute an estimate for the incremental marginal likelihood: ˆ L t = ˆ p ( e t | e 1: t -1 ) = N ∑ n =1 ˜ α n t ˆ p θ n ( e 1: t | e 1: t -1 ) . (5) 14 if Resampling required then 15 for n ← 1 to N do 16 Draw k with P ( k = i ) ∝ ˜ α i t . 17 Propose ( θ ⋆ , s ⋆ 1: t ) ∼ K pmcmc,k ( e 1: t , s k 1: t , θ k ) . 18 Set ( θ n , s n 1: t ) := ( θ ⋆ , s ⋆ 1: t ) 19 return ( θ i , s i 1: t ) i =1: N for t = 1 to T .
```