## ARE INFORMATION CRITERIA GOOD ENOUGH TO CHOOSE THE RIGHT THE NUMBER OF REGIMES IN HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS?

BOUCHRA R. NASRI, BRUNO N. R ´ EMILLARD, AND MAMADOU Y. THIOUB

Abstract. Selecting the number of regimes in Hidden Markov models is an important problem. Many criteria are used to do so, such as Akaike information criterion (AIC), Bayesian information criterion (BIC), integrated completed likelihood (ICL), deviance information criterion (DIC), and Watanabe-Akaike information criterion (WAIC), to name a few. In this article, we introduced goodness-of-fit tests for general Hidden Markov models with covariates, where the distribution of the observations is arbitrary, i.e., continuous, discrete, or a mixture of both. A selection procedure is proposed based on this goodness-of-fit test. The main aim of this article is to compare the classical information criterion with the new criterion when the outcome is either continuous, discrete or zero-inflated. Numerical experiments assess the finite sample performance of the goodness-of-fit tests, and comparisons between the different criteria are made.

Keywords. Time series; hidden Markov models; goodness-of-fit; regime selection; discrete distributions; zero-inflated distributions; continuous distributions.

## 1. Introduction

Hidden Markov models (HMM) are used in many fields to model the dynamics of complex systems such as the incidence of a specific infectious disease (Douwes-Schultz and Schmidt, 2022), animal movements (Bastille-Rousseau et al., 2016, Pohle et al., 2017, Leos-Barajas et al., 2017), financial assets (Hamilton, 1989, 1990, Hardy, 2001), or the dynamics of biological sequences (Yoon, 2009). Furthermore, Diebold and Inoue (2001) also showed that HMM can approximate long memory processes. Finally, note that hidden semi-Markov models can be seen or can be approximated by HMM with an enlarged number of regimes (Zucchini et al., 2016). Since the regimes often have an interpretation, selecting the correct number of regimes is important. Mathematically, a hidden Markov model (HMM) depends on two different sources of randomness: a finite number of (non-observable) regimes whose dynamics are modelled by a homogeneous (stationary) or inhomogeneous (non-stationary) Markov chain and observations whose distribution depends on the regimes and possibly previous observations and covariates. There are two important steps in implementing an HMM: (i) estimation of parameters and (ii) selection of the number of regimes. Since the regimes are not observable, the parameters can be estimated by maximizing the likelihood or using the Expectation-Maximization (EM) algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977). One can also use Bayesian methods as in Scott (2002); see also Ryd´ en (2008), Zucchini et al. (2016) for implementation issues. For the selection of the number of regimes, in many cases, researchers assumed that the number of regimes. For example, in Hardy (2001), it is assumed that monthly returns were modelled by two-regime HMM, which makes sense since monthly returns are often almost independent. In other cases, it is difficult, if not impossible, to know or to pre-define the correct number of regimes, which makes selection methods more attractive. Often, methods based on information criteria such as AIC (Akaike, 1974) and BIC (Schwarz, 1978) are used, which has been proved to work for some specific Hidden Markov models with a discrete finite state space for the outcomes (Capp´ e et al., 2005, Chapter 15). However, this hypothesis is not met in this work since we consider outcomes with infinite support. Another information criterion is the ICL (Integrated Completed Likelihood), introduced in Biernacki et al. (2000). The ICL is very similar to the BIC, but instead of considering only the (partial) log-likelihood of the outcomes, the hidden states are estimated and plugged into the complete log-likelihood. One can also use Bayesian-based criteria like the deviance information criterion (DIC) (Spiegelhalter et al., 2002) and the Watanabe-Akaike information criterion (WAIC) introduced by Watanabe (2010). For an interesting review of criteria for model selection, see also Gelman et al. (2014) and references therein. Finally, for HMMs, Scott (2002) proposed to compute the posterior probability of having s regimes, and the number of regimes is the most probable one according to this posterior distribution. In the literature, there have been few comparisons between information-based regime selection methods (Pohle et al., 2017, Celeux and Durand, 2008). The comparisons are generally performed when there are no covariates, and the distribution is either continuous or discrete. A common characteristic of these selection methods is that the maximum number of regimes ℓ max should be chosen in advance, and the information criterion must be computed for all regimes ℓ ≤ ℓ max . Furthermore, choosing the number of regimes ℓ ⋆ minimizing a given information criterion does not imply that the model is correct.

To assess the fit of the selected model, Zucchini et al. (2016) and Pohle et al. (2017) suggest plotting what they called 'pseudo-residuals'. However, they did not propose formal goodnessof-fit tests. Recently, Nasri and Remillard (2019), Nasri et al. (2020b) proposed formal goodnessof-fit tests based on pseudo-observations constructed from the conditional Rosenblatt's transforms for general dynamic models with continuous outcomes (including multivariate HMMs with continuous distribution). Under the null hypothesis that the dynamic model is correct, these pseudo-observations are approximately independent and uniformly distributed. Nasri and Remillard (2019), Nasri et al. (2020b) also proposed to select the regimes based on goodnessof-fit tests. Goodness-of-fit tests based on pseudo-observations are not new and have been proposed in univariate settings by Diebold et al. (1998) and Bai (2003), when the associated cdfs are continuous. The problem with this technique is that when the cdfs are not continuous, the pseudo-observations are no longer approximately independent or uniformly distributed. To overcome this problem, randomization methods were proposed in literature (Brockwell, 2007, Kheifets and Velasco, 2013). Note that recently, Kheifets and Velasco (2017) proposed another method not involving randomization for purely discrete time series, which can be generalized for mixtures of discrete and continuous distributions (arbitrary data).

The main aim of this paper is to compare the selection of the number of regimes using information criteria to the selection method based on goodness-of-fit tests. Here, we consider general HMMs with covariates, including possibly past observations, and where the distribution of the observations is continuous, discrete or a mixture of both. These models are described in Section 2, together with an estimation method based on the EM algorithm, a generalized version of goodness-of-fit tests, and the proposed selection procedure for the number of regimes. In Section 3, under different data-generating processes, numerical experiments are performed to assess the power of the goodness-of-fit tests, as well as the comparison of the precision of the selection methods for the number of regimes. The generalized goodness-of fit procedure is compared to classical selection methods used in the literature. Finally, in Section 4, we present an application of the proposed methodologies for the incidence of COVID-19 cases in counties of New York state.

## 2. Description of the models and estimation of parameters

Suppose that τ t ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } is the regime at time t ∈ { 1 , . . . , n } , Y t is the variable of interest, and Z t is the vector of covariates. Let F t -1 be the information (sigma-algebra) generated by { Y 1 , . . . , Y t -1 , Z 1 , . . . , Z t } and let G t -1 be the information generated by { τ 1 , . . . , τ t -1 } and F t -1 . Further set X t = ( Y t -1 , . . . , Y t -p , Z t ), t ≥ 1.

Hidden Markov models considered in this paper have the following components: a series of transition matrices Q t = q ( κ , x t ), with parameter κ = ( κ 1 , . . . , κ ℓ ) ∈ R ℓ × ℓ , where Q t,j,k = q jk ( κ j , x t ) = P ( τ t = k |G t -1 , τ t -1 = j ), j, k ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } , and cumulative probability distributions G j, β j ( y, x t ) = P ( Y t ≤ y |G t -1 , τ t = j, X t = x t ), β j ∈ B j , where B j is a parameter space. It is assumed that for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } , G j, β j has density g j, β j ( y t , x t ) with respect to a reference measure L . The parameter of interest is θ = ( β , κ ), with β = ( β 1 , . . . , β ℓ ) ∈ B 1 × · · · × B ℓ and κ = ( κ 1 , . . . , κ ℓ ) ∈ R ℓ × ℓ . In this article, references measures are of the form L = δ N ⋆ + L , where δ A is the counting measure on a countable set A , and L is Lebesgue's measure. This way, one can deal in a unified way with arbitrary distributions, i.e., continuous, discrete, as well as mixtures of discrete and continuous distributions. Next, let δ be the counting measure on { 1 , . . . , ℓ } and assume that η 0 is the distribution of τ 0 . Most of the time, η 0 has no effect on the estimation of the parameters, particularly if the Markov chain is ergodic, meaning that one can start with another η 0 , as long as η 0 ( j ) &gt; 0 for all j ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } . With respect to reference measure δ ⊗ n × L ⊗ n , the joint conditional density of τ = ( τ 1 , . . . , τ n ) and Y = ( Y 1 , . . . , Y n ) = y given Z = ( Z 1 , . . . , Z n ) = z and τ 0 is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

2.1. Estimation. Since most regimes are not observable, one can use the EM algorithm (Dempster et al., 1977), which proceeds in two steps. In the first step (expectation or E-step), one computes Q y , z ( ˜ θ , θ ) = E θ { log f ˜ θ ( τ, Y , Z ) | Y = y , Z = z } . From Appendix A,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where λ t, θ ( j ) = P θ ( τ t = j | Y = y , Z = z ) and Λ t, θ ( j, k ) = P θ ( τ t -1 = j, τ t = k | Y = y , Z = z ), for all t ∈ { 1 , . . . , n } and j, k ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } . In the second step, (maximisation or M-step), one computes θ ( k +1) = arg max θ Q y ( θ , θ ( k ) ) , starting from an initial value θ (0) . One can see from (2) that parameters ( β 1 , . . . , β ℓ ) and ( κ 1 , . . . , κ ℓ ) are estimated separately for each regime. As k →∞ , θ ( k ) converges to the maximum likelihood estimator of the density of Y . The formulas to implement the EM algorithm are given in Appendix A.

2.2. Goodness-of-fit tests. For our models, the conditional distribution function F t of Y t given F t -1 is expressed as a mixture. More precisely, if η t, θ ( j ) = P θ ( τ t = j | Y 1 = y 1 , . . . , Y t = y t , Z 1 = z 1 , . . . , Z t = z t ), t ∈ { 1 , . . . , n } , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A recursive formula for computing η t, θ is given by Equation (8) in Appendix A. It follows from (3) that the conditional density f t of Y t given F t -1 is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Equation (4) can in turn be used to compute the log-likelihood as well as AIC and BIC values. Next, if each G j, β j is continuous for all j ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } , then U t = F t, θ ( Y t ) are iid and uniformly distributed over (0 , 1), while this is no longer true if one of the F j s has discontinuities, as in the zero-inflated case. In the latter case, one can construct

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where V 1 , . . . , V n are iid uniform independent of Y 1 , . . . , Y n , Z 1 , . . . , Z n , F t, θ ( y -) = P ( Y t &lt; y |F t -1 ), and ∆ F t, θ ( y ) = P ( Y t = y |F t -1 ). In this case, under the null hypothesis that the model is correct, it follows from Brockwell (2007) that the U t s are iid and uniformly distributed over (0 , 1). This result is not new. It was already used in the context of randomized tests for iid observations by Ferguson (1967, Section 5.3), and it appeared in the proof of Lemma 3.2 in Moore and Spruill (1975). Note that in the continuous case, one recovers U t = F t, θ ( Y t ), so there is no added randomness. For a given number of regimes, the null hypothesis can be tested using the empirical cdf D n of the pseudo-observations u n,t = (1 -v t ) F t, θ n ( y t -) + v t F t, θ n ( y t ),

t ∈ { 1 , . . . , n } , defined for any u ∈ [0 , 1], by D n ( u ) = 1 n n ∑ t =1 1 { u n,t ≤ u } . As shown in Bai

(2003) and R´ emillard (2011), the empirical process D n defined by D n ( u ) = n 1 / 2 { D n ( u ) -u } , u ∈ [0 , 1], converges in an appropriate space to a continuous centred Gaussian process D . As a test statistic, one could use the Cram´ er-von Mises statistic S n defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where and u n :1 &lt; · · · &lt; u n : n are the ordered values. Since S n is a measure of distance between the empirical distribution and the uniform distribution, large values of S n lead to the rejection of the null hypothesis. One could also use the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic T n defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since T n is also a measure of distance between the empirical cdf and the uniform distribution, large values of T n lead to the rejection of the null hypothesis.

The only problem is that the limiting distribution of the empirical process D n and the test statistics S n and T n depend on the estimation error of the unknown parameter θ . To overcome this difficulty, a parametric bootstrap method, described in Algorithm 1, is used to estimate the P -values. The validity of the parametric bootstrap procedure was proven in (R´ emillard, 2011, Proposition 1) for general dynamic models, including HMMs. The algorithm is described for S n but it can be used for other statistics as well.

Algorithm 1. For a given number of regimes ℓ , let θ n be the maximum likelihood estimator of θ obtained from the EM algorithm. Then compute the statistic S n = S n ( u n, 1 , . . . , u n,n ) given be (5) . Next, for k = 1 , . . . , B , B large enough, repeat the following steps:

- (1) Generate a random sample Y ∗ 1 , . . . , Y ∗ n with values y ∗ 1 , . . . , y ∗ n from distribution P θ n , i.e., from an HMM with parameter θ n , and generate uniform iid V ∗ 1 , . . . , V ∗ n with values v ∗ 1 , . . . , v ∗ n .
- (2) Compute the estimator θ ∗ n from Y ∗ 1 , . . . , Y ∗ n .
- (3) Compute the pseudo-observations u ∗ n,t = (1 -v ∗ t ) F t, θ ∗ n ( y ∗ t -, x t ) + v ∗ t F t, θ ∗ n ( y ∗ t , x t ) , t ∈ { 1 , . . . , n } , using Equation (3) , and compute S ( k ) n = S n ( u ∗ n, 1 , . . . , u ∗ n,n ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

One can also implement the average-randomisation procedure (Machado and Santos Silva, 2005) to improve the power of the proposed tests S n or T n . To this end, one simulates M independent samples V k = ( V k 1 , . . . , V kn ), k ∈ { 1 , . . . , M } and compute associated empirical M

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

von Mises statistic ¯ S n,M = ∫ 1 0 ¯ D 2 n,M ( u ) du . An explicit expression for ¯ S n,M is given by Equation (12) in Appendix C. The approximate P -value can then be computed using a slight modification of Algorithm 1 by using averaging. It was shown in Kheifets and Velasco (2017) that this procedure, using as few as M = 25 samples, was almost as efficient as their proposed methodology for purely discrete data.

Although the proposed goodness-of-fit tests are generally consistent, it seems that for Poisson models, the mean of the regimes must be quite different in order to detect more regimes, especially if the sample size is small. This is illustrated in Figure 1, where the power, for n ∈ { 250 , 500 , 1000 , 2000 } is displayed as a function of the constant means λ 1 = 1, λ 2 ∈ [1 , 6] for the null hypothesis of 1 regime, and λ 1 = 1 , λ 2 = 5, λ 3 ∈ [5 , 25] for the null hypothesis of 2 regimes.

- 2.3. Selection procedure for the number of regimes. As proposed in Nasri et al. (2020a,b), at the 5% level, we choose the number of regimes ℓ ∗ as the first ℓ for which the P -value of the goodness-of-fit test is larger than 5%, starting with 1 regime, unless the model is a zero-inflated one, in which case one starts with 2 regimes. This selection procedure was shown to be quite effective for determining the number of regimes in HMM copulas (Nasri et al., 2020b). Of course, one could choose a level different from 5%.

This methodology uses multiple testing. However, if a goodness-of-fit test is powerful enough, multiple testing has no significant effect. For example, if P 1 and P 2 are P -values computed for the null hypothesis that model i ∈ { 1 , 2 } is correct, and if model 2 is the correct one, then the probability of choosing model 2 over model 1 is P ( {P 2 &gt; 5% } ∩ {P 1 &lt; 5% } ) ≈ P ( P 2 &gt; 5% |P 1 &lt; 5%) ≈ 95%, if the test is powerful enough, meaning that P ( P 1 &lt; 5%) is close to 1. These computations extends to any finite number of models, as long as the sample size is large enough. Therefore, for the proposed selection of the correct number of regimes to work, all one needs is that the goodness-of-fit test will reject the null hypothesis for ℓ regimes with large probability, whenever ℓ &lt; ℓ true since in this case,

Figure 1. Power curves for Poisson regime-switching models.

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As a result, the probability of selecting ℓ ⋆ = ℓ true should be close to 95%.

- 2.4. Other selection methods. Having defined our proposed selection method, we now define the other selection methods we will consider for the numerical comparisons.

The main information-based criteria are AIC, BIC, and ICL, defined respectively by AIC =

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

parameters, and ˆ τ t is the most probable state at time t ∈ { 1 , . . . , n } . In Pohle et al. (2017), the authors considered two-state HMM with two very different distributions and transition matrix defined with probability 0 . 9 of staying in the same state. They considered seven scenarios ( H 1 ) which were misspecifications of the null hypothesis. Their conclusion was that the ICL criterion was the best. They also concluded that for these scenarios, the AIC and BIC had a tendency to overestimate the number of regimes. We will see next that we get opposite results.

Next, we present Bayesian selection criteria. Suppose the log-density of the observations is log f ( y | φ ) = ∑ n t =1 log f t ( y t | φ ), and set D ( φ ) = -2 log f ( y | φ ). If { φ ( k ) ; k = 1 , . . . , N B } is a sample from the posterior distribution, set ¯ φ = 1 N B ∑ N B k =1 φ ( k ) , and let var φ { log f t ( y t | φ ) } be the sample variance of the log f t ( y t | φ ( k ) ) , k = 1 , . . . , N B . Further set p D D -D (¯ φ ), where ¯ D = 1 N B ∑ N B k =1 D ( φ ( k ) ) . The Deviance Information Criterion (DIC) (Spiegelhalter et al., 2002) is DIC = ¯ D + p D = 2p D + D(¯ φ ), and the Watanabe-Akaike information criterion (WAIC)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

an interesting review of criteria for model selection, see also Gelman et al. (2014) and reference therein. Finally, for HMMs, Scott (2002) proposed to compute the posterior probability of having s regimes. If γ is the a priori distribution of the number of regimes S ∈ { 1 , . . . , s } ,

= ¯ S max

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the posterior distribution assuming there are s regimes, s ∈ { 1 , . . . , s max } .

## 3. Numerical experiments

In this section we perform Monte Carlo experiments for: (i) assessing the power of the proposed goodness-of-fit tests; (ii) comparing the regime selection procedures proposed in Section 2.3. To this end, we generated random samples of size n ∈ { 250 , 500 } from several ARX-HMM models described in Section 3.1. For each sample size and for each model, and for a given number of regimes, we perform 1000 replications and in each replication, whenever needed, B = 100 bootstrap samples were used to compute the P -value of tests statistic ¯ S n, 1 , ¯ S n, 25 , and ¯ S n, 50 . In practice, when there are no replications, larger bootstrap samples should be used. In Section 3.2, we assess the power of the proposed goodness-of-fit tests for different DGPs. Next, in Section 3.3, we compare the seven regime selection procedures for the same DGPs, as well as for a Poisson model with constant means in each regime. In each case, we used N = 100 replications. To reduce the computational burden, only a small number of regimes were considered. However, in practice, larger number are necessary, e.g., for daily returns of assets (4 regimes for 2-year sequences and up to 6 for longer series).

3.1. Data generating processes (DGP). For the numerical experiments, we considered autoregressive HMM with Gaussian and Poisson distributions with covariates described next. They all satisfy Equation (1). We also considered their zero-inflated counterparts.

- ( M 1 ) Gaussian ARX-HMM: In this model, the conditional distribution of Y t given F t -1 and τ t = j is Gaussian with mean µ tj = ∑ p k =1 ϕ jk Y t -k + α ⊤ j z t and standard deviation σ j . In this case, x t = ( y t -1 , . . . , y t -p , z t, 1 , . . . , z t,r ) ⊤ . The case p = 1 and covariate z t ≡ 1 was considered in Ang and Bekaert (2002), Caccia and R´ emillard (2018), while the general case appeared in Fr¨ uhwirth-Schnatter (2006). It is assumed that z t 1 = 1 for all t . Here, one assumes that for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } , all zeros of the polynomial Φ j ( ζ ) = 1 -∑ p k =1 ϕ jk ζ k are outside the unit circle. Also β j = ( ϕ j , α j , σ j ) ⊤ , j ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } .
- ( M 2 ) Poisson ARX-HMM : This model is similar to the one proposed in Kedem and Fokianos (2002), Fokianos and Tjøstheim (2011), where g j, β j is the Poisson density with parameter µ tj , where, in the log-linear case, µ tj = exp ( ∑ p k =1 ϕ jk log(1 + y t -k ) + α ⊤ j z t ) , with

β j = ( ϕ j , α j ) ⊤ , j ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } . Here, z t, 1 = 1 for all t , and x t = ( y t -1 , . . . , y t -p , z t ) ⊤ . When the covariates are all non negative, one can also consider the linear case, where µ tj = ∑ p k =1 ϕ jk y t -k + α ⊤ j z t , with the additional constraints ϕ jk ≥ 0, ∑ p k =1 ϕ jk &lt; 1, α j 1 &gt; 0, and α jk ≥ 0, k ∈ { 2 , . . . , r } . Note that contrary to Fokianos and Tjøstheim (2011), Doukhan et al. (2021), µ tj does not depend on µ t -1 ,j , so there is no path dependence problem (Berentsen et al., 2018).

- ( M 3 ) Zero-inflated Gaussian ARX-HMM : In this model, the first regime is observable, corresponding to Y t = 0, while the other regimes are continuous as in the Gaussian ARXHMM.
- ( M 4 ) Zero-inflated Poisson ARX-HMM : Here, the first regime is not observable, and corresponds to the density g 1 ( y ) = I ( y = 0), while the other regimes are as in the Poisson ARX-HMM. This is an extension of the case r = 2 considered in Douwes-Schultz and Schmidt (2022).

For the first set of experiments, we considered a stationary case, while for the second set of experiments, there is linear trend. More precisely, the means µ ( j ) t,ℓ for experiment j ∈ { 1 , 2 } , are defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where z t 2 ∼ Exp(1), ℓ 0 = 1 for zero-inflated models, and ℓ 0 = 0 otherwise. The transition matrices Q ℓ 0 ,ℓ 1 used in the numerical experiments are defined as follows: Q 1 , 1 = Q 0 , 2 =

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and ℓ 0 = 0 otherwise, and ℓ 1 is the number of non-zero regimes. It follows that the percentage of time regime 1 appears using Q 1 , 1 , Q 0 , 2 or Q 1 , 2 is 33 . ¯ 3%. Also, in the Gaussian cases ( M 1 , M 3 ), σ ℓ 0 +1 = 0 . 8 and σ ℓ 0 +2 = 0 . 1. Finally, note that in the numerical experiments, we only used the Cram´ er-von Mises statistics S n,M with M ∈ { 1 , 25 , 50 } , since preliminary calculations showed that the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistics had always a lower power.

- 3.2. Level and power of the goodness-of-tests based on S n,M . The results of the experiments for DGPs M 1 and M 2 are presented in Table 1, while those for DGPs M 3 and M 4 appear in Table 2. For each of these experiments, we considered three sample sizes, namely n ∈ { 100 , 250 , 500 } . Also, ℓ 1 denotes the number of non-zeros regimes under H 1 .

For a target level of 5%, a 95% confidence interval for the level, based on N = 1000 replications, is (3 . 65% , 6 . 35%), or the maximum error is 1 . 35%. When the error is less than 1 . 35%, the test is said to be accurate, according to Batsidis et al. (2014), while a test with empirical level smaller than 3.65% would be conservative, and if the empirical level is greater than 6.35%, it is said to be liberal.

First, in the Gaussian case (DGP M 1 ), the results from Table 1 indicate that the test is accurate for each sample sizes, since the levels are not significantly different from the 5% targets. Also, the power for rejecting the null hypothesis of 1 regime when there are 2 regimes is very large, being 87 . 1% when n = 100 and 99 . 9% when n = 250. There was no need to consider the case n = 500. Next, in the Poisson case (DGP M 2 ), the tests based on S n, 1 , S n, 25 and S n, 50 are mostly accurate when n ∈ { 250 , 500 } , since the levels are also very close to the 5% targets, but the tests are liberal when n = 100. The test is slightly conservative for n = 500 when using S n, 1 , which is not recommended anyway. However, the power of tests are not very good, unless n = 500. Also, the type of experiment is significant, since the results for Exp 2 are better than those for Exp 1, for all sample sizes. The conclusion from these experiments in the Poisson case is that in order to detect the correct number of regimes, either the differences of means are large or the sample size is large. This is coherent with the results illustrated in Figure 1.

Next, from the results of the zero-inflated DGPs M 3 and M 4 displayed in Table 2, all tests are mostly accurate, even when n = 100, since that the levels are not significantly different from the 5% targets. The only exception is for M 4 , where the tests are mostly conservative when n = 250. Also, the power in the Gaussian case (DGP M 3 ) is very good, even when n = 100. In the Poisson case (DGP M 4 ), the result are very good for rejecting ℓ = 1 regimes when there are in fact 3 regimes, even for small sample sizes. Note that the case ℓ = 1 corresponds to a model with no regimes, not the zero-inflated regime. In the Poisson case, the rejection of the null hypothesis of ℓ = 3 regimes when ℓ 1 = 1, is not very good, but at least it improves when the sample size increases. Again testing for and ℓ = 2 regimes when ℓ 1 = 2 is not very good. Finally, one can see that the results for statistics S n, 25 and S n, 50 are very similar, and are better in general than for S n, 1 , which we do not recommend.

3.3. Comparisons of the procedures for the selection of the number of regimes. In this section, we investigate the selection of the number of regimes using the methodology proposed in Section 2.3, as well as the classical selection criteria (AIC, BIC, ICL) and the Bayesian inference criteria (DIC, WAIC, Scott) defined in Section 2.4. First, samples of size n = 250 are simulated for the same DGPs. To reduced the computation time, we performed 100 replications, using B = 100 parametric bootstrap samples for S n, 50 , while 5000 iterations were used for the Bayesian methods. In all cases, we selected the number of regimes ℓ ∈ { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 } . The results of the two experiments for DGPs M 1 -M 4 are presented in Table 3.

It follows from these results that the Bayesian criteria DIC and WAIC perform rather poorly for regime-switching models, while Scott's method is correct 70% (resp. 66%) of the time for Exp 1 (resp. Exp 2) for Gaussian models, when the true number of regimes is 1, it is correct 35% (resp. 50%) of the time for Exp 1 (resp. Exp 2) when the true number of regimes is 2. For the other models, Scott's method does not work most of the time, compared to the other non-Bayesian methods.

Next, in terms of performance, for the Gaussian models M 1 and M 3 , the best selection method is BIC, followed closely by ICL and our proposed selection method based on ¯ S n, 50 . There are even some cases where the BIC is less efficient than our method. The AIC criteria behaves rather poorly compared to S n, 50) , BIC, and ICL. For the Poisson models M 2 and M 4 , based on the results in Tables 1-2 about power assessment, it is no surprise that when the true number of regimes is ℓ 1 = 1, all three classical information criteria perform rather well. This is no longer the case when ℓ 1 = 2. In fact, the BIC is the worst criteria, and AIC is the best one, followed by our proposed method. Finally, in the zero-inflated case M 4 , our method selects the correct number of regimes ℓ 1 = 2 only 41% of the time for Exp 1, which is coherent with the results in Table 2, while AIC and BIC are almost perfect. As for Exp 2, our proposed method do as well as the BIC, followed by the AIC. However, when ℓ 1 = 2, AIC is the best, followed by our method, and BIC performs rather poorly. To summarize the results, there is no clear winner and one should always compute the AIC, BIC, and our selection method.

Table 1. Percentage of rejection of the null hypothesis of ℓ regimes at the 5% level for DGPs M 1 and M 2 and for samples of size n ∈ { 100 , 250 , 500 } , using N = 1000 replications and B = 100 parametric bootstrap samples. Under H 1 , the true number of regimes is ℓ 1 ∈ { 1 , 2 } . The empirical levels are displayed in bold.

| Exp 1: AR(2) with Exp(1) covariate  M  1  ,  n  = 100  M  1  ,  n  = 250  M  2  ,  n  = 100  M  2  ,  n  = 250  M  2  ,  n  = 500  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  1  Statistic  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  ¯  S  n,  1  5.2  3.4  1.3  4.8  2.9  2.4  4.9  6.6  6.4  4.5  7.7  8.1  ¯  S  n,  25  5.2  3.4  1.3  4.8  2.9  2.4  5.3  7.7  6.8  4.9  7.2  8.3  ¯  S  n,  50  5.2  3.4  1.3  4.8  2.9  2.4  5.2  7.5  6.7  5.3  6.9  8.4  2  ¯  S  n,  1  87.1  4.7  2.8  99.9  4.1  2.6  7.4  6.6  8.5  12.2  5.8  7.3  26.1  3.6  7.6  ¯  S  n,  25  87.1  4.7  2.8  99.9  4.1  2.6  8.0  6.5  8.5  13.3  6.1  6.5  26.7  4.9  6.5  ¯  S  n,  50  87.1  4.7  2.8  99.9  4.1  2.6  7.9  6.5  8.4  13.4  6.1  6.6  27.1  4.9  6.5  Exp 2: AR(1) with linear trend  M  1  ,  n  = 100  M  1  ,  n  = 250  M  2  ,  n  = 100  M  2  ,  n  = 250  M  2  ,  n  = 500  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  1  Statistic  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  ¯  S  n,  1  4.6  2.3  1.6  5.1  2.7  2.4  4.5  6.6  8.0  5.6  7.1  6.9  ¯  S  n,  25  4.6  2.3  1.6  5.1  2.7  2.4  4.4  6.4  7.3  5.1  6.6  7.0  ¯  S  n,  50  4.6  2.3  1.6  5.1  2.7  2.4  4.5  6.3  7.2  5.2  6.6  7.0  2  ¯  S  n,  1  93.8  7.6  3.2  100  4.0  3.1  8.1  4.3  5.6  15.8  5.1  4.5  28.6  4.2  4.8  ¯  S  n,  25  93.8  7.6  3.2  100  4.0  3.1  9.2  4.2  5.1  16.6  4.8  5.0  29.5  4.1  6.0  ¯  S  n,  50  93.8  7.6  3.2  100  4.0  3.1  9.6  4.3  5.4  16.3  4.9  4.8  29.4  4.1  5.8   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2. Percentage of rejection of the null hypothesis of ℓ regimes at the 5% level for the DGPs M 3 and M 4 and for samples of size n ∈ { 100 , 250 , 500 } , using N = 1000 replications and B = 100 parametric bootstrap samples. Under H 1 , the number of non-zero regimes is ℓ 1 ∈ { 1 , 2 } , and under H 0 , ℓ = 1 means a non-zero-inflated model. The empirical levels are displayed in bold.

| Exp 1: AR(2) with Exp(1) covariate  M  3  ,  n  = 100  M  3  ,  n  = 250  M  4  ,  n  = 100  M  4  ,  n  = 250  M  4  ,  n  = 500  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  1  Statistic  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  ¯  S  n,  1  80.2  5.0  8.9  95.9  5.1  3.8  13.9  5.2  6.0  26.0  4.2  6.5  46.0  4.0  5.4  ¯  S  n,  25  80.2  5.8  6.0  95.9  5.6  2.1  22.3  5.2  5.5  44.4  4.9  6.8  71.6  4.5  5.9  ¯  S  n,  50  80.2  4.9  6.3  95.9  5.3  2.2  23.4  4.6  5.7  44.9  6.2  6.7  71.5  4.0  5.4  2  ¯  S  n,  1  75.8  71.9  3.6  98.1  97.1  4.4  100  3.7  3.3  100  5.4  5.4  100  9.2  4.2  ¯  S  n,  25  75.8  78.2  4.0  98.1  98.3  6.4  100  3.9  5.0  100  6.2  3.7  100  12.9  4.4  ¯  S  n,  50  75.8  78.5  4.3  98.1  98.4  6.2  100  4.2  4.6  100  6.5  4.0  100  12.2  4.2  Exp 2: AR(1) with linear trend  M  3  ,  n  = 100  M  3  ,  n  = 250  M  4  ,  n  = 100  M  4  ,  n  = 250  M  4  ,  n  = 500  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  1  Statistic  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  2  3  1  ¯  S  n,  1  98.1  4.8  9.6  99.9  4.3  83.4  84.5  4.5  6.0  99.4  4.1  5.9  ¯  S  n,  25  98.1  5.1  6.4  99.9  4.2  83.4  87.2  3.9  4.5  99.7  2.7  6.5  ¯  S  n,  50  98.1  4.5  6.1  99.9  3.9  83.4  87.1  4.1  4.4  99.6  2.6  6.2  2  ¯  S  n,  1  99.9  51.2  4.2  100  84.7  5.2  100  5.8  3.4  100  6.7  4.3  100  9.5  4.3  ¯  S  n,  25  99.9  67.0  3.4  100  91.3  3.7  100  5.4  4.4  100  7.0  5.5  100  11.0  4.4  ¯  S  n,  50  99.9  67.3  3.4  100  91.3  3.9  100  5.8  4.5  100  7.2  5.2  100  10.9  4.3   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Finally, to understand a little better the selection procedure in the Poisson case, we performed a last set of experiments using constant means for each regime. More precisely, we simulated Poisson models with ℓ 1 ∈ { 1 , 2 , 3 } regimes, λ ∈ { 1 , 3 , 10 } and λ ∈ { 1 , 6 , 12 } , for n ∈ { 250 , 500 } . The results are displayed in Table 4. As the number of regime increases, the performance of our proposed method, AIC, and BIC selection methods decreases, and it can be compensated by increasing the sample sizes. When the difference between the means is large enough, the results for these three selection methods are excellent, even for a sample size of n = 250. Note that ICL criterion and the Baysian methods perform rather badly for selecting the number of regimes in this last experiment.

Table 3. Percentage of time a model with ℓ regimes is selected, for the DGPs M 1 - -M 4 for samples of size n = 250, using for N = 100 replications, with B = 100 parametric bootstrap samples for S n, 50 , and 5000 iterations for the Bayesian methods, with a sample size N B = 100. Here, ℓ 1 is the number of non-zero regimes. The correct number of regimes is indicated in bold.

| Exp 1: AR(2) with Exp(1) covariate  M  1  ,  n  = 250  M  2  ,  n  = 250  M  3  ,  n  = 250  M  4  ,  n  = 250  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  1  Criteria  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  ¯  S  n,  50  91  9  0  0  98  1  0  1  5  88  6  1  56  41  2  1  AIC  50  14  19  17  100  0  0  0  15  50  16  19  0  99  1  0  BIC  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  20  80  0  0  1  99  0  0  ICL  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  20  79  1  0  2  97  1  0  DIC  1  13  26  60  0  0  12  88  0  4  30  66  5  6  23  66  WAIC  100  0  0  0  99  1  0  0  0  100  0  0  52  46  2  0  'Scott'  70  19  9  2  49  26  15  10  0  0  0  100  30  18  22  30  2  ¯  S  n,  50  1  98  1  0  85  15  0  0  5  0  91  4  0  93  7  0  AIC  0  36  25  39  65  35  0  0  0  0  67  33  0  87  13  0  BIC  0  95  4  1  100  0  0  0  0  0  91  9  0  100  0  0  ICL  0  87  9  4  100  0  0  0  0  0  85  15  0  100  0  0  DIC  0  2  19  79  0  0  16  84  0  0  12  88  0  1  11  88  WAIC  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  0  100  0  0  84  16  0  0  'Scott'  8  35  24  33  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  100  0  9  40  51  Exp 2: AR(1) with linear trend  M  1  ,  n  = 250  M  2  ,  n  = 250  M  3  ,  n  = 250  M  4  ,  n  = 250  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  1  Criteria  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  ¯  S  n,  50  98  2  0  0  93  3  0  4  0  99  1  0  3  92  2  3  AIC  73  14  8  5  96  4  0  0  0  76  14  10  0  95  5  0  BIC  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  ICL  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  DIC  0  0  8  92  0  1  28  71  0  0  1  99  0  0  16  84  WAIC  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  0  100  0  0  58  42  0  0  'Scott'  66  25  7  2  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  100  0  21  29  50  2  ¯  S  n,  50  0  80  19  1  88  10  1  1  0  9  85  6  0  89  9  2  AIC  0  35  30  35  78  21  1  0  0  0  75  25  0  76  24  0  BIC  0  62  34  4  100  0  0  0  0  0  100  0  0  100  0  0  ICL  0  60  28  12  100  0  0  0  0  0  96  4  0  100  0  0  DIC  0  0  8  92  0  2  19  79  0  0  3  97  0  0  1  99  WAIC  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  0  84  16  0  96  4  0  0  'Scott'  21  50  13  16  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  100  0  16  13  71   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 4. Percentage of time a model with ℓ regimes is selected, for a Poisson model for samples of size n ∈ { 250 , 500 } , using for N = 100 replications, with B = 100 parametric bootstrap samples for S n, 50 , and 5000 iterations for the Bayesian methods, with a sample size N B = 100. The correct number of regimes is indicated in bold.

| λ  1  = 1,  λ  2  = 3,  λ  3  = 10  ℓ  1  = 1  ℓ  1  = 2  ℓ  1  = 3  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  n  Criteria  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  2  3  ≥  4  250  ¯  S  n,  50  97  1  1  1  7  88  4  1  0  39  54  7  AIC  98  2  0  0  0  98  2  0  0  4  87  9  BIC  100  0  0  0  1  99  0  0  0  51  49  0  ICL  100  0  0  0  85  15  0  0  0  100  0  0  DIC  0  1  22  77  0  3  12  85  0  0  6  94  WAIC  96  4  0  0  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  'Scott'  48  21  14  17  0  26  28  46  0  11  30  59  500  ¯  S  n,  50  93  3  0  4  3  91  3  3  0  3  91  6  AIC  99  1  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  0  93  7  BIC  100  0  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  4  96  0  ICL  100  0  0  0  83  17  0  0  0  100  0  0  DIC  0  2  20  78  0  0  19  81  0  0  4  96  WAIC  97  3  0  0  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  'Scott'  69  13  8  10  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  100  λ  1  = 1,  λ  2  = 6,  λ  3  = 12  ℓ  1  = 1  ℓ  1  = 2  ℓ  1  = 3  ℓ  ℓ  ℓ  n  Criteria  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  2  3  ≥  4  1  2  3  ≥  4  250  ¯  S  n,  50  94  2  0  4  1  92  2  5  0  7  88  5  AIC  98  2  0  0  0  93  7  0  0  0  95  5  BIC  100  0  0  0  0  98  2  0  0  12  88  0  ICL  100  0  0  0  0  98  2  0  0  97  3  0  DIC  0  3  23  74  0  0  15  85  0  0  9  91  WAIC  98  2  0  0  100  0  0  0  100  0  0  0  'Scott'  48  20  16  16  2  23  32  43  0  0  3  97   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 4. Example of application

To illustrate the proposed methodology, we used the number of reported COVID-19 cases from Jan 1st 2021 to May 20th, 2022, for the 58 counties of New York state reported by CDC. The last seven days are used for comparing predictions. In this example, the variables of interest are incidence y tj , j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 58 } , where y tj is the daily number of cases by 1000 inhabitants in county j . Note that for these data, the county of New York is composed of the following counties: Bronx, Kings, New York city, Queens, and Richmond. According to the map of New York counties in Figure 3, we constructed a neighbourhood matrix M with entries 1 if two counties have common boundaries, and 0 otherwise. For each county j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 58 } , we chose two explanatory variables: Z t 1 ,j ≡ 1 and Z t, 2 ,j = ∑ 58 k =1 M jk y t -1 ,k , with Z 1 , 2 ,j = 0, i.e., Z t 2 represents the number of cases by 1000 inhabitants the previous day in the neighbouring counties. The latter variable is used to take into account the spatial dependence. Finally, because there was a significant seasonality of order 7, we chose to model the seasonal differences ˜ y t = y t -y t -7 . Since we want to predict the last 7 days, for each j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 58 } , we estimated the parameters using the first 489 observations ˜ y 1 ,j , . . . , ˜ y 489 ,j . To this end, we fitted ARXHMM models with ℓ ∈ { 2 , 3 , 4 } and p ∈ { 0 , . . . , 14 } and different distributions. It turned out that the best models were Gaussian. For a given j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 58 } , the best model was chosen as the first one for which the P -values of the goodness-of-fit test was at least 5%, where the models were ordered according to the lexicographic order, i.e., (2 , 0) , (2 , 1) , . . . , (2 , 14) , (3 , 0) , . . . , (4 , 14). The resulting choices are listed in Table 5.

For the predictions ̂ ˜ y t,j , since a Gaussian mixture is not symmetric in general, we used the median of the predicting Gaussian mixture using all previous observations. The prediction at time t for y t,j is then given by ̂ y t,j = y t -7 ,j + ̂ ˜ y t,j , j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 58 } , and the sum of the predictions were computed to obtain the weekly predictions. As can be seen from Figure 2, the results are quite satisfactory, showing that our proposed models make sense. Finally, the severity of the estimated weekly predicted COVID-19 incidence for the New York state counties is illustrated in Figure 3. Note that from the map and Table 5, the counties with the largest number of predicted weekly incidence are Warren and Weschester.

Table 5. Best models and predicted weekly incidence for the 58 counties with ℓ ∈ { 2 , 3 , 4 } and p ∈ { 0, . . . , 14 } . Note the best models were all Gaussian HMMs with this specific number of regimes and lags.

| County  ℓ  p  Pred  County  ℓ  p  Pred  Albany  3  0  356.78  Niagara  3  2  438.18  Allegany  2  3  215.57  Oneida  3  8  301.42  Broome  3  7  407.80  Onondaga  2  14  232.32  Cattaraugus  3  0  294.52  Ontario  3  7  216.85  Cayuga  3  4  174.90  Orange  3  1  334.31  Chautauqua  3  0  371.77  Orleans  3  0  311.41  Chemung  2  11  334.95  Oswego  3  3  235.45  Chenango  2  2  273.19  Otsego  3  0  273.13  Clinton  3  6  374.09  Putnam  3  6  433.15  Columbia  3  2  335.62  Rensselaer  2  14  353.54  Cortland  3  1  217.87  Rockland  3  2  358.75  Delaware  2  2  292.38  Saratoga  2  11  435.93  Dutchess  3  3  319.23  Schenectady  4  0  416.03  Erie  3  2  458.24  Schoharie  2  11  247.33  Essex  2  12  278.28  Schuyler  2  14  256.77  Franklin  2  9  233.41  Seneca  2  11  210.22  Fulton  3  1  277.14  St. Lawrence  2  7  174.61  Genesee  2  13  340.01  Steuben  2  11  336.05  Greene  3  4  244.62  Suffolk  3  2  399.41  Hamilton  4  1  208.74  Sullivan  3  0  366.5  Herkimer  2  3  249.46  Tioga  2  6  329.46  Jefferson  2  7  333.76  Tompkins  3  0  431.06  Lewis  2  4  286.57  Ulster  3  2  309.54  Livingston  3  4  253.58  Warren  3  0  496.74  Madison  3  0  246.44  Washington  3  1  396.98  Monroe  3  4  309.54  Wayne  3  6  231.97  Montgomery  3  1  376.90  Westchester  2  8  470.04  Nassau  3  0  434.94  Wyoming  3  1  274.97  New York City  2  7  377.56  Yates  2  13  207.82   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 5. Conclusion

We showed how to model time series data with ARX-HMM models, i.e., hidden Markov models using previous observations of the series as well as other covariates. Based on the numerical experiments performed in Section 3, it is proposed that the number of regimes is determined by the first number of regimes for which the P -value is at least 5%, using the averaged Cram´ er-von Mises statistics S n, 25 or S n, 50 , where the P -value is approximated by parametric bootstrap with at least B = 100 samples. For choosing the number of regimes, one should also compute the BIC and the AIC (especially for Poisson distribution) for a fixed number of potential candidates for the number of regimes, e.g., for ℓ ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ 1 } .The ICL

Figure 2. Predicted weekly values vs observed weekly values for all 58 counties. The slope of the regression is 0 . 94936.

<!-- image -->

Figure 3. Estimated weekly cases per 100 000 inhabitants (incidence) for New York Counties for May 14 to May 20, 2022. Note that the predicted incidence for Bronx, Kings, New York City, Queens, and Richmond, is estimated to be proportional to the predicted incidence of the aggregated New York county.

<!-- image -->

criterion is either not good or very close to the BIC. This is also true of the Bayesian criteria DIC, WAIC, and Scott. An example of an application using COVID-19 cases for New York state counties shows that the proposed models for time series fit the data quite well.

Appendix A. EM estimation for general HMM

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where λ t, θ ( j ) = P θ ( τ t = j | Y = y , Z = z ) and Λ t, θ ( j, k ) = P θ ( τ t -1 = j, τ t = k | Y = y , Z = z ), for all t ∈ { 1 , . . . , n } and j, k ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } . Now, for all j ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } , set ¯ η n, θ ( j ) = 1, η 0 , θ ( j ) = η 0 ( j ) = 1 ℓ = 1 |R| , and define η t, θ ( j ) = P θ ( τ t = j | Y 1 = y 1 , . . . , Y t = y t , Z 1 = z 1 , . . . , Z t = z t ), t = 1 , . . . , n . Further let ¯ η t, θ ( i ) = ¯ η t, θ ( i, y t +1: n ) be the conditional density of Y t +1: n given Y 1: t = y 1: t , Z = z , and τ t = i . To compute λ t, θ ( j ) and Λ t, θ ( i, j ), one can use the following proposition, whose proof is given in Appendix B.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, for all j ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } and t ∈ { 1 , . . . , n } , ℓ ∑ k =1 Λ t, θ ( j, k ) = λ t -1 , θ ( j )

Remark A.1. To avoid numerical problems, one should replace ¯ η in (9) -(10) by its normalized version

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since one divides both numerator and denominator by the same constant, the expressions (9) -(10) remain the same.

A.2. M-Step. For this step, given θ ( k ) , θ ( k +1) is defined as θ ( k +1) = arg max θ Q y , z ( θ , θ ( k ) ) . Setting λ ( k ) t ( j ) = λ t, θ ( k ) ( j ) and Λ ( k ) t ( j, l ) = Λ t, θ ( k ) ( j, l ), it follows from Section A.1 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that in the constant case Q t = Q for all t , one gets Q ( k +1) jl = ∑ n t =1 Λ ( k ) t ( j, l ) ∑ ℓ i =1 ∑ n t =1 Λ ( k ) t ( j, i ) .

## Appendix B. Proof of Proposition 1

To simplify notations, parameters are omitted. This proof is an extension of the results in Caccia and R´ emillard (2018). Let t ∈ { 1 , . . . , n } be given. Further let G 1 on R t -1 , G 2 on R , and G 3 on R n -t be bounded measurable functions. It follows from the definition of conditional expectations that for any i ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This proves (9). Similarly, for any l, i ∈ { 1 , . . . , ℓ } ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This proves (10). As a by-product, one gets (7) and (8), the latter obtained by setting G ¸ 3 ≡ 1. This completes the proof. □

Appendix C. Expression for ¯ S n,M

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where, for any j, k ∈ { 1 , . . . , M } ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that S n,jj is also given by formula (5).

## References

- Akaike, H. (1974). A new look at the statistical model identification. IEEE Trans. Automatic Control, AC-19:716-723. System identification and time-series analysis.
- Ang, A. and Bekaert, G. (2002). Regime switches in interest rates. J. Bus. Econom. Statist., 20(2):163-182.
- Bai, J. (2003). Testing parametric conditional distributions of dynamic models. Rev. Econ. Stat., 85(3):531-549.
- Bastille-Rousseau, G., Potts, J. R., Yackulic, C. B., Frair, J. L., Ellington, E. H., and Blake, S. (2016). Flexible characterization of animal movement pattern using net squared displacement and a latent state model. Mov. Ecol., 4(1):1-12.
- Batsidis, A., Martin, N., Pardo, L., and Zografos, K. (2014). A necessary power divergence-type family of tests for testing elliptical symmetry. J. Stat. Comput. Simul., 84(1):57-83.
- Berentsen, G. D., Bulla, J., Maruotti, A., and Støve, B. (2018). Modelling corporate defaults: A Markov-switching Poisson log-linear autoregressive model.
- Biernacki, C., Celeux, G., and Govaert, G. (2000). Assessing a mixture model for clustering with the integrated completed likelihood. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, 22(7):719-725.
- Brockwell, A. E. (2007). Universal residuals: A multivariate transformation. Statist. Probab. Lett., 77(14):1473-1478.
- Caccia, M. and R´ emillard, B. (2018). Option pricing and hedging for discrete time autoregressive hidden Markov model. In Glau, K., Linders, D., Min, A., Scherer, M., Schneider, L., and Zagst, R., editors, Innovations in Insurance, Risk- and Asset Management, pages 313-348. World Scientific.
- Capp´ e, O., Moulines, E., and Ryd´ en, T. (2005). Inference in Hidden Markov Models. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer, New York.
- Celeux, G. and Durand, J.-B. (2008). Selecting hidden Markov model state number with crossvalidated likelihood. Computational Statistics, 23(4):541-564.
- Dempster, A. P., Laird, N. M., and Rubin, D. B. (1977). Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM algorithm. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. B, 39:1-38.
- Diebold, F. X., Gunther, T. A., and Tay, A. S. (1998). Evaluating density forecasts with applications to financial risk management. Int. Econ. Rev., 39(4):863-883.
- Diebold, F. X. and Inoue, A. (2001). Long memory and regime switching. J. Econom., 105(1):131 - 159.

- Doukhan, P., Fokianos, K., and Rynkiewicz, J. (2021). Mixtures of nonlinear poisson autoregressions. J. Time Series Anal., 42(1):107-135.
- Douwes-Schultz, D. and Schmidt, A. (2022). Zero-state coupled Markov switching count models for spatio-temporal infectious disease spread. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. Ser. C.
- Ferguson, T. S. (1967). Mathematical Statistics: A Decision Theoretic Approach. Probability and Mathematical Statistics, Vol. 1. Academic Press, New York.
- Fokianos, K. and Tjøstheim, D. (2011). Log-linear Poisson autoregression. J. Multivariate Anal., 102(3):563-578.
- Fr¨ uhwirth-Schnatter, S. (2006). Finite mixture and Markov switching models. Springer Series in Statistics. Springer, New York.
- Gelman, A., Hwang, J., and Vehtari, A. (2014). Understanding predictive information criteria for Bayesian models. Stat. Comput., 24(6):997-1016.
- Hamilton, J. D. (1989). A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and the business cyle. Eonometrica, pages 357-384.
- Hamilton, J. D. (1990). Analysis of time series subject to changes in regime. J. Econom., 45(1-2):39-70.
- Hardy, M. R. (2001). A regime-switching model of long-term stock returns. N. Am. Actuar. J., 5(2):41-53.
- Kedem, B. and Fokianos, K. (2002). Regression models for time series analysis. Wiley Series in Probability and Statistics. Wiley-Interscience [John Wiley &amp; Sons], Hoboken, NJ.
- Kheifets, I. and Velasco, C. (2013). Model adequacy checks for discrete choice dynamic models. In Recent Advances and Future Directions in Causality, Prediction, and Specification Analysis, pages 363-382. Springer.
- Kheifets, I. and Velasco, C. (2017). New goodness-of-fit diagnostics for conditional discrete response models. J. Econometrics, 200(1):135-149.
- Leos-Barajas, V., Photopoulou, T., Langrock, R., Patterson, T. A., Watanabe, Y. Y., Murgatroyd, M., and Papastamatiou, Y. P. (2017). Analysis of animal accelerometer data using hidden markov models. Methods Ecol. Evol., 8(2):161-173.
- Machado, J. A. F. and Santos Silva, J. M. C. (2005). Quantiles for counts. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., 100(472):1226-1237.
- Moore, D. S. and Spruill, M. C. (1975). Unified large-sample theory of general chi-squared statistics for tests of fit. Ann. Statist., 3:599-616.
- Nasri, B. R., Boucher, E., Perreault, L., R´ emillard, B. N., Huard, D., and Nicault, A. (2020a). Modeling hydrological inflow persistence using paleoclimate reconstructions on the Qu´ ebecLabrador (Canada) Peninsula. Water Resour. Res., 56(5):e2019WR025122.
- Nasri, B. R. and Remillard, B. N. (2019). GaussianHMM1d: Inference, Goodness-of-Fit and Forecast for Univariate Gaussian Hidden Markov Models. R package version 1.0.1.
- Nasri, B. R., R´ emillard, B. N., and Thioub, M. Y. (2020b). Goodness-of-fit for regime-switching copula models with application to option pricing. Canad. J. Statist., 48(1):79-96.
- Pohle, J., Langrock, R., van Beest, F. M., and Schmidt, N. M. (2017). Selecting the number of states in hidden Markov models: Pragmatic solutions illustrated using animal movement. J. Agric. Biol. Environ. Stat., 22(3):270-293.
- Ryd´ en, T. (2008). EM versus Markov chain Monte Carlo for estimation of hidden Markov models: a computational perspective. Bayesian Anal., 3(4):659-688.

- R´ emillard, B. (2011). Validity of the parametric bootstrap for goodness-of-fit testing in dynamic models. Technical report, SSRN Working Paper Series No. 1966476.
- Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model. Ann. Statist., 6(2):461-464.
- Scott, S. L. (2002). Bayesian methods for hidden Markov models: recursive computing in the 21st century. J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., 97(457):337-351.
- Spiegelhalter, D. J., Best, N. G., Carlin, B. P., and van der Linde, A. (2002). Bayesian measures of model complexity and fit. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B Stat. Methodol., 64(4):583-639.
- Watanabe, S. (2010). Asymptotic equivalence of Bayes cross validation and widely applicable information criterion in singular learning theory. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 11:3571-3594.
- Yoon, B.-J. (2009). Hidden Markov models and their applications in biological sequence analysis. Current Genomics, 10(6):402-415.
- Zucchini, W., MacDonald, I. L., and Langrock, R. (2016). Hidden Markov models for time series, volume 150 of Monographs on Statistics and Applied Probability. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, second edition. An introduction using R.

e de Montr´ eal,

D´ epartement de m´ edecine sociale et pr´ eventive, ´ Ecole de sant´ e publique, Universit´ C.P. 6128, succursale Centre-ville Montr´ eal (Qu´ ebec) H3C 3J7

Email address :

bouchra.nasri@umontreal.ca

Department of Decision Sciences, HEC Montr´ eal,

Montr´ eal, Qu´ ebec, Canada H3T 2A4

Email address :

bruno.remillard@hec.ca

Department of Decision Sciences, HEC Montr´ eal,

Montr´ eal, Qu´ ebec, Canada H3T 2A4

Email address :

mamadou-yamar.thioub@hec.ca