## A Markov-switching spatio-temporal ARCH model

Tzung Hsuen Khoo 1 , Dharini Pathmanathan 1 , Philipp Otto 2 , and Sophie Dabo-Niang 3

1 Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Faculty of Science, Universiti Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 2 School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Glasgow, United Kingdom CNRS, UMR 8524-Laboratoire Paul Painlev´ e, INRIA-MODAL,

3 Universit´ e Lille, F-59000 Lille, France

October 4, 2023

## Abstract

Stock market indices are volatile by nature and sudden shocks are known to affect volatility patterns. The autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) and generalized ARCH (GARCH) models neglect structural breaks triggered by sudden shocks that may lead to an overestimation of persistence, causing an upward bias in the estimates. Different regime-switching models which have abrupt regime-switching governed by a Markov chain were developed to model volatility in financial time series data. Volatility modelling was also extended to spatially interconnected time series resulting in spatial variants of ARCH models. This work proposes a Markov regime-switching framework of the spatio-temporal log-ARCH model. The Markov-switching extension of the model, the estimation procedure and the smooth inferences of the regimes are discussed. The Monte-Carlo simulation studies show that the maximum likelihood estimation method for the proposed model has good finite sample properties. The proposed model was applied on 28 stock indices data which were presumably affected by the 20152016 Chinese stock market crash. The results showed that that the proposed model is a better fit compared to that of the one-regime counterpart. Furthermore, the smoothed inference of the data indicated the approximate periods where structural breaks occurred. This model can capture structural breaks which simultaneously occur in locations which are spatially autocorrelated.

Keywords: Regime-switching, Structural breaks, Volatility, Stock market, Spatial.

## 1 Introduction

Time series data, such as stock market indices, are known to exhibit volatility clusters throughout a long period. Two of the most popular models on volatility modelling are the autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) model (Engle, 1982) and generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (GARCH) model (Engle and Bollerslev, 1986). The GARCH( p , q ) model assumes that a variable y t is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where σ 2 t is the conditional variance, t ε t u is a sequence of independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) random variables with zero mean and unit variance, ω is a constant, t α i u are the ARCH parameters, t β i u are the GARCH parameters.

When p ' 0, (2) becomes an ARCH( q ) model. The conditional variance of a financial time series is governed by a GARCH process with a constant unconditional variance. However, international financial markets are susceptible to sudden large shocks such as the 2007-2008 financial crisis and the Chinese stock market crash (2015-2016). Such shocks can trigger abrupt breaks in the unconditional variance in the time series, which correspond to structural breaks in parameters t α i u and t β i u in GARCH models. It is evident that overlooking such structural breaks can result in an upward bias in the estimated persistence of GARCH models, which is measured by ř q i ' 1 α i ` ř p i ' 1 β i (Mikosch and St˘ aric˘ a, 2004; Hillebrand and Medeiros, 2008).

The occurrence of structural breaks also has significant implications for predicting the volatility of financial time series. It is common to use an expanding window to estimate the parameters of GARCH forecasting models in out-of-sample volatility forecasting. However, this approach may not be appropriate when structural breaks exist in the time series. West and Cho (1995) suggested that the volatility forecasting accuracy of GARCH(1,1) models for exchange rate returns could be achieved by accounting for the occurrence of structural breaks in the unconditional variance of exchange rate returns. Starica et al. (2005) indicated that forecasts of stock return volatility with GARCH(1,1) models assuming stable parameters are often inferior to forecasts by models which can accommodate frequent changes in the unconditional variance of stock returns.

The structural breaks in the parameters of GARCH models can be accounted for by making the parameters in the models to be time-varying. The parameters t α i u and t β i u can be different depending on an unobserved random variable s t (Hamilton, 1994). The random variable s t is often denoted as the state or regime , and this will be referred to regime for the remainder of this work. Different regime-switching models, which incorporate abrupt regime-switching governed by a Markov chain, have been developed to model the volatility of financial data from a temporal perspective (Hamilton and Susmel, 1994; Gray, 1996; Haas et al., 2004).

Volatility modelling was also extended to spatially interconnected time series. The spatial ARCH (spARCH) model was introduced by Otto et al. (2018), where its properties were further analysed (Otto et al., 2021). A logarithmic expression of the volatility equation was suggested by Sato and Matsuda (2017). This can be seen as a spatially equivalent log-ARCH model. The spARCH model was then generalized to allow for different spatial GARCH-type models (Otto and Schmid, 2023). Recently, a dynamic spatio-temporal log-ARCH model was proposed, and its estimation procedure and asymptotic properties were provided (Otto et al., 2023).

The phenomenon of regime-switching can be extended in a spatial and temporal framework where each regime-switching can occur simultaneously across different spatial locations, reflecting the interconnected behaviour of the data. This enables the model to capture intricate dynamics that could be missed by traditional Markov-switching ARCH/GARCH models, where sudden changes in volatility may be both spatially and temporally dependent. The literature on spatially extended Markov-switching model is very limited. To the best of our knowledge, one study by Kondo (2022) proposed a two-regime Markov-switching model with a spatial autoregressive process, which was applied to investigate the spatial dependence of regional business cycles in Mexico. However, this model does not account for the ARCH and spatio-temporal effects which will be considered in our model. In this article, we introduce a novel Markov-switching model with a dynamic spatio-temporal log-ARCH process.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the dynamic spatio-temporal log-ARCH model (Otto et al., 2023), the Markovswitching extension of the model, the estimation procedure, and the smooth inference of regimes. In section 3, a Monte Carlo simulation study is presented to investigate the finite sample properties of the maximum likelihood estimation. In section 4, applications on global stock market data are investigated. Section 5 concludes with recommendations for future studies.

## 2 Methodology

## 2.1 Dynamic spatio-temporal ARCH Model

In this work, we propose a regime-switching version of the spatio-temporal ARCH models developed by Otto et al. (2023). Thus, we briefly outline the single-regime spatio-temporal ARCH model with one spatial lag as below:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for i ' 1 , 2 , ..., n and t ' 1 , 2 , ..., T .

In this model, y it is a variable of region i and time t , h it is defined as the volatility term, w ij is the ij -th entry of the n x n spatial weight matrix W n , and t ε it u are i.i.d. random variables across i and t with a mean of zero and unit variance; µ 0 is the regional fixed effect. Lastly, p ρ 0 , γ 0 , δ 0 q are the measures of spatial, temporal, and spatio-temporal effects, respectively.

In contrast to the original model, we do not consider any exogenous variables or temporal fixed effects. Moreover, the regional fixed effect for each location is assumed to be the same. A log-square operation on both sides of (3) and arranging n variables in a vector form leads to:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Y ˚ t = p log y 2 1 t , log y 2 2 t , ..., log y 2 nt q 1 , h ˚ t = p log h 1 t , log h 2 t , ..., log h nt q 1 , E ˚ t = p log ε 2 1 t , log ε 2 2 t , ..., log ε 2 nt q 1 and 1 n is a n x 1 vector of ones. Substituting (6) into (5) results in

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The entries of E ˚ t in (7) are still i.i.d across i and t but the means may not be zero. Thus, E r logε 2 i,t s is added and subtracted in (7):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ϕ 0 ' µ 0 ` µ ε , µ ε ' E r logε 2 i,t s , U ˚ t ' p log ε 2 1 t ´ E r logε 2 i,t s , log ε 2 2 t ´ E r logε 2 i,t s , ... , log ε 2 nt ´ E r logε 2 i,t sq 1 .

## 2.2 Markov-switching spatio-temporal ARCH model

In this section, we describe the regime-switching version of (8). Let the state variable s t be a random variable which only takes on integers t 1 , 2 , ..., K u . If the conditional probability P t s t ' i t | s t ´ 1 ' i t ´ 1 , s t ´ 2 ' i t ´ 2 , ... u equals to P t s t ' i t | s t ´ 1 ' i t ´ 1 u , then s t can be defined as a K -state Markov chain with a K x K transition probability matrix P n (Hamilton, 1994):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p ij is the transition probability from state i to state j . t p ij u i,j ' 1 ,...,K also satisfies the following relation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this work, a two-regime Markov-switching spatio-temporal ARCH model will be introduced. A two-regime Markov-switching spatio-temporal ARCH model can be formulated as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the state variable s t follows a 2-state Markov chain with 2 x 2 transition probability matrix P ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and therefore, assumes the value of t 1 , 2 u . s t =1and s t =2are equivalent to regime 1 and 2 respectively. Even though the distribution of U ˚ t is skewed, we assume U ˚ t to be N p 0 n , σ 2 0 I n q to derive the quasi-maximum likelihood estimator (QMLE) in the following section.

## 2.3 Quasi Maximum likelihood estimation (QMLE)

QMLE requires the log-likelihood of θ = p θ s t ' 1 , θ s t ' 2 , p, q q 1 , where θ s t ' j = p ρ 0 ,s t , γ 0 ,s t , δ 0 ,s t , µ 0 ,s t q j ' 1 , 2 , to be calculated. To this end, the approach of the Hamilton filter Hamilton (1989) is followed. Firstly, the 2 x 1 vector η t contains the conditional densities of Y ˚ t is defined as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The conditional densities of Y ˚ t can be obtained by first rearranging (7),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, U ˚ t is transformed into Y ˚ t :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(12) can then be expressed as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Secondly, we are required to also construct the 2 x 1 vectors of filtered probability ξ t | t , and predicted probability ξ t ` 1 | t :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By assuming that θ is known, the idea of the Hamilton filter is to generate optimal inference and prediction for each t by iterating the following equations,

Ä

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P represents the 2 x 2 transition probability matrix defined in (11), Ä denotes element-by-element multiplication. Once the iterations are completed for t ' 1 , 2 , ..., T , the log-likelihood function L p θ q can be calculated as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where log f p Y ˚ t | s t , Y ˚ t ´ 1 ; θ q is expressed by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The log-likelihood in (19) is then maximized numerically using the R package bbmle . (Bolker and Bolker, 2017).

## 2.3.1 Constraints on Parameters in QMLE

Constraints on the parameters are necessary to ensure the numerical maximization is well-behaved. In general, ρ 0 ,s t P ( λ ´ 1 min , λ ´ 1 max ), where λ is an eigenvalue of W n , leads to a non-singular I n ´ ρ 0 ,s t W n when W n is symmetric, and a positive definite variance-covariance matrix Ord (1975). When W n is row-normalized, the parameter can be further simplified to (-1, 1). Secondly, to ensure weak stationarity across time, we assume that ´ 1 ă γ 0 ,s t ă 1. Furthermore, ´ 1 ă δ 0 ,s t ă 1 and the sum of ρ 0 ,s t and δ 0 ,s t needs to smaller than one for each regime (see Otto et al., 2023, for more details on the parameter space). We employ transformations to constrain the parameters(Kim et al., 1999). For example, the transformation of a parameter x is expressed by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

when x ą a . On the other hand, if a ă x ă b , then the transformation of x can be done by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.4 Smoothed inference

A form of inference on the state variable s t of the vector Y ˚ t was introduced in section 2.2 in the form of filtered probability (15). The iterative calculation of ξ t | t from (12) to (20) uses observation vectors Y ˚ τ , τ ' 1 , ..., t . Another form of inference on state variable s t , which is defined as the smoothed inference, uses data obtained at time t ¡ τ . Smoothed inference will be used in section 4 to infer the state variables s t , t ' 1 , 2 , ..., T of the data set. Smoothed inferences are calculated using an iterative algorithm by Kim (1994), and it is formulated as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Ã denotes the operation of element-by-element division. In a tworegime framework, the 2 x 1 smoothed probabilities ξ t | T can then be obtained by a backward iteration for t ' T ´ 1 , T ´ 2 , .., 1 using (21).

## 3 Monte Carlo simulation studies

We performed Monte Carlo simulation studies to investigate the finite sample properties of the QMLE of the two-regime Markov-switching spatiotemporal ARCH model discussed in section 2.3. Data required in this simulation study are generated with the error terms t ε i,t u , i ' 1 , ..., n, t ' 1 , ..., T randomly generated from N.I.I.D p 0 , 1 q , and a row-normalized spatial weight matrix W n generated using Queen contiguity. The parameters p ρ 0 , 1 , γ 0 , 1 , δ 0 , 1 , µ 0 , 1 , p q and p ρ 0 , 2 , γ 0 , 2 , δ 0 , 2 , µ 0 , 2 , q q are set to be (0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 0.1, 0.1, 0.97) and (0.2, 0.8, -0.2, 0.1, 0.93) respectively. The parameters are chosen to simulate a weakly temporal-dependent model and a persistent model, respectively. Using the above-mentioned parameters, two plots are generated and illustrated in Figure 1. The first plot is an example of the simulated time series at location (1,1) in a 10 ˆ 10 grid; the second plot is a plot of simulated values of 100 locations at time point = 100.

We performed Monte Carlo simulation studies based on the sample size n and time period T of tp n, T q ' p 36 , 200 q , p 36 , 300 q , p 36 , 500 q , p 49 , 200 q , p 49 , 300 q , p 49 , 500 q , p 100 , 200 q , p 100 , 300 q , p 100 , 500 qu with 100 repetitions. The empirical means and root-mean-square errors (RMSE) for the estimators are shown in Table 1. The results of the simulation studies show that the empirical means and RMSE improve as the sample size and time period p n, T q increase from p 36 , 200 q to p 100 , 500 q . This suggests the mean converges to the true value as both n and T increase. In summary, the suggested estimation procedure exhibits good finite sample properties.

Figure 1: (a) An example of a simulated time series for the location p 1 , 1 q in a 10 x 10 grid with T = 300 (b) A plot of simulated values in a 10 x 10 grid at the time point = 100; △ corresponds to the value indicated by the vertical line in (a).

<!-- image -->

## 4 Application to real data

We apply the method to 26 Asian stock indices and two United States (US) stock indices during the period from 1 January 2014 to 1 January 2019. During this period, there was a global stock market sell-off that spanned from around June 2015 to June 2016, triggered by the sharp decline of the Shanghai Stock Exchange in China. This event was subsequently compounded by other significant global events, including the Greek debt default in June 2015, the decrease in oil prices, and the revelation of the Brexit vote in February 2016. The effect of the Chinese stock market sell-off (2015-2016) on the spatial autocorrelation of 71 global stock indices was investigated by Khoo et al. (2023), and the results suggested that the occurrence of the stock market sell-off increased spatial autocorrelations among the stock indices. The present work applies the newly developed Markov-switching spatio-temporal ARCH model to investigate a smaller subset of stock indices, comprising most of the Asian stock indices, along with two US stock indices within a spatio-temporal framework.

Table 1: The empirical means and RMSE ( bracketed ) of the estimators in the Monte Carlo simulation studies.

| Parameter  n  '  36  n  '  49  n  '  100  T  '  200  T  '  300  T  '  500  T  '  200  T  '  300  T  '  500  T  '  200  T  '  300  T  '  500  ρ  0  ,  1  '  0  .  2  0.199  (  0.028  )  0.207  (  0.075  )  0.199  (  0.016  )  0.197  (  0.020  )  0.197  (  0.014  )  0.201  (  0.012  )  0.197  (  0.014  )  0.199  (  0.010  )  0.200  (  0.009  )  γ  0  ,  1  '  0  .  2  0.204  (  0.046  )  0.203  (  0.048  )  0.198  (  0.009  )  0.197  (  0.012  )  0.198  (  0.009  )  0.200  (  0.007  )  0.200  (  0.007  )  0.199  (  0.006  )  0.200  (  0.005  )  δ  0  ,  1  ' ´  0  .  2  -0.193  (  0.037  )  -0.204  (  0.031  )  -0.199  (  0.023  )  -0.196  (  0.024  )  -0.199  (  0.020  )  -0.200  (  0.014  )  -0.200  (  0.016  )  -0.199  (  0.013  )  -0.200  (  0.011  )  µ  0  ,  1  '  0  .  1  0.116  (  0.123  )  0.095  (  0.058  )  0.100  (  0.038  )  0.105  (  0.052  )  0.094  (  0.040  )  0.102  (  0.031  )  0.096  (  0.035  )  0.100  (  0.031  )  0.099  (  0.025  )  p  '  0  .  97  0.968  (  0.016  )  0.966  (  0.13  )  0.967  (  0.009  )  0.966  (  0.016  )  0.967  (  0.011  )  0.967  (  0.010  )  0.970  (  0.015  )  0.969  (  0.014  )  0.968  (  0.009  )  ρ  0  ,  2  '  0  .  2  0.204  (  0.079  )  0.198  (  0.034  )  0.206  (  0.035  )  0.193  (  0.065  )  0.202  (  0.030  )  0.199  (  0.022  )  0.206  (  0.027  )  0.201  (  0.025  )  0.200  (  0.018  )  γ  0  ,  2  '  0  .  8  0.797  (  0.027  )  0.795  (  0.027  )  0.800  (  0.009  )  0.800  (  0.013  )  0.801  (  0.011  )  0.799  (  0.006  )  0.799  (  0.010  )  0.801  (  0.007  )  0.799  (  0.004  )  δ  0  ,  2  ' ´  0  .  2  -0.193  (  0.126  )  -0.196  (  0.039  )  -0.207  (  0.042  )  -0.197  (  0.068  )  -0.204  (  0.034  )  -0.199  (  0.025  )  -0.211  (  0.036  )  -0.203  (  0.030  )  -0.201  (  0.021  )  µ  0  ,  2  '  0  .  1  0.093  (  0.326  )  0.093  (  0.139  )  0.098  (  0.095  )  0.077  (  0.142  )  0.094  (  0.101  )  0.095  (  0.062  )  0.075  (  0.088  )  0.097  (  0.076  )  0.091  (  0.048  )  q  '  0  .  93  0.893  (  0.087  )  0.913  (  0.039  )  0.919  (  0.032  )  0.903  (  0.056  )  0.908  (  0.046  )  0.922  (  0.029  )  0.914  (  0.049  )  0.918  (  0.033  )  0.927  (  0.024  )   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

The main descriptive statistics of the selected stock indices are illustrated in Table 2. The daily closing prices are acquired from http://www. investing.com , and the log-returns of the daily closing prices are calculated before the application of the model. The proposed application to real data seeks to investigate the occurrence of structural breaks due to the formation of two regimes during the time period of interest.

## 4.1 Construction of spatial weight matrices

The spatial weight matrix in the model requires the distance between each stock log-return Y t p s i q , i ' 1 , 2 , ..., n to be defined. Since stock returns do not have a meaningful geographical location, a distance metric based on geographical distances may not be suitable for constructing a spatial weight matrix in the Markov-switching spatio-temporal ARCH model. Instead, the distance within the financial network could be considered (see, e.g., F¨ ulle and Otto 2023; Mattera and Otto 2023). For this reason, a model-based approach with individual uni-variate log-ARCH models is adopted in the application. In a model-based approach, each time series is assumed to follow a parametric model such as the ARIMA models. A log-ARCH( p ) model for each log-return Y t p s i q can be formulated as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p is the order of the log-ARCH( p ) model, ω i is the constant term, and γ i 1 , γ i 2 , ..., γ ip are the ARCH parameters for Y t p s i q . A log-square transformation on (22), it follows that,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Table 2: The main descriptive statistics of 28 stock indices in the selected time period.

| Stock Index  Country  Mean  St. Dev.  Min  Max  NASDAQ  USA  0  .  00048  0  .  00892  ´  0  .  04216  0  .  04152  NYSE Composite  USA  0  .  00022  0  .  00753  ´  0  .  04396  0  .  02921  SCI  China  0  .  00044  0  .  01511  ´  0  .  08873  0  .  05604  SZ Component  China  0  .  00031  0  .  01740  ´  0  .  08603  0  .  06254  HSI  Hong Kong  0  .  00026  0  .  01025  ´  0  .  06018  0  .  04021  TAIEX  Taiwan  0  .  00021  0  .  00762  ´  0  .  04957  0  .  03518  KOSPI  South Korea  0  .  00022  0  .  00681  ´  0  .  03143  0  .  02912  NIKKEI 225  Japan  0  .  00032  0  .  01272  ´  0  .  08253  0  .  07426  JKSE  Indonesia  0  .  00037  0  .  00833  ´  0  .  04088  0  .  04451  KLSE  Malaysia  ´  0  .  00004  0  .  00525  ´  0  .  02738  0  .  02222  STI  Singapore  0  .  00007  0  .  00697  ´  0  .  04390  0  .  02656  SET  Thailand  0  .  00034  0  .  00731  ´  0  .  04842  0  .  04484  PSEI  Philippine  0  .  00034  0  .  00889  ´  0  .  06939  0  .  03576  VN-30  Vietnam  0  .  00055  0  .  00929  ´  0  .  05775  0  .  04144  XAO  Australia  0  .  00013  0  .  00790  ´  0  .  04115  0  .  03204  NZX-50  New Zealand  0  .  00055  0  .  00513  ´  0  .  03395  0  .  02412  SENSEX-30  India  0  .  00046  0  .  00824  ´  0  .  06120  0  .  03324  NIFTY-50  India  0  .  00050  0  .  00832  ´  0  .  06097  0  .  03312  CSE  Sri Lanka  0  .  00007  0  .  00472  ´  0  .  02699  0  .  01758  KARACHI-100  Pakistan  0  .  00045  0  .  00903  ´  0  .  04765  0  .  04419  ASE  Jordan  0  .  00002  0  .  00397  ´  0  .  01981  0  .  02086  BSE  Bahrain  0  .  00006  0  .  00450  ´  0  .  02842  0  .  02754  QE  Qatar  ´  0  .  00019  0  .  01126  ´  0  .  07543  0  .  07310  ADX  UAE  0  .  00002  0  .  01029  ´  0  .  07155  0  .  06487  TASI  Saudi Arabia  ´  0  .  00018  0  .  01208  ´  0  .  07547  0  .  08547  MSM-30  Oman  ´  0  .  00029  0  .  00676  ´  0  .  06413  0  .  05370  XU-100  Turkey  0  .  00054  0  .  01238  ´  0  .  07347  0  .  05256  IMOEX  Russia  0  .  00041  0  .  04183  ´  0  .  25228  0  .  20400   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the transformed constant term φ i ' ω i ` E p log ε 2 t p s i qq , and γ i 1 , γ i 2 , ..., γ ip can now be viewed as autoregressive (AR) parameters for log-squared Y t p s i q . The transformation from (22) and (23) to (24) and (25) ensures that u 2 t p s i q has a mean of zero which allows for consistent estimations of the ARCH parameters. Once each log-ARCH( p ) model is fitted, the estimated parameters γ i 1 , γ i 2 , ..., γ ip are used to measure the dissimilarity for each pair of time series p Y t p s i q , Y t p s j qq . In the application, the Piccolo distance metric

(Piccolo, 1990), which is defined as follows, is selected as the dissimilarity measure:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The Piccolo distance for each pair of p Y t p s i q , Y t p s j qq forms an n x n matrix which is then used to construct the n x n spatial weight matrix W n . Each entry w ij of W n is constructed using the criterion of k-nearest neighbours as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where N k p i q is the set of k nearest neighbours of each log-return Y t p s i q , and # N k p i q is the cardinality of the set of k neighbours of i . W n is then rownormalized by its construction. The number of order p is chosen to be 1 for all time series; the model is estimated using k ' 3 , 5 , 7 , 9. The estimated parameters and Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) (Schwarz, 1978) are shown in Table 3.

## 4.2 Results and discussion

The data involve 26 Asian stock indices and two US stock indices, namely NYSE and NASDAQ. Table 3 shows the estimated parameters from fitting Markov-switching spatio-temporal ARCH models and one-regime spatiotemporal ARCH models with k ' 3 , 5 , 7 , 9 to the log-returns of 28 stock indices. Table 3 shows that the models estimated with k ' 5 result in the lowest BIC of 135053. Therefore, the parameters estimated using k ' 5 will be used for the rest of this case study.

From Table 3, the high transition probabilities p and q suggest the existence of two regimes during this time period. The BIC of the two-regime model shows improvement compared to the one-regime model, which further supports the existence of two regimes during the investigated time period. The two regimes can be differentiated primarily through the spatial autoregressive effects ρ 0 , 1 and ρ 0 , 2 . The estimated values of p ρ 0 , 1 , ρ 0 , 2 q ' p 0 . 260 , 0 . 073 q suggest that the regime 1 can be viewed as a regime with more significant spatial effect. The temporal effects γ 0 , 1 and γ 0 , 2 are estimated to be positive and statistically significant. However, the spatio-temporal effect δ 0 , 1 and δ 0 , 2 are not statistically significant. This implies that spatial and temporal effects do not depend on each other. Figure 2 shows the calculated smooth probability in regime 1 calculated for each data point. It is further observed that the 28 stock indices switch regime around September 2014 with a high probability. This could be attributed to the end of the quantitative easing initiative in the US in October 2014. An investigation by Li (2020) indicates that the 2008-2014 quantitative easing program in the US had a positive spatial spillover effect on emerging markets like India and Indonesia. From Figure 2, it can be seen that the stock indices are in regime 1 from February 2015 to June 2015 with a high probability. This is followed by a structural break in June 2015 which leads to a regime-switching. In January 2017, the frequent regime-switching is observed to cease, and the stock indices are in regime 2 with a high probability.

To reiterate, the occurrences of regime-switching with high smooth probabilities are closely related to the different global events that occurred in the selected time period.

Figure 2: The blue curve represents the calculated smooth probability of Regime 1 (k=5); the red lines outline time periods which can be approximately categorized into 2 regimes based on the calculated smooth probability in regime 1. 1 ○ - The 2008-2014 quantitative easing program; 2 ○ - The Chinese stock market sell-off; 3 ○ - Last regime-switching in the selected period.

<!-- image -->

## 5 Conclusions

To the best of our current knowledge, the integration of spatio-temporal ARCH models into a Markov-switching framework has not been previously explored. This research endeavours to bridge these gaps by presenting a novel model and proposing a quasi-maximum likelihood estimation method for its implementation. Through a comprehensive Monte Carlo simulation, we evaluate the finite sample properties of the maximum likelihood estima- tion approach. Stock-market data that potentially exhibits structural breaks was used to demonstrate the practicality of this proposed model. The results of the application to real data showcased the ability of the proposed model to efficiently detect regimes in spatially autocorrelated data. Future research focusing on network analysis to model structural breaks in stocks from diverse sectors, without consideration for geographical distance, is of particular interest. Moreover, a Markov-switching spatiotemporal ARCH model with more than 2 regimes can also be developed in the future.

Table 3: Estimated parameters for Markov-switching spatio-temporal ARCH model of 28 stock indices.

| Parameter  k  '  3  k  '  5  k  '  7  k  '  9  Two-  regime  Estimate  One-  regime  Estimate  Two-  regime  Estimate  One-  regime  Estimate  Two-  regime  Estimate  One-  regime  Estimate  Two-  regime  Estimate  One-  regime  Estimate  ρ  0  ,  1  0  .  103  ˚˚˚  0  .  108  ˚˚˚  0  .  260  ˚˚˚  0  .  185  ˚˚˚  0  .  295  ˚˚˚  0  .  220  ˚˚˚  0  .  307  ˚˚˚  0  .  233  ˚˚˚  γ  0  ,  1  0  .  202  ˚˚˚  0  .  213  ˚˚˚  0  .  228  ˚˚˚  0  .  208  ˚˚˚  0  .  228  ˚˚˚  0  .  211  ˚˚˚  0  .  234  ˚˚˚  0  .  212  ˚˚˚  δ  0  ,  1  0  .  139  ˚˚˚  0  .  083  ˚˚˚  0  .  033  0  .  091  ˚˚˚  ´  0  .  001  0  .  067  ˚˚˚  ´  0  .  046  0  .  065  ˚˚˚  µ  0  ,  1  ´  4  .  05  ˚˚˚  ´  5  .  33  ˚˚˚  ´  3  .  53  ˚˚˚  ´  4  .  42  ˚˚˚  ´  3  .  69  ˚˚˚  ´  4  .  25  ˚˚˚  ´  3  .  92  ˚˚˚  ´  4  .  12  ˚˚˚  p  0  .  368  ¨  -  0  .  779  ˚  -  0  .  855  ˚˚˚  -  0  .  876  ˚˚˚  -  ρ  0  ,  2  0  .  027  ˚˚  -  0  .  073  ˚˚˚  -  0  .  080  ˚˚˚  -  0  .  079  ˚˚˚  -  γ  0  ,  2  0  .  206  ˚˚˚  -  0  .  185  ˚˚˚  -  0  .  186  ˚˚˚  -  0  .  185  ˚˚˚  -  δ  0  ,  2  0  .  049  ˚˚˚  -  0  .  040  ˚  -  ´  0  .  004  -  ´  0  .  008  -  µ  0  ,  2  ´  6  .  97  ˚˚˚  -  ´  6  .  77  ˚˚˚  -  ´  7  .  20  ˚˚˚  -  ´  7  .  26  ˚˚˚  -  q  0  .  836  ˚˚˚  -  0  .  920  ˚˚˚  -  0  .  938  ˚˚˚  -  0  .  946  ˚˚˚  -  BIC  135117  135515  135053  135334  135067  135354  135095  135368   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

'.' p ¡ 0.1 '*' p ¡ 0.05, '**' p ¡ 0.01, '***' p ¡ 0.001.

## References

- Ben Bolker and Maintainer Ben Bolker. Package 'bbmle'. Tools for General Maximum Likelihood Estimation , 641, 2017.
- Robert F Engle. Autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity with estimates of the variance of United Kingdom inflation. Econometrica: Journal of the econometric society , pages 987-1007, 1982.
- Robert F Engle and Tim Bollerslev. Modelling the persistence of conditional variances. Econometric reviews , 5(1):1-50, 1986.
- Markus J F¨ ulle and Philipp Otto. Spatial GARCH models for unknown spatial locations-an application to financial stock returns. Spatial Economic Analysis , pages 1-14, 2023.
- Stephen F Gray. Modeling the conditional distribution of interest rates as a regime-switching process. Journal of Financial Economics , 42(1):27-62, 1996.
- Markus Haas, Stefan Mittnik, and Marc S Paolella. A new approach to Markov-switching GARCH models. Journal of financial Econometrics , 2 (4):493-530, 2004.
- James D Hamilton. A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and the business cycle. Econometrica: Journal of the econometric society , pages 357-384, 1989.
- James D Hamilton. Time series analysis . Princeton university press, 1994.
- James D Hamilton and Raul Susmel. Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity and changes in regime. Journal of econometrics , 64(1-2): 307-333, 1994.
- Eric Hillebrand and Marcelo C Medeiros. Estimating and forecasting GARCH models in the presence of structural breaks and regime switches. In Forecasting in the presence of structural breaks and model uncertainty , pages 303-327. Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2008.

- Tzung Hsuen Khoo, Dharini Pathmanathan, and Sophie Dabo-Niang. Spatial autocorrelation of global stock exchanges using functional areal spatial principal component analysis. Mathematics , 11(3):674, 2023.
- Chang-Jin Kim. Dynamic linear models with Markov-switching. Journal of econometrics , 60(1-2):1-22, 1994.
- Chang-Jin Kim, Charles R Nelson, et al. State-space models with regime switching: classical and gibbs-sampling approaches with applications. MIT Press Books , 1, 1999.
- Keisuke Kondo. Spatial dependence in regional business cycles: Evidence from Mexican states. Journal of Spatial Econometrics , 3(1):1, 2022.
- Hong Li. Volatility spillovers across european stock markets under the uncertainty of Brexit. Economic Modelling , 84:1-12, 2020.
- Raffaele Mattera and Philipp Otto. Network log-ARCH models for forecasting stock market volatility. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.11064 , 2023.
- Thomas Mikosch and C˘ at˘ alin St˘ aric˘ a. Nonstationarities in financial time series, the long-range dependence, and the IGARCH effects. Review of Economics and Statistics , 86(1):378-390, 2004.
- Keith Ord. Estimation methods for models of spatial interaction. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 70(349):120-126, 1975.
- Philipp Otto and Wolfgang Schmid. A general framework for spatial GARCH models. Statistical Papers , 64:1721-1747, 2023.
- Philipp Otto, Wolfgang Schmid, and Robert Garthoff. Generalised spatial and spatiotemporal autoregressive conditional heteroscedasticity. Spatial Statistics , 26:125-145, 2018.
- Philipp Otto, Wolfgang Schmid, and Robert Garthoff. Stochastic properties of spatial and spatiotemporal ARCH models. Statistical Papers , 62:623638, 2021.
- Philipp Otto, Osman Do˘ gan, and S¨ uleyman Ta¸ spınar. Dynamic spatiotemporal ARCH models. Spatial Economic Analysis (forthcoming) , 2023. doi: 10.1080/17421772.2023.2254817.
- Domenico Piccolo. A distance measure for classifying ARIMA models. Journal of time series analysis , 11(2):153-164, 1990.
- Takaki Sato and Yasumasa Matsuda. Spatial autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity models. Journal of the Japan Statistical Society , 47(2): 221-236, 2017.

- Gideon Schwarz. Estimating the dimension of a model. The annals of statistics , pages 461-464, 1978.
- Catalin Starica, Stefano Herzel, Tomas Nord, et al. Why does the GARCH (1, 1) model fail to provide sensible longer-horizon volatility forecasts. Manuscript, Chalmers University of Technology , pages 1-44, 2005.
- Kenneth D West and Dongchul Cho. The predictive ability of several models of exchange rate volatility. Journal of econometrics , 69(2):367-391, 1995.