## A Markovian regime-switching stochastic SEQIR epidemic model with governmental policy †

Hongjie Fan 1 , 2 , ‡ , Kai Wang 2 , ‡ , ∗ , Yanling Zhu 2 , ∗

1. School of Economics and Management, Shandong Agriculture and Engineering University, Jinan 250100, Shandong, China

2. School of Statistics and Applied Mathematics, Anhui University of Finance and Economics, Bengbu 233030, Anhui, China

Abstract: In this paper, a stochastic SEQIR epidemic model with Markovian regimeswitching is proposed and investigated. The governmental policy and implement efficiency are concerned by a generalized incidence function of the susceptible class. We have the existence and uniqueness of the globally positive solution to the stochastic model by using the Lyapunov method. In addition, we study the dynamical behaviors of the disease, and the sufficient conditions for the extinction and persistence in mean are obtained. Finally, numerical simulations are introduced to demonstrate the theoretical results.

Keywords:

Extinction; Persistence in mean; Governmental policy; Telegraph noise

MSC Classification:

37N25; 60H10; 60J10; 92B05

† Supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Anhui Province(no.2108085MA04), and the Social Science Foundation of the Ministry of Education of China(no.21YJAZH081).

‡ These authors have contributed equally to this paper as the first authors.

∗ Corresponding authors.

Emails: fanhj1997@163.com(HJ Fan); wangkai050318@163.com(K Wang); zhuyanling99@126.com(YL Zhu).

## 1 Introduction

In recent years, COVID-19 has brought great disasters to people around the world. It caused a lot of people lost their lives, but also lost a lot of natural resources. For virus-borne diseases, in fact, people have been doing research for a long time. The mathematical model also plays an indelible role in analyzing the spread dynamics of infectious diseases, and the most famous is SIR model, which was firstly studied by Kermack and McKendrick in 1927 [1].

After that, a lot of models have been studied, such as SIS, SEIR, SIQR etc [2-6], and researchers started to investigate the varying population [7,8]. Due to the heterogeneity and variation of the virus, the phenomenon of recurrence and reinfection appeared, and corresponding theoretical models were established [12, 13]. And many factors are considered in the theoretical models, such as the vaccination, the imperfect quarantine and media effects. The purpose of authors is introduce the model that incorporates a partially effective quarantine policy to test the mathematical robustness of prior mathematical results to variations in quarantine effectiveness [9-11]. The media effect is also a important factor that influence the dynamical behaviors of the diseases [12-14]. Due to the spread of information such as media, it will increase people's awareness of the disease and thus reduce infection. Moreover, the governmental prevention and control policy plays an important role in preventing the transmission of the epidemic. For example, Mandal et al [17] proposed the model

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with S (0) , E (0) , Q (0) , I (0) , R (0) are nonnegative constants. S is susceptible individuals, E is exposed individuals, Q is quarantined individuals, I is infected individuals, R is recovered individuals. Other parameters are described as Table 1.

Table 1: Description of parameters to model (1.1).

| Parameter  Description  Parameter  Description  A  the recruitment rate of  S  b  1  the rate of  Q  to  S  β  the disease transmission rate  c  the rate of  Q  to  I  ρ  1  ∈  (0  ,  1)  the rate of  S  with proper precaution  ξ  the natural death rate  ρ  2  ∈  (0  ,  1)  the rate of  E  with proper precaution  δ  the death rate due to COVID-19  α  the rate of  E  to  I  M  governmental policies  b  2  the rate of  E  to  Q  p  the rate of policies implemented  σ  the recover rate of  E  η  the recover rate of  I   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

We know that there are many uncertainties that may affect the dynamical behaviors of infectious diseases, such as climate, population movement, etc [18,19]. Therefore, many researchers studied the epidemic model with the white noise [2,3,5,6]. Authors of [6] studied modified model (1.1) by introducing the fluctuation in the parameter β , so that β → β + σ 0 dB ( t ) dt . In real eco-systems, population dynamics are often affected by random switching of the external environment. For example, the disease transmission rate β in the epidemic model is corrected for meteorological factors, because many viruses and bacteria have better survival and infectivity in humid, less ultraviolet conditions. The SIS epidemic model with Markovian switching was firstly studied in 2012 [15]. Then the deterministic and stochastic SEQIR model was studied [16,17]. Based on the above work and model (1.1), we propose the following stochastic SEQIR model with government policy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where B ( t ) is the standard Brownian motion with the density of noises σ 2 0 . And pMh ( S ) is a twicedifferentiable function of governmental policies, which enables the model to be more realistic. That implies, not only can government policies change, but they can vary depending on the number of susceptible people. We assume that h (0) = 0 and 0 ≤ h ( S ) ≤ Sh ′ (0) for all S ≥ 0, see reference [7] for more details.

The remainder of this study is structured as follows: In Section 2, we show some preliminaries that will be used in the following sections. In Section 3, we devote to Existence and uniqueness of the positive solution to the stochastic model (1.2). In Section 4, we obtain the condition of extinction of the disease. In Section 5, the condition for the persistence in the mean of the disease is obtained. In Section 6, we carry out the numerical simulation of and stochastic model. This paper ends with conclusion and discussion in Section 7.

## 2 Preliminaries

Let (Ω , F , { F t } t ≥ 0 , P ) be a complete probability space with a filtration { F t } t ≥ 0 satisfying the usual conditions (i.e., it is right continuous and F 0 contains all P -null sets), B ( t ) be defined on this probability space, and R n + = { ( x 1 , ...x n ) ∈ R n : x i ≥ 0 , i = 1 , 2 , ..., n } . Let r ( t ) , t ≥ 0 be a right continuous Markov chain on the complete probability space (Ω , F , { F t } t ≥ 0 , P ), taking values in a finite state space S = 1 , ..., N and with infinitesimal generator Γ = ( q ij ) ∈ R N × N . That is r ( t ) satisfies

̸

where ∆ &gt; 0 and q ij &gt; 0 is the transition rate from i to j if i = j while q ii = -∑ i = j q ij for ech i ∈ S . That implies r t is irreducible and has a unique stationary distribution π = ( π 1 , ..., π N ), which can be determined

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

by π Γ = 0, subjected to ∑ N k =1 π k = 1, π k &gt; 0, for any k ∈ S . And assume that the right continuous Markov chain r ( t ) is independent of the Brownian motion B ( t ) for t ≥ 0.

In general, considering the n -dimensional stochastic differential equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where F ( x ( t ) , r ( t )) is defined on R n × S → R n and g ( x ( t ) , r ( t )) is an n × m matrix, which are locally Lipschitz functions in x . B ( t ) and r ( t ) are m -dimensional Brownian motion and the right continuous Markov chain in the above discussion.

For each k ∈ S , a given function V ( x, k ) : R n × S → R n , such that V ( x, k ) is twice continuously differential with respect to the first variable x , we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where V t ( x, k ) = ∂V ( x,k ) ∂t , V x ( x, k ) = ( ∂V ( x,k ) ∂x 1 , . . . , ∂V ( x,k ) ∂x n ) , V xx ( x, k ) = ( ∂ 2 V ( x,k ) ∂x i ∂x j ) n × n . By Itˆ o 's formula we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For simplicity, we define ˆ ̺ = min k ∈ S ̺ ( k ) and ˇ ̺ = max k ∈ S ̺ ( k ).

## 3 Existence and uniqueness of the positive solution to the stochastic model

In this section, we discuss the existence and uniqueness of the positive solution in the stochastic model (1.2). First of all, we give a useful lemma.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The proof of the Lemma is similar with Remark 3.1 of [19], therefore it is omitted. □

Theorem 3.1. For r 0 ∈ S and any initial value ( S ( r 0 ) , E ( r 0 ) , Q ( r 0 ) , I ( r 0 ) , R ( r 0 )) ∈ R 5 + , there is a unique positive solution ( S, E, Q, I, R ) of model (1.2) for t ≥ 0, which will remain in R 5 + with probability one.

Proof. Since the coefficients of model (1.2) are locally Lipschitz continuous on R + , then for any r 0 ∈ S and initial value ( S ( r 0 ) , E ( r 0 ) , Q ( r 0 ) , I ( r 0 ) , R ( r 0 )) ∈ R 5 + , there is a unique local solution ( S ( t ) , E ( t ) , Q ( t ) , I ( t ) , R ( t )) to model (1.2) on [0 , τ e ]. We need to prove τ e = + ∞ a.s. to show that the solution exists globally. Let k 0 ≥ 1 be sufficiently large such that S, E, Q, I, R are lie in [ k 0 , 1 k 0 ]. Let k ≥ k 0 , define the stopping time

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let τ + ∞ = lim k → + ∞ τ k , whence τ + ∞ ≤ τ e . If we can show τ + ∞ = + ∞ , then τ e = + ∞ and model (1.2) has a unique solution ( S, E, Q, I, R ) for t ≥ 0.

Obviously, we only need to show τ + ∞ = + ∞ . If the assertion is false, then there exist constants T &gt; 0 and ǫ ∈ (0 , 1) such that P ( τ + ∞ ≤ T ) ≥ ǫ, which yields that there is an integer k 1 ≥ k 0 such that P ( τ k ≤ T ) ≥ ǫ, for k ≥ k 1 . Define a Lyapunov function V : R 5 + → R + :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Itˆ o's formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The remainder of the proof follows that in [20], and hence it is omitted here. □

## 4 Extinction

In this section, we obtain the condition for the extinction of the disease. We define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where w 1 ( k ) = (1 -ρ 1 ( k ))(1 -ρ 2 ( k )), and w 2 ( k ) = b 2 ( k ) + α ( k ) + σ ( k ) + ξ ( k ) for k ∈ S .

Theorem 4.1. If β ( k ) ≥ σ 2 0 ( k ) w 1 ( k ) ˇ A ˆ ξ and R ∗ s &lt; 1 for any k ∈ S , then, for any r 0 ∈ S and the initial value ( S ( r 0 ) , E ( r 0 ) , Q ( r 0 ) , I ( r 0 ) , R ( r 0 )) ∈ R 5 + , the disease will go to extinction exponentially with probability one, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. By applying Itˆ o's formula to the second equation of model (1.2), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Integrating both sides of the above equation form 0 to t gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

By applying of the large number theorem for local continuous martingales, we can get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, for any k ∈ S , we define the function x ↦-→ F ( x ) = β ( k ) w 1 ( k ) x -1 2 σ 2 0 ( k ) w 2 1 ( k ) x 2 -w 2 ( k ). By the positively invariant set Ω and the assumption β ( k ) ≥ σ 2 0 ( k ) w 1 ( k ) ˇ A ˆ ξ , we know F ( x ) is increasing on [ 0 , β ( k ) /σ 2 0 ( k ) w 1 ( k ) ] , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking the superior limit on both sides of the above equation, we can obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from the ergodic property of the Markov chain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that lim sup t → + ∞ E ( t ) = 0 a.s.. Thus for any constant ǫ &gt; 0, there exists a positive constant T such that E ( t, ω ) ≤ ǫ for t &gt; T , which together with the third equation of model (1.2) yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By using the comparative theorem, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Letting ǫ → 0, lim sup t → + ∞ Q ( t ) = 0 a.s.. Similarly, we can obtain that lim sup t → + ∞ I ( t ) = 0 a.s.. □

## 5 Persistence in mean

In this section, we obtain the condition for the persistence of the disease. We define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ψ 1 is determined by equation (5.7).

Theorem 5.1. If β ( k ) ≥ σ 2 0 ( k ) w 1 ( k ) ˇ A ˆ ξ and ˜ R ∗ s &gt; 1 for any k ∈ S , then, for any r 0 ∈ S and the initial value ( S ( r 0 ) , E ( r 0 ) , Q ( r 0 ) , I ( r 0 ) , R ( r 0 )) ∈ R 5 + , the disease will persist in mean, and the solution ( S ( t ) , E ( t ) , Q ( t ) , I ( t ) , R ( t )) to model (1.2) has the following properties

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. By inequation (4.1) of section 4, for any k ∈ S , we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we can obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the first equation of model (1.2), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, we can obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We define a Lyapunov function U : R + × S → R , which is U ( E,k ) = ln( E ) + ω ( k ). Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the generator matrix is irreducible, for P 0 = ( P (1) , ......P ( N )) with P ( k ) = F ( ˇ A ˆ ξ , k ) , there is a ω = ( ω (1) , ......ω ( N )) satisfying the Poisson system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 1 is a unit of vector of R N . That implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting the above equality (5.10) into the inequality (5.9), integrating from 0 to t and dividing by t on both sides,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combined with the boundness of S and the strong law of the large number theorem for continuous local martingales,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, we have lim t → + ∞ U ( t ) -U (0) t = 0 a.s.. Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, we can obtain the equation (5.1), (5.2) and (5.3). □

Remark 5.1. By the assumption of h ( S ) and the condition of Theorem 5.1, we can obtain 1 -A ( k ) ˆ ξ ˇ Aξ ( k ) + p ( k ) M ( k ) h ′ (0) ξ ( k ) &gt; 0 and β ( k ) ≥ 1 2 σ 2 0 ( k ) w 1 ( k ) ˇ A ˆ ξ for k ∈ S then ψ i , i = 1 , 2 , 3 are nonnegative. Therefore, we can have that ˜ R ∗ s ≤ R ∗ s , and the equation holds if and only if β ( k ) = 1 2 σ 2 0 ( k ) w 1 ( k ) ˇ A ˆ ξ for any k ∈ S , then R ∗ s is the basic reproduction number of stochastic model (1.2). Comparing R ∗ s with the basic reproduction number R 0 of deterministic model (1.1), they are same if model (1.2) has no white noise and Markov chain r ( t ) has only one state. That implies model (1.2) we proposed is more generalized and it is more suitable to the complex environment.

## 6 Simulation

In this section, we give two examples by Milstein's Higher Order Method [21,22], and set Markov chain r ( t ) by S = { 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 } . Let ∆ = 0 . 0001 is the step and the generator Γ is

then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, we have the stationary distribution of r ( t ), which is π = (0 . 2622 , 0 . 2879 , 0 . 2227 , 0 . 2272). The simulation of r ( t ) is shown as Figure 1.

Example 1. Let A = (0 . 0008 , 0 . 0005 , 0 . 0070 , 0 . 0010), β = (0 . 006 , 0 . 018 , 0 . 049 , 0 . 08),

ξ = (0 . 011 , 0 . 010 , 0 . 019 , 0 . 02), b 1 = (0 . 05 , 0 . 06 , 0 . 010 , 0 . 08), b 2 = (0 . 05 , 0 . 04 , 0 . 06 , 0 . 07),

c = (0 . 08 , 0 . 07 , 0 . 09 , 0 . 10), σ = (0 . 003 , 0 . 005 , 0 . 006 , 0 . 004), ρ 1 = (0 . 001 , 0 . 005 , 0 . 010 , 0 . 009),

ρ 2 = (0 . 001 , 0 . 005 , 0 . 007 , 0 . 003), α = (0 . 016 , 0 . 0015 , 0 . 0017 , 0 . 0019), p = (0 . 001 , 0 . 002 , 0 . 003 , 0 . 004),

η = (0 . 02 , 0 . 018 , 0 . 019 , 0 . 0021), δ = (0 . 05 , 0 . 06 , 0 . 04 , 0 . 08), M = (0 . 001 , 0 . 002 , 0 . 003 , 0 . 004),

σ

0

= (0

.

008

,

0

.

065

,

0

.

007

,

0

.

006).

In addition, the initial values of the system are S (0) = 20 , E (0) = 20 , Q (0) = 15 , I (0) = 10 , R (0) = 0.

We can have R ∗ s = 0 . 1277 &lt; 1, which follows theorem 4.1. That implies the disease will go out eventually, as shown in Figure 2. In Figure 3 it depicts E ( t ) , Q ( t ) and I ( t ) under the states r ( t ) = 1 , 2 , 3 , 4, respectively. The disease of the subsystem with the states r ( t ) = 2 , 3 will go out, which are different from the results of model (1.2) with regime switching.

Example 2. We only change that A = (0 . 70 , 0 . 245 , 0 . 890 , 0 . 41), β = (0 . 016 , 0 . 018 , 0 . 019 , 0 . 008), then

˜ R ∗ s = 2 . 5861 &gt; 1 and simulations are shown as Figure 4. It is follows from theorem 5.1 that the disease will persist in mean. However, that will be distinct in the subsystem with the state r ( t ) = 2 in Figure 5, which depict E ( t ) , Q ( t ) and I ( t ) under r ( t ) = 1 , 2 , 3 , 4, respectively.

Remark 6.1. Then it can be see that the stochastic epidemic model with regime switching is influenced by several states, but it's not determined by one state. Therefore the model with regime switching is more realistic and suitable to describe the dynamics of the diseases in the complex and changing environment.

## 7 Conclusion and discussion

In this paper, we propose a SEQIR epidemic model with both white and telegraph noises, and investigate the dynamic behaviors of the diseases. The governmental policy and the efficiency of policy implemented are both considered in the stochastic model by constructing the generalized function. Firstly, we get the positively invariant set of the classes of the stochastic model, and have the existence and uniqueness of the globally positive solution of model (1.2). Then the sufficient condition for the distinction of the disease is obtained. Furthermore, we have obtained the sufficient condition for persistence in mean by selecting suitable Lyapunov function with regime switching.

Moreover, some interesting topics are deserved for further consideration. It is found that ˜ R ∗ s ≤ R ∗ s in this paper, and we will continue to investigate what happens to the diseases under the condition ˜ R ∗ s &lt; 1 &lt; R ∗ s . In addition, we can use the similar methods to study more complex epidemic models, such as SEQIR model with media effects.

## Conflict of interest

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

## Data availability

No data is used for the research in this article.

## References:

- [1] Kermack W O, McKendrick A G, A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, 1927(115): 700-721.
- [2] Gray A, Greenhalgh D, Hu L, et al, A stochastic differential equation SIS epidemic model, SIAM J. Appl. Math., 2011, 71(3): 876-902.
- [3] Cai Y, Kang Y, Banerjee M, et al, A stochastic SIRS epidemic model with infectious force under intervention strategies, J. Differential Equations, 2015, 259(12): 7463-7502.
- [4] Champredon D, Dushoff J, Earn D J D, Equivalence of the Erlang-distributed SEIR epidemic model and the renewal equation, SIAM J. Appl. Math., 2018, 78(6): 3258-3278.
- [5] Cai S, Cai Y, Mao X, A stochastic differential equation SIS epidemic model with two independent Brownian motions, J. Math. Anal. Appl., 2019, 474(2): 1536-1550.
- [6] Wang K, Fan H, Zhu Y, Dynamics and application of a generalized SIQR epidemic model with vaccination and treatment, Appl. Math. Model., 2023, 120: 382-399.
- [7] Li D, Liu S, Cui J, Threshold dynamics and ergodicity of an SIRS epidemic model with Markovian switching, J. Differential Equations, 2017, 263(12): 8873-8915.
- [8] Liu L, Jiang D, Hayat T, Dynamics of an SIR epidemic model with varying population sizes and regime switching in a two patch setting, Phys. A, 2021, 574: 125992.
- [9] Safi M A, Gumel A B, Dynamics of a model with quarantine-adjusted incidence and quarantine of susceptible individuals, J. Math. Anal. Appl., 2013, 399(2): 565-575.
- [10] Erdem M, Safan M, Castillo-Chavez C, Mathematical analysis of an SIQR influenza model with imperfect quarantine, Bull. Math. Biol., 2017, 79: 1612-1636.
- [11] Yang J, Shi X, Song X, et al, Threshold dynamics of a stochastic SIQR epidemic model with imperfect quarantine, Appl. Math. Lett., 2023, 136: 108459.
- [12] Caraballo Garrido T, El Fatini M, Pettersson R, et al, A stochastic SIRI epidemic model with relapse and media coverage, Discrete Contin. Dyn. Syst. Ser. B, 23 (8), 3483-3501., 2018.
- [13] Liu Q, Jiang D, Hayat T, et al, Dynamical behavior of a higher order stochastically perturbed SIRI epidemic model with relapse and media coverage, Chaos Solitons Fractals, 2020, 139: 110013.
- [14] Zhou B, Han B, Jiang D, et al, Ergodic stationary distribution and extinction of a hybrid stochastic SEQIHR epidemic model with media coverage, quarantine strategies and pre-existing immunity under discrete Markov switching, Appl. Math. and Comput., 2021, 410: 126388.
- [15] Gray A, Greenhalgh D, Mao X, et al, The SIS epidemic model with Markovian switching, J. Math. Anal. Appl., 2012, 394(2): 496-516.
- [16] Boukanjime B, Caraballo T, El Fatini M, et al, Dynamics of a stochastic coronavirus (COVID-19) epidemic model with Markovian switching, Chaos Solitons Fractals, 2020, 141: 110361.
- [17] Zhou Y, Liu H, Stability of periodic solutions for an SIS model with pulse vaccination, Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 2003, 38(3-4): 299-308.
- [18] Cao Z, Feng W, Wen X, Zu L, Cheng M, Dynamics of a stochastic SIQR epidemic model with standard incidence, Phys. A, 2019, 527: 121180.
- [19] Liu Q, Jiang D, Shi N, Threshold behavior in a stochastic SIQR epidemic model with standard incidence and regime switching, Appl. Math. Comput., 2018, 316: 310-325.
- [20] Mao X, Marion G, Renshaw E, Environmental noise suppresses explosion in population dynamics, Stoch. Process Appl. 2002, 97:95-110.
- [21] Higham D J, An algorithmic introduction to numerical simulation of stochastic differential equations, SIAM Rev., 2001, 43:525-546.
- [22] Wang K, Zhu Y, Asymptotic properties of a stochastic Gilpin-Ayala model under regime switching, Nonlinear Anal. Hybrid Syst., 2019, 32:79-90.

## Figures

Figure 1: Simulation of Markov chain r ( t ) with r (0) = 3.

<!-- image -->

Figure 2: Simulations of E ( t ) , Q ( t ) , I ( t ) with R ∗ 0 &lt; 1.

<!-- image -->

Figure 3: Simulations of E ( t ) , Q ( t ) , I ( t ) with R ∗ 0 &lt; 1 and r ( t ) = 1 , 2 , 3 , 4.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4: Simulations of E ( t ) , Q ( t ) , I ( t ) with ˜ R ∗ 0 &gt; 1.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: Simulations of E ( t ) , Q ( t ) , I ( t ) with ˜ R ∗ 0 &gt; 1 and r ( t ) = 1 , 2 , 3 , 4.

<!-- image -->