## Non-homogeneous stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems with multi-dimensional state and regime switching

Yuyang Chen ∗

Peng Luo †

April 2, 2024

## Abstract

In this paper, we study non-homogeneous stochastic linear-quadratic (LQ) optimal control problems with multi-dimensional state and regime switching. We focus on the corresponding stochastic Riccati equation, which is the same as that one in homogeneous stochastic LQ optimal control problem, and the adjoint backward stochastic differential equation (BSDE), which arises from the non-homogeneous terms in the state equation and cost functional. Both stochastic Riccati equation and adjoint BSDE are solved by the contraction mapping method, and are used to represent the closed-loop optimal control and the optimal value of our problems.

Key words : stochastic LQ optimal control, regime switching, stochastic Riccati equation. MSC-classification : 93H20, 60H30.

## 1 Introduction

LQ optimal control problem is a widely researched topic and regarded as one of the most classical control problems. Wonham studied the stochastic LQ optimal control problem with deterministic coefficients in [23] and discussed the corresponding Riccati equation in detail in [24]. Bismut [1] first focused on the stochastic Riccati equation but was only able to solve some special cases. Peng [16] used Bellman's principle and Wonham's method to obtain the existence and uniqueness results for a more general stochastic Riccati equation. After extensive research (see [7, 8, 9, 10]), Tang [21] effectively resolved the most comprehensive stochastic Riccati equation. We refer to [19, 15, 20] for further advancements in stochastic LQ optimal control problems and stochastic Riccati equations.

In engineering, management and economics problems, different states often require the establishment of different equations, leading to the emergence of the LQ problem with Poisson jumps. Wu and Wang [25] proposed the stochastic LQ problem whose state equation is driven by both Brownian motion and Poisson process, and solved the related Riccati equation whose coefficients partially degenerates to zero. Hu and Øksendal [4] first studied the non-homogeneous stochastic LQ problem with Poisson jumps although they didn't solve the Riccati equations. Yu [28] obtained the existence and uniqueness result for forward-backward stochastic equations (FBSDEs) with Poisson jumps under monotone condition, and applied it to backward stochastic LQ problems. Li et al. [11] discussed the stochastic LQ problem with Poisson processes under the indefinite case.

Another form of state switching under varying equations is referred to as regime switching. Li and Zhou [12] studied a stochastic LQ problem in the finite time horizon with Markovian jumps in parameter values while Li et al. [13] discussed the case in the infinite time horizon. Liu et al. [14] examined the near-optimal controls of regime switching LQ problems that come with indefinite control weight costs. Recently, there have been further breakthroughs concerning this issue. For example, Zhang et al. [29] established both open-loop and closed-loop solvability for stochastic LQ optimal control problem of Markovian regime switching system with deterministic coefficients. Hu et al. [5] studied the stochastic LQ control problem with regime switching, random coefficients and cone control constraint in which the state equation is one-dimensional. Wen et al. [22], Chen and Luo [2] used different methods to solve the multi-dimensional stochastic LQ optimal control problems with regime switching and the corresponding matrix-valued Riccati equations. The LQ problem with regime switching has numerous applications in the field of mathematical finance, especially mean-variance portfolio selection problems and asset-liability management, see [30, 27, 26, 17, 6].

∗ School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China (cyy0032@sjtu.edu.cn)

† School of Mathematical Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China (peng.luo@sjtu.edu.cn). Financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12101400) is gratefully acknowledged.

In this paper, we are interested in solving non-homogeneous stochastic LQ optimal control problems with multi-dimensional state and regime switching. Our first contribution is to solve the matrix-valued stochastic Riccati equation, which is also discussed in the homogeneous problem [2]. In our previous work [2], we constructed a Piccard iteration scheme and was only able to obtain the existence of the solution for the Riccati equation, while through this article we use the contraction mapping method to solve the Riccati equation. Our second contribution is to solve the adjoint BSDE, which comes from the non-homogeneous terms in the state equation and cost functional. The coefficients of this BSDE are all unbounded as well as Y is multi-dimensional, which makes measure transformation infeasible. Our last main contribution is to show the closed-loop solution and the optimal value for the non-homogeneous stochastic LQ problem, which are represented by the solution of the stochastic Riccati equation and the adjoint BSDE.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we formulate the multi-dimensional stochastic LQ optimal control problems with regime switching and give our three main results. The proofs of these theorems are presented sequentially in Section 3.

## 2 Formulation of the problem and main results

̸

Let (Ω , F , P ) be a fixed complete probability space on which are defined a standard one-dimensional Brownian motion W = { W ( t ); 0 ≤ t &lt; ∞} and a continuous-time stationary Markov chain α t valued in a finite state space M = { 1 , 2 , . . . , ℓ } with ℓ &gt; 1. We assume W ( t ) and α t are independent processes. The Markov chain has a generator Q = ( q ij ) ℓ × ℓ with q ij ≥ 0 for i = j and ∑ ℓ j =1 q ij = 0 for every i ∈ M . Define the filtrations F t = σ { W ( s ) , α s : 0 ≤ s ≤ t } ∨ N and F t W = σ { W ( s ) : 0 ≤ s ≤ t } ∨ N , where N is the totality of all the P -null sets of F . For a random variable η , ‖ η ‖ ∞ denotes the L ∞ -norm of η , i.e., ‖ η ‖ ∞ := ess sup ω | η ( ω ) | . Equalities and inequalities between random variables and processes are understood in the P -a.s. and P ⊗ dt -a.e. sense, respectively.

We use the following notation throughout the paper:

```
R n : the n -dimensional Euclidean space with the Euclidean norm | · | ; R m × n : the Euclidean space of all ( m × n ) real matrices; S n : the space of all symmetric ( n × n ) real matrices; I n : the identity matrix of size n ; M ⊤ : the transpose of a matrix M ; tr ( M ) : the trace of a matrix M ; 〈· , ·〉 : the Frobenius inner product on R n × m , which is defined by 〈 A,B 〉 = tr ( A ⊤ B ); | M | : the Frobenius norm of a matrix M, defined by ( tr ( MM ⊤ ) ) 1 2 ;
```

Furthermore, we introduce the following spaces of random processes: for Euclidean space H = R n , R n × m , S n , p ≥ 2 and all {F t } t ≥ 0 -stopping time τ ≤ T ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

L ∞ F W (Ω; H ), H p F W (0 , T ; H ), L p F W (0 , T ; H ), L p F W (Ω; C (0 , T ; H )), L ∞ F W (0 , T ; H ) and L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; H ) are defined in a same manner by replacing F by F W .

We now introduce the non-homogeneous multi-dimensional stochastic LQ optimal problem with regime switching. Consider the following n -dimensional controlled linear stochastic differential equation on the finite time interval [0 , T ]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( t, ω, i ) , B ( t, ω, i ) , C ( t, ω, i ) , D ( t, ω, i ) are all { F t W } t ≥ 0 -adapted processes of suitable sizes for i ∈ M and x ∈ R n is an initial state, i 0 ∈ M is an initial regime. The solution X = { X ( t ); 0 ≤ t ≤ T } of (2.1), valued in R n , is called a state process; the process u = { u ( t ); 0 ≤ t ≤ T } of (2.1), valued in R m , is called a control which influences the state X , and is taken from the space U [0 , T ] := L 2 F (0 , T ; R m ).

In order to measure the performance of control u ( · ), we introduce the following quadratic cost functional:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For state equation (2.1) and cost functional (2.2), we introduce the following assumption: ( A 1) For all i ∈ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under condition ( A 1), for any initial state x and any control u ( · ) ∈ U [0 , T ], standard SDE theory shows that equation (2.1) has a unique solution X ( · ) ∈ L 2 F (Ω; C (0 , T ; R n )). We call such ( X ( · ) , u ( · )) an admissible pair.

Then the following problem, called stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problem with regime switching, can be formulated.

Problem ( SLQ ). For any initial pair ( x, i 0 ) ∈ R n ×M , find a control u ∗ ∈ U [0 , T ] such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Any element u ∗ ∈ U [0 , T ] satisfying (2.3) is called an optimal control of Problem (SLQ) corresponding to the initial pair ( x, i 0 ) ∈ R n × M , the corresponding state process X ∗ ( · ) ≡ X ( · ; u ∗ ) is called an optimal state process. We also call V ( x, i 0 ) the value function of Problem (SLQ). Our objective is to solve Problem (SLQ). In the classical LQ problem, it is commonly observed that the positive definite coefficients in (2.2) serve as a sufficient condition for the solvability of the Riccati equation and subsequently the LQ problem, as illustrated in [21]. Therefore, we also introduce the following assumption.

( A 2) For all i ∈ M , t ∈ [0 , T ] and some λ &gt; 0,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.1 When R ( · , i ) &gt; 0 , Q ( · , i ) -S ( · , i ) ⊤ R ( · , i ) -1 S ( · , i ) ≥ 0 , i ∈ M , the SLQ problem with the state equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the cost functional

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is equivalent to another one with

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.1 Stochastic Riccati equation and adjoint BSDE

Inspired by the classic methods on non-homogeneous LQ optimal control problems, we consider the following n × n -dimensional stochastic Riccati equation (SRE for short):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and n -dimensional adjoint BSDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 2.2 A vector process ( P ( · , i ) , Λ( · , i )) ℓ i =1 is called a solution of SRE (2.4) , if it satisfies (2.4) , and ( P ( · , i ) , Λ( · , i )) ∈ L ∞ F W (Ω; C (0 , T ; S n )) × L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; S n ) for all i ∈ M .

Definition 2.3 A vector process ( K ( · , i ) , L ( · , i )) ℓ i =1 is called a solution of BSDE (2.5) , if it satisfies (2.4) , and ( K ( · , i ) , L ( · , i )) ∈ L ∞ F W (Ω; C (0 , T ; R n )) × L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; R n ) for all i ∈ M .

Before introducing our main results, we recall the following lemma from standard matrix analysis, which is a direct consequence of [3, Theorem 7.4.1.1]. We will use this lemma throughout this paper.

Lemma 2.4 Let A , B ∈ S n with B being positive semi-definite. Then with λ max ( A ) denoting the largest eigenvalue of A , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Corollary 2.5 Let A ∈ R n × m , B ∈ R m × k . We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.2 Main results

In [2], Chen and Luo showed the existence of the solution for SRE (2.4). Now we give the following theorem, which also gives the uniqueness of the solution for SRE (2.4).

Theorem 2.6 Let ( A 1) and ( A 2) hold. There exists a sufficiently small constant L σ &gt; 0 , when

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

SRE (2.4) has a unique solution ( P ( · , i ) , Λ( · , i )) l i =1 such that ( P ( · , i ) , Λ( · , i )) ∈ L ∞ F W (0 , T ; S n ) × L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; S n ) and P ( · , i ) ≥ 0 for all i ∈ M .

Based on the solvability of SRE (2.4), we can propose the following theorem, showing the existence and uniqueness results for the solution of BSDE (2.5), whose coefficients are unbounded.

Theorem 2.7 Under the conditions of Theorem 2.6, BSDE (2.5) has a unique solution ( K ( · , i ) , L ( · , i )) l i =1 such that ( K ( · , i ) , L ( · , i )) ∈ L ∞ F W (0 , T ; R n ) × L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; R n ) for all i ∈ M .

By leveraging the solvability of SRE (2.4) and BSDE (2.5), we can effectively address Problem (SLQ). The following theorem provides an optimal feedback control for Problem (SLQ), as well as the optimal value.

Theorem 2.8 Under the conditions of Theorem 2.6, Problem (SLQ) admits an optimal control, as a feedback function of the time t , the market regime i and the state X ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, the corresponding optimal value is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( P ( · , i ) , Λ( · , i )) l i =1 is the unique solution of (2.4) and ( K ( · , i ) , L ( · , i )) l i =1 is the unique solution of (2.5) .

## 3 Proofs of our main results

## 3.1 Solvability of SRE (2.4)

In this subsection, we focus on the solvability of SRE (2.4). The key ingredient of our approach is the construction of a contraction map, which is inspired by [2].

Proof of Theorem 2.6. First of all, for i ∈ M , t ∈ [0 , T ], we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider ( p ( · , i ) , λ ( · , i )) l i =1 ∈ L ∞ F W (0 , T ; S n ) × L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; S n × d ), p ( · , i ) ≥ 0 and the following equation:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From [2], BSDE (3.1) has a unique solution ( P ( · , i ) , Λ( · , i )) l i =1 ∈ L ∞ F W (0 , T ; S n ) × L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; S n × d ) and P ( · , i ) ≥ 0. Now we are going to prove Θ ( ( p ( · , i ) , λ ( · , i )) l i =1 ) := ( P ( · , i ) , Λ( · , i )) l i =1 is a contraction map on the closed convex set C by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ρ is a positive constant determined later. Applying Itˆ o's formula to e ρt | P ( t, i ) | 2 and taking conditional expectation, we have

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where q = max j = i q ij and L A , L C are positive constants depending on A ( · , i ) , C ( · , i ). Now we choose ρ = 2 L A +2 L C +2( l -1) 2 q 2 T +1 and obtain ( P ( · , i ) , Λ( · , i )) l i =1 ∈ C from ( p ( · , i ) , λ ( · , i )) l i =1 ∈ C . For ( p 1 ( · , i ) , λ 1 ( · , i )) l i =1 , ( p 2 ( · , i ) , λ 2 ( · , i )) l i =1 ∈ C , we denote

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and obtain the following BSDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we focus on

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thanks to ( A 1) and ( A 2) and ( P 1 ( · , i ) , Λ 1 ( · , i )) l i =1 , ( P 2 ( · , i ) , Λ 2 ( · , i )) l i =1 ∈ L ∞ F W (0 , T ; S n ) × L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; S n × d ), P 1 ( · , i ) , P 2 ( · , i ) ≥ 0, there exists nonnegative adapted processes ¯ α ( · ) , ¯ γ ( · ) ∈ L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; R ) and ¯ β ( · ) ∈ L ∞ F W (0 , T ; R ) such that for i ∈ M , t ∈ [0 , T ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, we can choose ¯ γ ( t ) = 2 max ( | D ( t, i ) R ( t, i ) -1 D ( t, i ) ⊤ Λ 1 ( t, i ) | , | D ( t, i ) R ( t, i ) -1 D ( t, i ) ⊤ Λ 2 ( t, i ) | ) . Applying Itˆ o's formula to | ∆ P ( t, i ) | 2 on [ T -ǫ, T ] and taking conditional expectation, we have

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some ǫ, ¯ a, ¯ b, ¯ c &gt; 0, which implies

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (2.6), when L σ &gt; 0 is sufficiently small, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then there exists suitable ǫ, ¯ a, ¯ b, ¯ c &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let

¯ d = ¯ a ( l -1) 1 -ǫ 1 2 ‖ ¯ α ( · ) ‖ 2 L 2 , bmo F W (0 ,T ; R n × n ) -ǫ 1 2 -( l -1) q 2 ǫ ¯ a -ǫ ¯ b ∥ ∥ ¯ β ( · ) ∥ ∥ 2 L ∞ F W (0 ,T ; R n × n ) -1 ¯ c ‖ ¯ γ ( · ) ‖ 2 L 2 , bmo F W (0 ,T ; R n × n ) and we can obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which means SRE (2.4) has a unique solution ( P ( · , i ) , Λ( · , i )) l i =1 on [ T -ǫ, T ] such that ( P ( · , i ) , Λ( · , i )) ∈ L ∞ F W ( T -ǫ, T ; S n ) × L 2 , bmo F W ( T -ǫ, T ; S n ). With this method we can solve SRE (2.4) on [ T -2 ǫ, T -ǫ ] , [ T -3 ǫ, T -2 ǫ ] , . . . , and finally [0 , T ].

## 3.2 Solvability of adjoint BSDE (2.5)

On the basis of SRE (2.4), we study the solvability for BSDE (2.5), which is the coupled system with unbounded coefficients. At first, we introduce the following lemma, which is useful in the subsequent proof.

## Lemma 3.1 The following BSDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with α ( · ) , γ ( · ) ∈ L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; R k × k ) , η ( · ) ∈ L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; R k ) , β ( · ) ∈ L ∞ F W (0 , T ; R k × k ) and ‖ γ ( · ) ‖ L 2 , BMO F W (0 ,T ; R n × n ) &lt; 1 , admits a unique solution ( Y ( · ) , Z ( · )) such that ( Y ( · ) , Z ( · )) ∈ L ∞ F W (0 , T ; R k ) × L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; R k ) .

Proof. We denote ( y ( · ) , z ( · )) ∈ L ∞ F W (0 , T ; R k ) × L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; R k ) and consider the following BSDEs:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From [18, Proposition 2.1], BSDE (3.5) has a unique solution ( y ( · ) , z ( · )) ∈ L p F W (Ω; C (0 , T ; R k )) × L 1 F W (0 , T ; R k ).

At first, we are going to prove for some constants ε, a, d &gt; 0, Γ( y ( · ) , z ( · )) := ( Y ( · ) , Z ( · )) is a contraction map on the closed convex set B ε by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( y ( · ) , z ( · )) is defined on Ω × [ T -ε, T ] and ε, a, d will be determined later (see (3.7)). Applying Itˆ o's formula to | Y ( t ) | 2 on [ T -ε, T ] and taking conditional expectation, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some ε, a, b, c &gt; 0, which implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then there exists suitable ε, a, b, c &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

yielding ( y ( · ) , z ( · )) ∈ B ε . For ( y 1 ( · ) , z 1 ( · )) , ( y 2 ( · ) , z 2 ( · )) ∈ B ε , we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to (3.6), we can also obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we have proven that BSDE (3.4) has a unique solution ( Y ( · ) , Z ( · )) on [ T -ε, T ] such that ( Y ( · ) , Z ( · )) ∈ L ∞ F W ( T -ε, T ; R k ) × L 2 , bmo F W ( T -ε, T ; R k ). Following the same method, we can prove that BSDE (3.4) has a unique solution ( Y ( · ) , Z ( · )) on [ T -2 ε, T -ε ] such that ( Y ( · ) , Z ( · )) ∈ L ∞ F W ( T -2 ε, T -ε ; R k ) × L 2 , bmo F W ( T -2 ε, T -ε ; R k ). To conclude, we can prove the solvability of BSDE (3.4) on [0,T].

Now we are prepared to prove our second main result.

Proof of Theorem 2.7. For each i ∈ M and any t ∈ [0 , T ], we set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we can rewrite BSDE (2.5) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and again rewrite BSDE (3.8) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (2.6), when L σ &gt; 0 is sufficiently small, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Lemma 3.1, BSDE (3.9) has a unique solution ( K ( · ) , L ( · )) such that ( K ( · ) , L ( · )) ∈ L ∞ F W (0 , T ; R nl ) × L 2 , bmo F W (0 , T ; R nl ), which finishes the proof.

## 3.3 Optimal control and optimal value

Thanks to the solvability of SRE (2.4) and BSDE (2.5), we can now represent the optimal control and optimal value with their unique solutions and give the following proof.

Proof of Theorem 2.8. From the proof of Lemma 4.2 in [6], u ∗ is clearly an admissible control. Without causing ambiguity, we will abbreviate ψ ( t, α t ) to ψ , ψ = A,B,C,D,b,σ,Q,R,q,p,P, Λ , K, L, X, u . Applying Itˆ o's formula to t ↦→〈 P ( t, α t ) X ( t ) , X ( t )) 〉 and t ↦→-2 〈 K ( t, α t ) , X ( t )) 〉 , and taking the ex- pectation, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and add (3.10) and (3.11), then we can obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since for any t ∈ [0 , T ] , i ∈ M , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the equality holds when u ( t, i ) = v ( t, i ). Now we obtain the optimal control and optimal value.

## References

- [1] Bismut, J. M. (1976). Linear quadratic optimal stochastic control with random coefficients. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 14(3), 419-444.
- [2] Chen, Y., &amp; Luo, P. (2023). Stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems with nonMarkovian regime switching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17256.
- [3] Horn, R. A., &amp; Johnson, C. R. (2012). Matrix analysis. Cambridge university press.
- [4] Hu, Y., &amp; Øksendal, B. (2008). Partial information linear quadratic control for jump diffusions. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 47(4), 1744-1761.
- [5] Hu, Y., Shi, X., &amp; Xu, Z. Q. (2022). Constrained stochastic LQ control with regime switching and application to portfolio selection. The Annals of Applied Probability, 32(1), 426-460.

- [6] Hu, Y., Shi, X., &amp; Xu, Z. Q. (2022). Non-homogeneous stochastic LQ control with regime switching and random coefficients. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.01433.
- [7] Kohlmann, M., &amp; Tang, S. (2001). New developments in backward stochastic Riccati equations and their applications. In Mathematical Finance: Workshop of the Mathematical Finance Research Project, Konstanz, Germany, October 5-7, 2000 (pp. 194-214). Birkh¨ auser Basel.
- [8] Kohlmann, M., &amp; Tang, S. (2002). Global adapted solution of one-dimensional backward stochastic Riccati equations, with application to the mean-variance hedging. Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 97(2), 255-288.
- [9] Kohlmann, M., &amp; Tang, S. (2003). Minimization of risk and linear quadratic optimal control theory. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 42(3), 1118-1142.
- [10] Kohlmann, M., &amp; Tang, S. (2003). Multidimensional backward stochastic Riccati equations and applications. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 41(6), 1696-1721.
- [11] Li, N., Wu, Z., &amp; Yu, Z. (2018). Indefinite stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems with random jumps and related stochastic Riccati equations. Science China Mathematics, 61, 563-576.
- [12] Li, X., &amp; Zhou, X. Y. (2002). Indefinite stochastic LQ controls with Markovian jumps in a finite time horizon. Communications in Information and Systems, 2(3), 265-282.
- [13] Li, X., Zhou, X. Y., &amp; Ait Rami, M. (2003). Indefinite stochastic linear quadratic control with Markovian jumps in infinite time horizon. Journal of Global Optimization, 27, 149-175.
- [14] Liu, Y., Yin, G., &amp; Zhou, X. Y. (2005). Near-optimal controls of random-switching LQ problems with indefinite control weight costs. Automatica, 41(6), 1063-1070.
- [15] L¨ u, Q. (2019). Well-posedness of stochastic Riccati equations and closed-loop solvability for stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems. Journal of Differential Equations, 267(1), 180-227.
- [16] Peng, S. (1992). Stochastic hamilton-jacobi-bellman equations. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 30(2), 284-304.
- [17] Shen, Y., Wei, J., &amp; Zhao, Q. (2020). Mean-variance asset-liability management problem under non-Markovian regime-switching models. Applied Mathematics &amp; Optimization, 81, 859-897.
- [18] Sun, J., &amp; Yong, J. (2014). Linear quadratic stochastic differential games: open-loop and closedloop saddle points. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 52(6), 4082-4121.
- [19] Sun, J., Li, X., &amp; Yong, J. (2016). Open-loop and closed-loop solvabilities for stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 54(5), 22742308.
- [20] Sun, J., Xiong, J., &amp; Yong, J. (2021). Indefinite stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems with random coefficients: Closed-loop representation of open-loop optimal controls. The Annals of Applied Probability, 2021, 31(1): 460-499.
- [21] Tang, S. (2003). General linear quadratic optimal stochastic control problems with random coefficients: linear stochastic Hamilton systems and backward stochastic Riccati equations. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 42(1), 53-75.

- [22] Wen, J., Li, X., Xiong, J., &amp; Zhang, X. (2023). Stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems with random coefficients and Markovian regime switching system. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 61(2), 949-979.
- [23] Wonham, W. M. (1967). Optimal stationary control of a linear system with state-dependent noise. SIAM Journal on Control, 5(3), 486-500.
- [24] Wonham, W. M. (1968). On a matrix Riccati equation of stochastic control. SIAM Journal on Control, 6(4), 681-697.
- [25] Wu, Z., &amp; Wang, X. R. (2003). FBSDE with Poisson process and its application to linear quadratic stochastic optimal control problem with random jumps. Acta Automatica Sinica, 29(6), 821-826.
- [26] Xie, S. (2009). Continuous-time mean-variance portfolio selection with liability and regime switching. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics, 45(1), 148-155.
- [27] Yin, G., &amp; Zhou, X. Y. (2004). Markowitz's mean-variance portfolio selection with regime switching: From discrete-time models to their continuous-time limits. IEEE Transactions on automatic control, 49(3), 349-360.
- [28] Yu, Z. (2017). Infinite horizon jump-diffusion forward-backward stochastic differential equations and their application to backward linear-quadratic problems. ESAIM: Control, Optimisation and Calculus of Variations, 23(4), 1331-1359.
- [29] Zhang, X., Li, X., &amp; Xiong, J. (2021). Open-loop and closed-loop solvabilities for stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems of Markovian regime switching system. ESAIM: Control, Optimisation and Calculus of Variations, 27, 69.
- [30] Zhou, X. Y., &amp; Yin, G. (2003). Markowitz's mean-variance portfolio selection with regime switching: A continuous-time model. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 42(4), 1466-1482.