## Robust optimal stopping with regime switching ∗

## Siyu Lv † Zhen Wu ‡ Jie Xiong § Xin Zhang ¶ September 4, 2025

## Abstract

In this paper, we study an optimal stopping problem in the presence of model uncertainty and regime switching . The max-min formulation for robust control and the dynamic programming approach are adopted to establish a general theoretical framework for such kind of problem. First, based on the dynamic programming principle, the value function of the optimal stopping problem is characterized as the unique viscosity solution to the associated Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation. Then, the so-called smooth-fit principle for optimal stopping problems is proved in the current context, and a verification theorem consisting of a set of sufficient conditions for robust optimality is established. Moreover, when the Markov chain has a large state space and exhibits a two-time-scale structure, a singular perturbation approach is utilized to reduce the complexity involved and obtain an asymptotically optimal solution. Finally, an example of choosing the best time to sell a stock is provided, in which numerical experiments are reported to illustrate the implications of model uncertainty and regime switching.

Keywords: optimal stopping, model uncertainty, Markov chain, viscosity solution, smooth fit principle, verification theorem, two-time-scale modeling

## 1 Introduction

Optimal stopping refers to the problem of finding the best choice among all possible stopping times, based on averaged or expected results. To study optimal stopping problems, the verification theorem approach has been extensively employed because it provides some sufficient conditions that are easy to verify and typically leads to certain ordinary or partial differential equations (in the form of variational inequalities ) that can be solved analytically or numerically; see Lions [10, 11], Bensoussan and Lions [1, Chapter 3], Menaldi [12, 13], Øksendal [14, Chapter 10], and Pham [16, Chapter 5]. Apart from the interest in its own right, optimal stopping enjoys many applications in various fields, such as option pricing (Peskir and Shiryaev [15, Chapter VII]), stock selling (Øksendal [14, Examples 10.2.2 and 10.4.2]), and quickest detection (see the survey [18] by Shiryaev and the recent works [4, 5, 6] by Ernst, Mei, and Peskir).

∗ This work was supported by the National Key R&amp;D Program of China (2023YFA1009200) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61961160732, 12471418, 12171086).

† School of Mathematics, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China (lvsiyu@seu.edu.cn).

‡ School of Mathematics, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, China (wuzhen@sdu.edu.cn).

§ Department of Mathematics and SUSTech International Center for Mathematics, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518055, China (xiongj@sustech.edu.cn).

¶ School of Mathematics, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China (x.zhang.seu@gmail.com).

The robust stochastic control is a framework that deals with decision-making when, besides risk in standard stochastic control, there exists ambiguity (or, model uncertainty) as well. Briefly speaking, risk means the randomness involved in a given model , while ambiguity implies the uncertainty among a set of models . A popularly adopted formulation for robust stochastic control is the so-called max-min paradigm, i.e., finding an optimal control under the worst-case scenario; see [8, 17, 2, 19]. On the other hand, motivated by the need of more realistic models that better reflect random environment, the regime switching diffusion has attracted increasing interest in recent years. Mathematically, the regime switching diffusion is a two-component process ( X t , α t ) in which X t evolves according to a diffusion process whose coefficients depend on the regime of a finite-state Markov chain α t . As a result, the regime switching diffusion can capture more directly the discrete events that are less frequent but more significant to longer-term system behavior, and has been found to be very useful in modeling and simulation (see [7, 20, 21]).

This paper considers an optimal stopping problem involving model uncertainty and regime switching. Following the max-min formulation and based on the dynamic programming principle (DPP), the value function is characterized to be the unique viscosity solution to the associated Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation; see Section 3. With the help of the viscosity solution theory, we proceed to prove the smooth-fit property of the value function through the boundary of the so-called continuation region ; see Section 4. Then, a verification theorem as a sufficient criterion that can be used to construct a robust optimal stopping rule is established in Section 5. Quite often, the states of the Markov chain belong to several groups so that the chain jumps rapidly within each group and slowly between the groups (see Yin and Zhang [21]). In this case, we employ a singular perturbation approach based on a two-time-scale model to reduce the complexity involved; see Section 6. Finally, we provide an example of a stock selling problem, in which numerical experiments are conducted to demonstrate the theoretical results; see Section 7.

The main novelty and contribution of this paper include three aspects: (i) We present a comprehensive study for the optimal stopping problem with model uncertainty and regime switching, including the viscosity solution characterization of HJB equation, the smoothfit principle, and the verification theorem. Compared with traditional optimal stopping problems (e.g., [14, Chapter 10] and [16, Chapter 5]), the proofs are more delicate with some significant technical difficulties to be overcome. (ii) When the Markov chain has a two-timescale structure, we prove the convergence of the original problem to a limit problem with much simpler structure, and the solution of the limit problem provides a close approximation to that of the original problem. (iii) The notion of viscosity solution is fully utilized in this paper and shows its good versatility for optimal control problems. In the Definition 3.2 of viscosity solution, the ' global maximum (resp., minimum)' is adopted. It may be replaced by ' local maximum (resp., minimum)' or even ' strict local maximum (resp., minimum)'. These three terms are essentially equivalent (see Pham [16, Chapter 4]) and will be used in characterization of HJB equation, smooth-fit principle, and two-time-scale convergence, respectively, to facilitate the corresponding proofs.

## 2 Problem formulation

Let R be the real space. Denote C 1 (resp., C 2 ) the space of (resp., twice) continuously differentiable functions. Let (Ω , F , P ) be a probability space on which a 1-dimensional standard Brownian motion B P t , t ≥ 0, and a Markov chain α t , t ≥ 0, are defined. Assume that B P t and α t are independent. The Markov chain α t takes values in a finite state space M = { 1 , . . . , m } . Denote Q = ( λ ij ) i,j ∈M the generator (i.e., the matrix of transition rates) of α t . Let {F t } t ≥ 0 be the natural filtration of B P t and α t .

The reference model (or, the original state equation) is given by the following regime switching diffusion:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where b, σ : R ×M↦→ R are two functions satisfying:

(A1) There exists a positive constant L 1 such that, for any x 1 , x 2 ∈ R and i ∈ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under Assumption (A1), the reference model (1) admits a unique strong solution (see Yin and Zhang [21]).

The alternative models are induced by a set of probability measures P = { Q : Q ∼ P } that are equivalent to P . By Girsanov's transformation for regime switching diffusions (see Yao et al. [20, Lemma 1]), for each Q ∈ P , there exists an R -valued F t -adapted process (i.e., the Radon-Nikodym derivative) q t , t ≥ 0, such that

Further, if E q t satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then E q t is a P -martingale, and under Q , the process defined by B Q t = B P t -∫ t 0 q s ds , t ≥ 0, is a standard Brownian motion, α t remains to be a Markov chain with the original generator Q , and B Q t and α t are still independent. Note that the model uncertainty between an alternative model and the reference model (i.e., the difference between Q and P ) is characterized by q t , which can be regarded as a control variable . We then denote the set of all admissible controls as U = { q t : q t satisfies (2) } . We also denote the set of all F t -stopping times as S .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Given a new probability measure Q associated with a q t ∈ U , the reference model (1) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In what follows, we will consider the alternative model (3) instead of (1), and the solution to (3) is sometimes denoted by X q t if emphasis on q t is needed.

For ( τ, q t ) ∈ S × U , the reward functional for the optimal stopping problem is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r &gt; 0 is the discount factor, f, g : R ×M↦→ R are two functions satisfying: (A2) There exists a positive constant L 2 such that, for any x 1 , x 2 ∈ R and i ∈ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and Θ : R ↦→ R is a continuous function to measure the difference between Q and P , or, the ambiguity aversion of an investor in financial terminology. Then, the value function of the optimal stopping problem is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For further analysis, we also assume:

(A3) The value function V ( x, i ) is Lipschitz continuous with respect to x .

Remark 2.1. Some sufficient conditions to make (A3) hold include that, for example, the admissible controls are restricted to those q t that are uniformly bounded to confine the scope of ambiguity degree, or the diffusion coefficient σ is independent of x , i.e., σ ( x, i ) ≡ σ ( i ) . Moreover, Assumption (A3) also implies that V ( x, i ) has at most linear growth since M is a finite set.

## 3 Viscosity solution

We first present the DPP for our optimal stopping problem, whose proof is omitted here; one is referred to Pham [16, Chapter 5] for details.

Theorem 3.1. Let Assumptions (A1)-(A3) hold. Then, for any stopping time ν , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Based on the DPP, we have the following HJB equation in the form of variational inequality (see [10, 11, 12, 13]):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v ( x, i ) : R × M ↦→ R is the solution, Qv ( x, · )( i ) . = ∑ j = i λ ij [ v ( x, j ) -v ( x, i )] ≡ ∑ m j =1 λ ij v ( x, j ) is the infinitesimal operator of the Markov chain, and

Definition 3.2. A continuous function v ( x, i ) , i ∈ M , is called a viscosity subsolution (resp., supersolution) to (6) if for any i ∈ M , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(resp., ≥ 0 ), whenever ϕ ( x ) ∈ C 2 and v ( x, i ) -ϕ ( x ) has a global maximum (resp., minimum) at x = x ∈ R . Further, v ( x, i ) is called a viscosity solution if it is both a viscosity subsolution and supersolution.

Moreover, an equivalent definition of viscosity solution via the so-called superdifferential J 2 , + φ ( x ) and subdifferential J 2 , -φ ( x ) of a function φ at x (see Crandall et al. [3, Section 2] for precise definitions) is given below.

Definition 3.3. A continuous function v ( x, i ) , i ∈ M , is called a viscosity subsolution (resp., supersolution) to (6) if for any ( x, i ) ∈ R ×M and any ( η, Λ) ∈ J 2 , + v ( x, i ) (resp., J 2 , -v ( x, i ) ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(resp., ≥ 0 ). Further, v ( x, i ) is called a viscosity solution if it is both a viscosity subsolution and supersolution.

Remark 3.4. The upper (resp., lower) semicontinuity is enough to define the viscosity subsolution (resp., supersolution) in Definitions 3.2 and 3.3; see Pham [16, Chapter 4]. Here, we use continuity just for simplicity of presentation since the value function is continuous.

Theorem 3.5. Let Assumptions (A1)-(A3) hold. Then, the value function V ( x, i ) , i ∈ M , defined by (4) is a viscosity solution to the HJB equation (6).

Proof. Viscosity supersolution property. For any fixed i ∈ M , let ϕ ( x ) ∈ C 2 be such that V ( x, i ) -ϕ ( x ) attains its global minimum at x = x . On the one hand, taking τ = 0 in the DPP (5), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, based on V and ϕ , we introduce a function ψ : R ×M→ R defined as

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ν = τ α ∧ c for some c &gt; 0, where τ α is the first jump time of α t . Taking an arbitrary q t ∈ U and applying Itˆ o's formula to e -rt ψ ( X q t , α t ) between 0 and ν , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that V ( x, i ) -ϕ ( x ) attains its global minimum at x = x , so for 0 ≤ t &lt; ν , it follows that ψ ( X q t , i ) = ϕ ( X q t ) + ( V ( x, i ) -ϕ ( x )) ≤ V ( X q t , i ). Then we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Choosing τ = ν in the DPP (5), we know that, for any ε &gt; 0, there exists a q t ∈ U such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Replacing q t by q t in (9) (noting the fact that ν is independent of q t ) and combining (9) and (10), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Dividing both sides of the above inequality by c , letting c → 0, and taking the supremum over q ∈ R , we have sup q ∈ R { rV ( x, i ) -L q ϕ ( x, i ) -QV ( x, · )( i ) -f ( x, i ) -Θ( q ) } ≥ 0, which together with (7) yield the desired viscosity supersolution property.

Viscosity subsolution property. If it were not, there would exist an x , an i , and a ϕ ( x ) ∈ C 2 such that V ( x, i ) -ϕ ( x ) attains its global maximum at x , but sup q ∈ R { rV ( x, i ) -L q ϕ ( x, i ) -QV ( x, · )( i ) -f ( x, i ) -Θ( q ) } &gt; 0 and V ( x, i ) -g ( x, i ) &gt; 0. Then, there should exist a constant q ∈ R and a δ &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

before ν . = τ δ ∧ τ α , where τ δ is the first exit time of X q from the neighborhood B δ ( x ) . = { x ∈ R : | x -x | &lt; δ } .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any τ ∈ S and the function ψ defined by (8), applying Itˆ o's formula to e -rt ψ ( X q t , α t ) between 0 and τ ∧ ν , substituting V for ψ as in the proof of viscosity supersolution property, and noting (11) and (12), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we can show that the last term in (13) is not less than δc 0 for some c 0 &gt; 0. In fact, similar to Pham [16, Chapter 5], we choose a smooth function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It can be seen that φ ( · ) has the following properties: (a) φ ( x ) = c 1 , (b) φ ( x ) ≤ c 1 ≤ 1, ∀ x ∈ B δ ( x ), (c) rφ ( x ) -L q φ ( x ) ≤ 1, ∀ x ∈ B δ ( x ), (d) φ ( x ) = 0, ∀ x ∈ ∂B δ ( x ).

By applying Itˆ o's formula to e -rt φ ( X q t ) between 0 and τ ∧ ν , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the first term of the right-hand side is equal to 0 since X q τ δ ∈ ∂B δ ( x ) and the second term E Q [ e -rτ α φ ( X q τ α )1 { τ ≥ ν } 1 { τ δ ≥ τ α } ] . = c 2 &lt; c 1 , due to τ α &gt; 0, a.s. Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Going back to (13), it follows from the arbitrariness of τ that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which leads to a contradiction to the DPP (5).

□

In the following uniqueness theorem, the function Θ( q ) is specified to be the relative entropy form Θ( q ) = q 2 / 2 θ , which is commonly used in the robust control literature (see [8, 17]), and the positive parameter θ is the so-called ambiguity factor . In this case, we can solve q ∗ ( x, i ) . = arg sup q ∈ R H q v ( x, i ) = -θσ ( x, i ) v ′ ( x, i ), and the HJB equation (6) reduces to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the arguments ( x, i ) are dropped for simplicity.

Theorem 3.6. Let Assumptions (A1)-(A3) hold. Let V 1 ( x, i ) and V 2 ( x, i ) be two viscosity solutions to the HJB equation (14) and both have at most linear growth. Then, we have V 1 ( x, i ) = V 2 ( x, i ) for any ( x, i ) ∈ R ×M .

Proof. We consider the following function defined on R × R ×M :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 0 &lt; γ &lt; 1, 0 &lt; ρ &lt; 1, and ψ ( x ) = exp( a (1 + x 2 ) 1 2 ) with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It turns out that Ψ( x 1 , x 2 , i ) has a global maximum at a point ( x 0 1 , x 0 2 , i 0 ), since Ψ( x 1 , x 2 , i ) is continuous and lim | x 1 | + | x 2 |→∞ Ψ( x 1 , x 2 , i ) = -∞ for each i ∈ M . In particular, we have 2Ψ( x 0 1 , x 0 2 , i 0 ) ≥ Ψ( x 0 1 , x 0 1 , i 0 ) + Ψ( x 0 2 , x 0 2 , i 0 ), i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from the linear growth property of V 1 and V 2 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the constant K 1 is independent of γ and ρ .

Moreover, the choice of ( x 0 1 , x 0 2 , i 0 ) implies Ψ(0 , 0 , i 0 ) ≤ Ψ( x 0 1 , x 0 2 , i 0 ), that is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the constant K 2 is also independent of γ and ρ . Note that ψ is of exponential growth but the right-hand side of the above inequality only has a linear growth, hence, there should exist a constant K ρ , which is dependent on ρ but independent of γ , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (16) and (17), there must be a subsequence of γ → 0 (still denoted by γ ) and x 0 such that x 0 1 → x 0 and x 0 2 → x 0 . Further, from the continuity of V 1 and V 2 in (15), we deduce that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, from Crandall et al. [3, Theorem 3.2], there exist (Λ 1 , Λ 2 ) ∈ R 2 such that

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the viscosity subsolution property of V 1 and the viscosity supersolution property of V 2 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

In the following, based on (20), the analysis is divided into two cases.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Case 1. If V 1 ( x 0 1 , i 0 ) -g ( x 0 1 , i 0 ) ≤ 0, then from V 2 ( x 0 2 , i 0 ) -g ( x 0 2 , i 0 ) ≥ 0, we get V 1 ( x 0 1 , i 0 ) -V 2 ( x 0 2 , i 0 ) ≤ g ( x 0 1 , i 0 ) -g ( x 0 2 , i 0 ). Letting γ → 0 yields V 1 ( x 0 , i 0 ) -V 2 ( x 0 , i 0 ) ≤ 0.

Case 2. If V 1 ( x 0 1 , i 0 ) -g ( x 0 1 , i 0 ) &gt; 0, then the left-hand side of min { . . . , . . . } in (20) should be ≤ 0. By subtracting the left-hand side of min { . . . , . . . } in (21), and sending γ → 0, it follows from (A1), (A2), (18), (19) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, since Ψ( x 1 , x 2 , i ) reaches its maximum at ( x 0 1 , x 0 2 , i 0 ), it follows that for any ( x, i ) ∈ R ×M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Letting γ → 0, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Particularly, taking x = x 0 in the above equation also leads to QV 1 ( x 0 , · )( i 0 ) -QV 2 ( x 0 , · )( i 0 ) ≤ 0. So no matter in Case 1 or Case 2, we both have V 1 ( x, i ) -V 2 ( x, i ) ≤ 2 ρψ ( x ). Sending ρ → 0, we have V 1 ( x, i ) -V 2 ( x, i ) ≤ 0. Using a similar argument, we can also obtain V 1 ( x, i ) -V 2 ( x, i ) ≥ 0. Thus we conclude that V 1 ( x, i ) = V 2 ( x, i ), ∀ ( x, i ) ∈ R ×M . □

## 4 Smooth-fit principle

In this section, we prove the smooth-fit C 1 property of the value function V ( x, i ) through the boundary ∂ D i between the continuation region D i . = { x ∈ R : V ( x, i ) &gt; g ( x, i ) } and its complement set, i.e., the stopping region D c i . = { x ∈ R : V ( x, i ) = g ( x, i ) } via a viscosity solution approach. In this section, we continue to adopt Θ( q ) = q 2 / 2 θ , or to say, we shall work with the HJB equation (14), as the uniqueness of viscosity solution is needed. For convenience, we denote the left-hand side of min { . . . , . . . } in (14) as H ∗ v ( x, i ) = rv -bv ′ + θ 2 σ 2 [ v ′ ] 2 -1 2 σ 2 v ′′ -Qv ( x, · )( i ) -f .

Lemma 4.1. Let (A1)-(A3) hold. Assume further that: (i) g ( x, i ) ∈ C 2 , and (ii) σ ( x, i ) is non-degenerate, i.e., σ 2 ( x, i ) &gt; 0 . Then, the value function V ( x, i ) is the unique classical solution to H ∗ v ( x, i ) = 0 on D i .

Proof. Step 1 . We first show that V ( x, i ) is the unique viscosity solution to H ∗ v ( x, i ) = 0 on D i . In fact, the viscosity supersolution property of V ( x, i ) to H ∗ v ( x, i ) = 0 is immediate from that of V ( x, i ) to (14). On the other hand, for any i ∈ M , let x ∈ D i and ϕ ( x ) ∈ C 2 be such that V ( x, i ) -ϕ ( x ) attains its local maximum at x = x . By the definition of D i , we have V ( x, i ) &gt; g ( x, i ), hence from the viscosity subsolution property of V ( x, i ) to (14), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which leads to the viscosity subsolution property of V ( x, i ) to H ∗ v ( x, i ) = 0. Moreover, similar to Theorem 3.6, we can prove the uniqueness of viscosity solution to H ∗ v ( x, i ) = 0 on D i (In the case that D i is a bounded domain, we even no longer need the function ψ in Ψ, which is introduced to deal with an unbounded domain by imposing restrictions on the growth of Ψ, in the proof of Theorem 3.6).

Step 2 . We rewrite the equation H ∗ v ( x, i ) = 0 as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the superscript ⊤ denotes the transpose of a vector. Then, the above equation can be further rewritten as a matrix form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in which O m is the ( m × m ) zero matrix, E m is the ( m × m ) identity matrix,

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

.

Step 3 . Note that the value functions V ( x, i ), i ∈ M , are Lipschitz continuous, thus they are differentiable almost everywhere. Denote L the common Lipschitz constant for all V ( x, i ). Denote E i the set of points at which V ( x, i ) is non-differentiable, then E i is a zero measure set. Moreover, E . = ∪ i ∈M E i is also a zero measure set as M is a finite set. Now, for any i ∈ M and any x 0 ∈ D i , consider an interval [ x 0 -l, x 0 + l ] ⊂ D i for some l &gt; 0. Note that V ( x, i ), i ∈ M , are bounded in [ x 0 -l, x 0 + l ]; without loss of generality, we denote the common bound also by L , i.e., | V ( x, i ) | ≤ L , i ∈ M . For a given b &gt; 0, let M be the maximum of | A ( x, y ) y + F ( x ) | in the region

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We do not know in advance if all V ′ ( x 0 , i ), i ∈ M , exist, but we can indeed, in view of that E is a zero measure set, select an x 1 near x 0 (let | x 1 -x 0 | = ε for some sufficiently small ε &lt; min { l/ 2 , b/M } ) such that all V ′ ( x 1 , i ), i ∈ M , exist. Then, let us consider the following initial value problem:

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the following region

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some a satisfying ε &lt; a &lt; l -ε ; it means I 1 ⊂ I 0 . The function A ( x, y ) y + F ( x ) is continuous w.r.t. ( x, y ) and Lipschitz continuous w.r.t. y on the region I 1 . From the PicardLindel¨ of theorem (see Hartman [9, Chapter II, Theorem 1.1]), the initial value problem (22) has a unique classical solution y ( x ) in [ x 1 -h, x 1 + h ], where (recall that M is an upper bound of | A ( x, y ) y + F ( x ) | on I 1 ⊂ I 0 )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, the equation H ∗ v ( x, i ) = 0 with initial value v ( x 1 , i ) = V ( x 1 , i ) and v ′ ( x 1 , i ) = V ′ ( x 1 , i ) has a unique classical solution v ( x, i ) in [ x 1 -h, x 1 + h ]. Such a classical solution is a viscosity solution as well.

̸

Note that [ x 1 -h, x 1 + h ] ⊂ D i . Remember that V ( x, i ) is a viscosity solution to H ∗ v ( x, i ) = 0 on D i , especially, in ( x 1 -h, x 1 + h ). From the uniqueness of viscosity solution, we have v ( x, i ) ≡ V ( x, i ) in ( x 1 -h, x 1 + h ). So V ( x, i ) is smooth C 2 in ( x 1 -h, x 1 + h ). It yields that V ′ ( x 0 , i ) indeed exists since x 0 ∈ ( x 1 -h, x 1 + h ). Moreover, if x 0 ∈ D j for j = i , we can repeat the above proof to show the well-posedness of V ′ ( x 0 , j ); otherwise, if x 0 / ∈ D j , then x 0 ∈ D c j and we have V ( x, j ) ≡ g ( x, j ), which implies that V ( x, j ) is differentiable at x 0 with V ′ ( x 0 , j ) = g ′ ( x 0 , j ). Finally, we show that all V ′ ( x 0 , i ), i ∈ M , exist for any point x 0 ∈ D i .

Step 4 . Now, let us consider the initial value problem (22) with new initial condition y ( x 0 ) = y 0 , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As in Step 3, we can find a solution interval ( x 0 -h, x 0 + h ) in which we have v ( x, i ) ≡ V ( x, i ), and thus V ( x, i ) is smooth C 2 in ( x 0 -h, x 0 + h ). From the arbitrariness of x 0 ∈ D i , we have V ( x, i ) is smooth C 2 on D i . It is known that a smooth enough viscosity solution is a classical solution, hence V ( x, i ) satisfies H ∗ v ( x, i ) = 0 on D i in the classical sense. □

Theorem 4.2. Let (A1)-(A3) hold. Assume further that: (i) g ( x, i ) ∈ C 2 , and (ii) σ ( x, i ) is non-degenerate, i.e., σ 2 ( x, i ) &gt; 0 . Then, the value function V ( x, i ) is smooth C 1 on ∂ D i .

Proof. We first verify that, for any x ∈ ∂ D i , V ( x, i ) admits a left derivative V ′ -( x, i ) and a right derivative V ′ + ( x, i ). Without loss of generality, we suppose that x is a right boundary of D i , that is, the left-side neighborhood ( x -δ, x ) ⊂ D i and the right-side neighborhood ( x, x + δ ) ⊂ D c i for some δ &gt; 0; the other case that x is a left boundary of D i can be treated similarly. In ( x -δ, x ), we have proved in Lemma 4.1 that V ( x, i ) = v ( x, i ), the unique classical solution to H ∗ v ( x, i ) = 0 on D i , thus we have V ′ -( x, i ) = v ′ ( x, i ). On the other hand, in ( x, x + δ ), it follows from V = g on D c i that V ′ + ( x, i ) = g ′ ( x, i ).

In view of V ( x, i ) = g ( x, i ) and V ( x, i ) ≥ g ( x, i ) for any ( x, i ) ∈ R ×M , we obtain the following relation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which means that V ′ -( x, i ) ≤ g ′ ( x, i ) = V ′ + ( x, i ). Suppose, on the contrary, V is not C 1 at x , then we have V ′ -( x, i ) &lt; V ′ + ( x, i ). Taking an η ∈ ( V ′ -( x, i ) , V ′ + ( x, i )), we consider the following smooth test function:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It can be seen that V dominates locally ϕ µ in a neighborhood of x , i.e., V -ϕ µ achieves a local minimum at x . Hence, from the viscosity supersolution property of V to the HJB equation (14), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which, by sending µ → 0 and noting the non-degenerate condition σ 2 &gt; 0, yields a contradiction. □

## 5 Verification theorem

Next, we present the verification theorem, which gives a sufficient way to determine whether a candidate is optimal. It also suggests that the solution to the HJB equation (if exists) coincides with the value function. In what follows, we denote H q v ( x, i ) = rv ( x, i ) -L q v ( x, i ) -Qv ( x, · )( i ) -f ( x, i ) -Θ( q ).

Theorem 5.1. Let v ( x, i ) be a real-valued function satisfying the following conditions: (i) v ( · , i ) ∈ C 2 ( R \ ∂ D i ) ∩ C 1 ( R ) , (ii) v ( x, i ) ≥ g ( x, i ) , (iii) sup q ∈ R H q v ( x, i ) ≥ 0 . Then, we have v ( x, i ) ≥ V ( x, i ) for all ( x, i ) ∈ R ×M .

Assume further that: (iv) For x ∈ D i , sup q ∈ R H q v ( x, i ) = 0 , and there exists a feedback map q ∗ ( x, i ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let q ∗ t . = q ∗ ( X q ∗ t t , α t ) ∈ U . Then, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a robust optimal stopping time and v ( x, i ) = V ( x, i ) is the value function.

Remark 5.2. It should be noted that along the boundary ∂ D i , the functions v ( · , i ) only belongs to C 1 but does not necessarily belong to C 2 . In this situation, we can take advantage of the smooth approximation argument for variational inequalities developed by Øksendal [14, Theorem 10.4.1 and Appendix D] to supply the needed smoothness when applying Itˆ o's formula. Therefore, for convenience, in the following proof we simply consider v ( · , i ) to be C 2 on the whole space; see also Guo and Zhang [7].

Proof. Step 1. For any τ ∈ S and q t ∈ U , by applying Itˆ o's formula to e -rt v ( X q t t , α t ) between 0 and τ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the inequality follows from condition (iii). In view of condition (ii), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (25) and (26), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we denote Π q t = L q v ( X q t , α t ) + Θ( q ). By taking infimum over q t ∈ U in (27), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e., ˜ J ( x, i ; τ ) ≤ v ( x, i ). Further, from the arbitrariness of τ ∈ S , it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Step 2. In this step, we take the feedback control q ∗ t defined by (23) and the stopping time τ ∗ defined by (24), then condition (iv) implies that the inequality in (25) becomes equality. The definition (24) of τ ∗ makes the inequality in (26) become equality and so does the inequality in (27). Then, (28) also turns out to be an equality, and q ∗ t defined by (23) indeed achieves the infimum of inf q t ∈U in (28). In particular,

˜ J ( x, i ; τ ∗ ) = v ( x, i ) . (30) It follows from (29) and (30) that V ( x, i ) = ˜ J ( x, i ; τ ∗ ) = v ( x, i ), i.e., τ ∗ defined by (24) is a robust optimal stopping time and v ( x, i ) = V ( x, i ) is the value function. □

## 6 Two-time-scale case

In this section, we suppose that the state space of a Markov chain α ε t , where ε is the socalled time-scale parameter , is divided into a number of groups such that the chain fluctuates rapidly within a group, but jumps occasionally from one group to another. Let the generator Q ε . = ( λ ε ij ) i,j ∈M for α ε t have the following two-time-scale structure:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define a process α ε t by α ε t = k if α ε t ∈ M k . The process α ε t is not necessarily a Markov chain. However, using a certain probabilistic argument, it is shown in Yin and Zhang [21, Chapter 4] that α ε t converges in distribution to a limit Markov chain α t with state space { 1 , . . . , L } , whose generator Q . = ( λ kp ) k,p ∈{ 1 ,...,L } is given by

where each ˜ Q k is an irreducible generator with dimension m k × m k and m 1 + · · · + m L = m . In this case, we can write the state space of α ε t as M = M 1 ∪·· · ∪ M L = { s 11 , . . . , s 1 m 1 }∪···∪ { s L 1 , . . . , s Lm L } , where, for k = 1 , . . . , L , M k . = { s k 1 , . . . , s km k } is the subspace corresponding to ˜ Q k . Let ν k = ( ν k 1 , . . . , ν k m k ) denote the stationary distribution of ˜ Q k . Note that in Q ε , ˜ Q . = ( ˜ λ ij ) i,j ∈M governs the rapidly changing part and ̂ Q . = ( ̂ λ ij ) i,j ∈M describes the slowly varying components.

Q = diag { ν 1 , . . . , ν L } ̂ Q diag { 1 m 1 , . . . , 1 m L } , (31) where 1 m k . = (1 , . . . , 1) ⊤ ∈ R m k . The rationale of the above procedure is that, when ε is small, one may ignore some details of the Markov chain α ε t and obtain a limit problem in which α ε t is aggregated so that the states in M k can be regarded as a single 'superstate'. The structure of the limit problem is much simpler than the original one, and the solution of the limit problem converges to that of the original problem.

In this section, we also take Θ( q ) to be the relative entropy form Θ( q ) = q 2 / 2 θ , as the uniqueness of viscosity solution is still needed, and we further assume:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For k = 1 , . . . , L , we define a set of averaged coefficients weighted by the stationary distributions ( ϕ . = b, f ):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, we consider a limit optimal stopping problem with the averaged coefficients b , σ , f given by (32) and the limit Markov chain α t defined by (31). Denote V ε ( x, i ) and V 0 ( x, k ) the value functions of the original problem and limit problem, respectively. Then, V ε ( x, i ) is the unique viscosity solution to the HJB equation (14), and V 0 ( x, k ) is the unique viscosity solution to the following limit HJB equation (the arguments ( x, k ) are omitted):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the number of equations for V ε is m = m 1 + · · · + m L , while that for V 0 is only L . From the Lipschitz property of the value function and the Arzel` a-Ascoli theorem, on any compact subset of R , for each subsequence of { ε → 0 } , there exists a further subsequence such that V ε converges to a limit function V on that set. The following lemma indicates that, V depends only on k whenever α ε t ∈ M k for k = 1 , . . . , L .

Lemma 6.1. Let (A1)-(A4) hold. Then, V ( x, s kl ) is independent of l , where s kl ∈ M k = { s k 1 , . . . , s km k } .

Proof. For ( η, Λ) ∈ J 2 , -V ( x, s kl ), from Crandall et al. [3, Lemma 6.1], there exist ε n → 0, x n → x , and ( η n , Λ n ) ∈ J 2 , -V ε n ( x n , s kl ) such that ( V ε n ( x n , s kl ) , η n , Λ n ) → ( V ( x, s kl ) , η, Λ), as n →∞ . Further, the definition of viscosity supersolution yields

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall that λ ε n s kl ,j = 1 ε n ˜ λ s kl ,j + ̂ λ s kl ,j and ˜ λ s kl ,j = 0 when j / ∈ M k . Multiplying both sides of the above inequality by ε n and letting n →∞ , it follows that ∑ r = l ˜ λ s kl ,s kr [ V ( x, s kr ) -V ( x, s kl )] ≤ 0 , or,

̸

In view of the irreducibility of ˜ Q k and Yin and Zhang [21, Lemma A.39], we obtain V ( x, s kl ) = V ( x, s kr ) for any s kl , s kr ∈ M k .

The next theorem shows that the limit function V ( x, k ) is also a viscosity solution to the limit HJB equation (33). From the uniqueness of viscosity solution, we have V ( x, k ) = V 0 ( x, k ) for k = 1 , . . . , L . It is mentioned that the 'strict local maximum (resp., minimum)' will be taken in Definition 3.2 to prove the viscosity solution property of V ( x, k ).

Theorem 6.2. Let (A1)-(A4) hold. Then, V ( x, k ) is a viscosity solution to the limit HJB equation (33).

Proof. Viscosity supersolution property . Fix k = 1 , . . . , L . For any s kl ∈ M k , let V ( x, k ) be a limit of V ε ( x, s kl ) for some subsequence of ε . Take a function ϕ ( x ) ∈ C 2 such that V ( x, k ) -ϕ ( x ) has a strict local minimum at x 0 in a neighborhood B δ ( x 0 ). Choose x ε l such that, for each s kl ∈ M k , V ε ( x, s kl ) -ϕ ( x ) attains its local minimum at x ε l in B δ ( x 0 ). Then we must have x ε l → x 0 as ε → 0. Moreover, the viscosity supersolution property of V ε implies

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in which

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

By noting that V ε ( x ε r , s kr ) -ϕ ( x ε r ) ≤ V ε ( x ε l , s kr ) -ϕ ( x ε l ) , we have

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Recall that ∑ m k r =1 ˜ λ s kl ,s kr = 0, i.e., ∑ r = l ˜ λ s kl ,s kr = -˜ λ s kl ,s kl , so the right-hand side of the above inequality is equal to

where the last equality is owing to ∑ m k l =1 ν k l ˜ λ s kl ,s kr = 0 based on the definition of stationary distribution. Therefore,

̸

It follows from (34), (35), and (36) that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

By the definition (31) of Q , we have

̸

̸

and further, by the definition (32) of averaged coefficients, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

On the other hand, V ( x 0 , k ) = lim ε → 0 V ε ( x ε l , s kl ) ≥ lim ε → 0 g ( x ε l ) = g ( x 0 ). As a consequence, V ( x, k ) is a viscosity supersolution to (33).

Viscosity subsolution property . Let ϕ ( x ) ∈ C 2 be such that V ( x, k ) -ϕ ( x ) attains its strict local maximum at x 0 in a neighborhood B δ ( x 0 ). Similarly, choose x ε l such that, for each s kl ∈ M k , V ε ( x, s kl ) -ϕ ( x ) attains its local maximum at x ε l in B δ ( x 0 ). So we have x ε l → x 0 as ε → 0. We first note that if V ( x 0 , k ) -g ( x 0 ) ≤ 0, then the viscosity subsolution property already holds. Otherwise, if V ( x 0 , k ) -g ( x 0 ) &gt; 0, then for ε small enough, we have V ε ( x ε l , s kl ) -g ( x ε l ) &gt; 0. It follows from the viscosity subsolution property of V ε that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we can repeat the same argument as in the proof of viscosity supersolution property to show that V ( x, k ) is a viscosity subsolution. Thus, V ( x, k ) is a viscosity solution to (33). From uniqueness of viscosity solution, we have V ( x, k ) = V 0 ( x, k ), k = 1 , . . . , L .

## 7 Stock selling

In this section, we provide an example of finding the best time to sell a stock. This example will be numerically solved by computing the optimal selling rule and value function. It turns out that the optimal selling rule is of threshold-type , and the threshold levels depend on the state of the Markov chain. In addition, we will test the dependence of the solution on the ambiguity factor θ and the effectiveness of the two-time-scale approximation.

Let the price of the stock be described by a switching geometric Brownian motion :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where b ( i ) and σ ( i ), i ∈ M , are the appreciation rate and volatility rate of the stock when the market is in state i , respectively.

Then, this equation can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The problem for the investor is to maximize the following reward by selecting a best time to sell the stock, and the value function is accordingly defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where q 2 t / 2 θ with θ &gt; 0 is the relative entropy to measure the ambiguity degree (the larger the θ , the bigger the ambiguity degree), and the positive constant K is the so-called transaction fee to sell a stock.

In this example, the HJB equation (6) reduces to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the following, Subsection 7.1 is concerned with a two-state Markov chain and Subsection 7.2 focuses on a four-state Markov chain with a two-time-scale structure.

## 7.1 Two-state case

In this subsection, we consider a two-state Markov chain α t with state space M = { 1 , 2 } , whose generator is given by

We take r = 5, b (1) = 2 . 125, b (2) = 0 . 875, σ (1) = 1, σ (2) = 1, K = 1, θ = 0 . 01, λ 1 = 1, λ 2 = 1 as a set of basic parameters and numerically compute the solution to (37). The step size for x used in the finite difference scheme is chosen to be 0.01. Under the basic parameters, the optimal selling rule is computed to be ( x 1 , x 2 ) = (1 . 99 , 1 . 53) and the value function is plotted in Figure 1. The function x -K , as the obstacle part of (37), is also plotted as dotted line; in fact, the threshold levels are exactly the corresponding intersection points of the continuation part and the obstacle part x -K . We see that the price to sell the stock in state 1 is bigger than that in state 2 (i.e., x 1 &gt; x 2 ). It is reasonable because the appreciation rates b (1) &gt; b (2) and hence the investor in state 1 would like to sell the stock later than that in state 2 to wait a further going up of the stock price. Moreover, as expected, V ( x, 1) is always higher than V ( x, 2).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In order to demonstrate the influence of ambiguity aversion of the investor, we also compute the cases when θ = 0 . 1 and θ = 1. Together with the basic case when θ = 0 . 01, the threshold levels ( x 1 , x 2 ) are listed in Table 1 and the value functions are plotted in Figures

1, 2, 3, respectively. From Table 1 and Figures 1, 2, 3, it can be found that both x 1 and x 2 decrease (i.e., to sell the stock earlier) and the value function declines (i.e., the reward gets smaller) as θ increases. In other words, the investor becomes more conservative as the ambiguity degree grows up.

Table 1: Threshold levels

| θ  0.01  0.1  1  (  x  1  , x  2  )  (1.99,1.53)  (1.95,1.52)  (1.69,1.43)   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Figure 1: Value function when θ = 0 . 01

<!-- image -->

## 7.2 Four-state case

In this subsection, the movements of a stock market can be viewed as a composition of two kinds of macro trends that last for a long time and switch to each other occasionally and two kinds of micro trends that run for only a short time and switch to each other frequently . To take care of such a situation, one may consider a four-state Markov chain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α 1 t ∈ { 1 , 2 } represents the macro market trends and α 2 t ∈ { 1 , 2 } stands for the micro market trends. We denote the state space of α ε t as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 2: Value function when θ = 0 . 1

<!-- image -->

Figure 3: Value function when θ = 1

<!-- image -->

and assume α ε t has a two-time-scale generator Q ε given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For convenience, we also denote the state space of α ε t as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with 1=(1,1), 2=(1,2), 3=(2,1), 4=(2,2). We take b (1) = 2 . 5, b (2) = 1 . 75, b (3) = 1 . 25, b (4) = 0 . 5, σ (1) = 1, σ (2) = 1, σ (3) = 1, σ (4) = 1, λ 1 = 2, λ 2 = 2, µ 1 = 1, µ 2 = 1. In addition, r , K , θ (= 0 . 01), and the step size for finite difference scheme are the same with those in Subsection 7.1. The value functions when ε = 1, ε = 0 . 1, ε = 0 . 01 are plotted in Figures 4, 5, 6, respectively. Note that V ε ( x, 1) and V ε ( x, 2) (similarly, V ε ( x, 3) and V ε ( x, 4)) are moving closer as the time-scale parameter ε approaches 0; they are almost overlapped in Figure 6.

Finally, we consider the limit problem when ε → 0. The corresponding stationary distributions are given by ν 1 = ν 2 = ( λ 2 / ( λ 1 + λ 2 ) , λ 1 / ( λ 1 + λ 2 )) = (1 / 2 , 1 / 2), and from (31), the generator for the limit Markov chain α t reads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With the parameters specified above and according to (32), we obtain the averaged coefficients b (1) = 2 . 125, b (2) = 0 . 875, σ (1) = 1, σ (2) = 1 for the limit problem. Note that these coefficients are the same with those in the first subsection. So the first subsection is exactly the limit problem. The optimal selling rule is given by ( x 1 , x 2 ) = (1 . 99 , 1 . 53) and the value function can be found in Figure 1.

To show the performance of the two-time-scale convergence, we define the error norms N ε 1 and N ε 2 as N ε 1 = ∑ N n =1 ( | V ε 1 ( n ) -V 1 ( n ) | + | V ε 2 ( n ) -V 1 ( n ) | ) /N and N ε 2 = ∑ N n =1 ( | V ε 3 ( n ) -V 2 ( n ) | + | V ε 4 ( n ) -V 2 ( n ) | ) /N , where N is the number of meshpoints with respect to x , and V ε ( n ) (respectively, V ( n )) stands for the value of V ε (respectively, V ) at meshpoint x ( n ). The error norms are calculated and listed in Table 2. Table 2 suggests that V ε approximates V quite well for small ε . In this sense, the two-time-scale approximation would be helpful for the long-term investors to skip the switching of micro market when it varies too fast, and only pay attention to the switching of macro market.

Table 2: Error norms

| ε  1  0.1  0.01  N  ε  1  0.0200  0.0069  0.0015  N  ε  2  0.0091  0.0029  0.0007   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Figure 4: Value function when ε = 1

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: Value function when ε = 0 . 1

<!-- image -->

Figure 6: Value function when ε = 0 . 01

<!-- image -->

## References

- [1] A. Bensoussan, J. L. Lions, Applications of Variational Inequalities in Stochastic Control, North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam-New York, 1982.
- [2] O. L. V. Costa, M. D. Fragoso, M. G. Todorov, Continuous-Time Markov Jump Linear Systems, Springer, Heidelberg, 2013.
- [3] M. Crandall, H. Ishii, P. L. Lions, User's guide to viscosity solutions of second order partial differential equations, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 27 (1992), 1-67.
- [4] P. Ernst, H. Mei, Exact optimal stopping for multi dimensional linear switching diffusions, Math. Oper. Res., 48 (2023), 1589-1606.
- [5] P. Ernst, H. Mei, G. Peskir, Quickest real-time detection of multiple Brownian drifts, SIAM J. Control Optim., 62 (2024), 1832-1856.
- [6] P. Ernst, G. Peskir, Quickest real-time detection of a Brownian coordinate drift, Ann. Appl. Probab., 32 (2022), 2652-2670.
- [7] X. Guo, Q. Zhang, Optimal selling rules in a regime switching model, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 50 (2005), 1450-1455.
- [8] L. P. Hansen, T. J. Sargent, Robust control and model uncertainty, Amer. Econ. Rev., 91 (2001), 60-66.

- [9] P. Hartman, Ordinary Differential Equations, SIAM, Philadelphia, PA, 2002.
- [10] J. L. Lions, Variational problems and free boundary problems, In: International Symposium on Mathematical Problems in Theoretical Physics, 356-369, Springer, Berlin-New York, 1975.
- [11] J. L. Lions, Some topics on variational inequalities and applications, In: New Developments in Differential Equations, 1-38, North-Holland, Amsterdam-New York-Oxford, 1976.
- [12] J. L. Menaldi, On the optimal stopping time problem for degenerate diffusions, SIAM J. Control Optim., 18 (1980), 697-721.
- [13] J. L. Menaldi, On a degenerate variational inequality with Neumann boundary conditions, J. Optim. Theory Appl., 36 (1982), 535-563.
- [14] B. Øksendal, Stochastic Differential Equations, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003.
- [15] G. Peskir, A. Shiryaev, Optimal Stopping and Free-Boundary Problems, Birkh¨ auser Verlag, Basel, 2006.
- [16] H. Pham, Continuous-Time Stochastic Control and Optimization with Financial Applications, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2009.
- [17] C. S. Pun, Robust time-inconsistent stochastic control problems, Automatica, 94 (2018), 249-257.
- [18] A. N. Shiryaev, Quickest detection problems: fifty years later, Sequential Anal., 29 (2010), 345-385.
- [19] M. G. Todorov, M. D. Fragoso, A new perspective on the robustness of Markov jump linear systems, Automatica, 49 (2013), 735-747.
- [20] D. D. Yao, Q. Zhang, X. Y. Zhou, A regime-switching model for European options, In: Stochastic Processes, Optimization, and Control Theory, 281-300, Springer, New York, 2006.
- [21] G. Yin, Q. Zhang, Continuous-Time Markov Chains and Applications, Springer, New York, 2013.