## Linear-Quadratic Optimal Control for Mean-Field Stochastic Differential Equations in Infinite-Horizon with Regime Switching

Hongwei Mei вҲ— Qingmeng Wei вҖ  and Jiongmin Yong вҖЎ

January 3, 2025

Abstract: This paper is concerned with stochastic linear quadratic (LQ, for short) optimal control problems in an infinite horizon with conditional mean-field term in a switching regime environment. The orthogonal decomposition introduced in [21] has been adopted. Desired algebraic Riccati equations (AREs, for short) and a system of backward stochastic differential equations (BSDEs, for short) in infinite time horizon with the coefficients depending on the Markov chain have been derived. The determination of closed-loop optimal strategy follows from the solvability of ARE and BSDE. Moreover, the solvability of BSDEs leads to a characterization of open-loop solvability of the optimal control problem.

Keywords: Linear-quadratic optimization problem, infinite-horizon, conditional mean-field, Markov switching, Riccati equations.

AMS Mathematics Subject Classification. 93E20, 49N10, 60F17.

## 1 Introduction

Let (в„Ұ , F , F , P ) be a complete filtered probability space on which a one-dimensional standard Brownian motion W ( В· ) is defined. On the same probability space, a Markov chain Оұ ( В· ) is defined with a finite state space M = { 1 , В· В· В· , m 0 } and the generator Оӣ = ( О» О№пҡҫ ) m 0 Г— m 0 , which is independent of W ( В· ). Let F W and F Оұ be the natural filtrations of W ( В· ) and Оұ ( В· ), augmented by all the P -null sets, respectively. We define F = F W вҲЁ F Оұ and denote the conditional expectation with respect to F Оұ by E Оұ t [ Оҫ ] := E [ Оҫ |F Оұ t ].

We consider the following n -dimensional controlled mean-field stochastic differential equation (SDE, for short) with regime switching (governed by the Markov chain Оұ ( В· )):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

вҲ— Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409, USA; email: hongwei.mei@ttu.edu . This author is supported in part by Simons Travel Grant MP-TSM-00002835.

вҖ  School of Mathematics and Statistics, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, China; email: weiqm100@nenu. edu.cn . This author is supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Jilin Province for Outstanding Young Talents (No. 20230101365JC), the National Key R&amp;D Program of China (No. 2023YFA1009002), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 12371443).

вҖЎ Department of Mathematics, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA; email: jiongmin.yong@ucf.edu . This author is supported in part by NSF Grant DMS-2305475.

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here all the coefficients A ( В· ) , ВҜ A ( В· ) , B ( В· ) , ВҜ B ( В· ) , C ( В· ) , ВҜ C ( В· ) , D ( В· ) , ВҜ D ( В· ) of the state equation (1.1) and the quadratic weight matrices Q ( В· ) , ВҜ Q ( В· ) , S ( В· ) , ВҜ S ( В· ) , R ( В· ) , ВҜ R ( В· ) of the cost functional (1.2) are some deterministic maps defined on M ; the nonhomogeneous terms b ( В· ) , Пғ ( В· ) of the state equation (1.1) and the linear weighting terms q ( В· ) , r ( В· ) of the cost functional (1.2) are some integrable stochastic processes; and the linear mean-field weighting terms ВҜ q ( В· ) , ВҜ r ( В· ) of the cost functional (1.2) are some integrable stochastic processes on [0 , вҲһ ). Due to Оұ ( В· ) being a Markov chain, the coefficients (such as A ( Оұ ( В· ))) and weight functions (such as Q ( Оұ ( В· ))) are all of random. Our goal is to minimize the cost functional (1.2) subject to the state equation (1.1) over some set of admissible controls. Such a problem is referred to as a mean-field linear-quadratic optimal control problem (MF-LQ problem, for short), denoted by Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ .

Linear quadratic (LQ, for short) problem has been extensively studied since the seminal works of BellmanGlicksberg-Gross [2], Kalman [13] and Letov [16] appeared around 1960. There has been a vast amount of works on LQ control problems and their variations. Let us briefly mention a very small portion of the relevant works. For the classical theory of deterministic LQ problems, see Lee-Markus [15], Willems [36], Anderson-Moore [1], Wonham [38]. See also Bernhard [4], Zhang [40], Delfour [9], and Delfour-Sbarba [10] for a zero-sum differential game version. Study of stochastic LQ problems began with the works of Kushner [14] and Wonham [37] in the 1960s. See also McLane [20], Davis [8], Bensoussan [3], and so on, In 1998, Chen-Li-Zhou [5] found that for stochastic LQ problems, the weighting matrix of the control in the cost functional does not have to be positive definite, or even could be negative definite to some extent. This kind of problems have been termed to be indefinite LQ problem for convenience, initiating which trigged quite a few investigations. For stochastic coefficient case of such a problem, Chen-Yong [6, 7] studied the local solvability of backward stochastic differential Riccati equation. Tang [32, 33] solved the case of random coefficients with degenerate (positive semi-definite) control weight in the cost functional. The general theory for indefinite LQ problem with deterministic coefficients was completely established by Sun-Yong [28], SunLi-Yong [26] and Sun-Yong [29], under the framework of open and closed-loop solvability. See the book [30]. In 2021, Sun-Xiong-Yong [27] finally completely solved the general case of indefinite LQ problem with random coefficients. See LВЁ u-Wang ([19]) for an infinite-dimensional version. In 2013, Yong [39] studied the problem with mean-field, followed by Huang-Li-Yong [12], Li-Sun-Yong [18], Sun [25], Wei-Yong-Yu [34], Sun-Yong [31], Li-Shi-Yong [17]. For Markov regime switching case, see Pham [22] and Zhang-Li-Xiong [41]. Moreover, the problem with coefficients being adapted to a martingale and with conditional mean-field interaction in a finite horizon has been studied by Mei-Wei-Yong [21]. This work can be regarded as a continuation of [21].

We now highlight the main features of the MF-LQ problem associated with (1.1) and (1.2), as well as the main contributions of the current paper.

(i) In order the cost functional associated with the state equation to be well-defined, we need to have a proper stabilizability of the state equation (1.1). Such a notion is technically new, due to two issues: (a) all the coefficients of the state equation and the quadratic weight functions in the cost functional depend on the Markov chain Оұ ( В· ), so that they are all random in some special form, adapted to F Оұ ; and (b) the state equation as well as the cost functional contains the conditional expectation terms E Оұ t [ X ( В· )] and E Оұ t [ u ( В· )]. We will establish some reasonably easy-to-check conditions under which our Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ is wellformulated.

(ii) Following the natural idea of completing squares, we derive the algebraic Riccati equations (AREs, for short) and the corresponding system of backward stochastic differential equations (BSDEs, for short) in an infinite horizon with the coefficients depending on the Markov chain. The well-posedness of AREs and BSDEs will determine the closed-loop optimal strategy.

(iii) For AREs, we use the results of the finite horizon LQ problem from [21]. Under the stabilizability condition, we are able to pass to the limits to get the so-called stabilizing solutions of AREs. For BSDEs, due to the fact that the stabilizability of our state equation is weaker than the constant coefficient system, the result found in [30] cannot be applied directly. A new method is introduced to prove the well-posedness of such BSDEs.

(vi) Besides the Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ to be cosed-loop solvable once the well-posedness of AREs and BSDEs have been established, We also obtained a characterization of open-loop solvability of the problem in terms of a forward-backward system, with the coupling by the stationarity conditions.

The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. In Section 2, some preliminaries are presented including the martingale measure and orthogonal decomposition. Stabilizability related notions and results are presented in Section 3. Some relevant notions and several immediate results are presented in Section 4. Closed-loop solvability results are proved in Section 5. In particular, Subsection 5.1 is devoted to the completing squares method. The solvability of AREs and BSDEs are carried out in Subsections 5.2 and 5.3, respectively. In Section 6, an open-loop solvability result is presented. Finally, some concluding remarks are made in Section 7.

## 2 Preliminaries

Throughout this paper, besides the notations introduced in the previous section, let S k ( S k + , S k ++ ) be the set of all the k Г— k symmetric (positive semi-definite, positive definite) matrices, I be the identity matrix or operator in a suitable space, M вҠӨ and R ( M ) be the transpose and range of a matrix M , respectively. We write M &gt; N ( M в©ҫ N , resp.), meaning that M -N is positive definite (positive semi-definite, resp.).

For Euclidean space H and 0 &lt; T в©Ҫ вҲһ , we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Naturally, replacing F s , F of L 2 F s (в„Ұ; H ), L 2 F ( s, T ; H ) by F Оұ s , F Оұ , we recognize the new spaces L 2 F Оұ s (в„Ұ; H ), L 2 F Оұ ( s, T ; H ). Furthermore, the spaces L 2 F -( s, T ; H ), L 2 F Оұ -( s, T ; H ) can also be identified by rewriting the measurability in L 2 F ( s, T ; H ), L 2 F Оұ ( s, T ; H ) as F -predictable and F Оұ -predictable, resp.

Any ( s, О№, Оҫ ) вҲҲ D is called an admissible initial triple . Also, we let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Any u ( В· ) вҲҲ U [ s, вҲһ ) is called a feasible control on [ s, вҲһ ) and any u ( В· ) вҲҲ U [ s, T ] is called a feasible control on [ s, T ]. We now introduce the following hypotheses.

- (A1) A ( В· ) , ВҜ A ( В· ) , C ( В· ) , ВҜ C ( В· ) : MвҶ’ R n Г— n , B ( В· ) , ВҜ B ( В· ) , D ( В· ) , ВҜ D ( В· ) : MвҶҰвҶ’ R n Г— m .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(A3) The following hold: Q ( В· ) , ВҜ Q ( В· ) : MвҶ’ S n ++ , R ( В· ) , ВҜ R ( В· ) : MвҶ’ S m ++ , S ( В· ) , ВҜ S ( В· ) : MвҶ’ R m Г— n , and for each Дұ вҲҲ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Clearly, under (A1) , all the coefficients of the state equation (1.1) are bounded. Thus, for any admissible initial triple ( s, О№, Оҫ ) вҲҲ D and any feasible control u ( В· ) вҲҲ U [ s, вҲһ ), the state equation (1.1) admits a unique solution X ( В· ) = X ( В· ; s, О№, Оҫ, u ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F ( s, T ; R n ) for any T &gt; 0, but might not be in L 2 F ( s, вҲһ ; R n ). Thus, J вҲһ ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ; u ( В· )) might not be well-defined or finite under (A1) -(A2) . We therefore introduce the set U ad [ s, вҲһ ) as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

We will show later that U ad [ s, вҲһ ) = вҲ… under a certain condition. Now, our LQ problem can be stated as follows.

Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ . For ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ) вҲҲ D , find ВҜ u ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Any ВҜ u ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ) satisfying (2.2) is called an open-loop optimal control , the corresponding state process ВҜ X ( В· ) = X ( В· ; s, Дұ, Оҫ, ВҜ u ( В· )) is called an open-loop optimal state process , and ( ВҜ X ( В· ) , ВҜ u ( В· )) is called an open-loop optimal pair . In this case, we say the above problem to be open-loop solvable .

In the case that b ( В· ) , Пғ ( В· ) , q ( В· ) , ВҜ q ( В· ) , r ( В· ) , ВҜ r ( В· ) are zero, the state equation (1.1) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We call (2.4) a purely quadratic cost functional. For the case of (2.3) with (2.4), the corresponding LQ problem is said to be homogeneous , denoted by Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ 0 . In what follows, for convenience, we will denote the homogeneous system (2.3) by [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ].

## 2.1 Orthogonal Decomposition

To achieve the stabilizability condition, we adopt the orthogonal decomposition constructed in [21] to derive an equivalent formulation for Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ .

For any s вҲҲ [0 , T ), L 2 F s (в„Ұ; H ) is a Hilbert space under the following inner product

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The space L 2 F Оұ s (в„Ұ; H ) , with the same inner product as above, is a closed subspace of L 2 F s (в„Ұ; H ) and its orthogonal complement in L 2 F s (в„Ұ; H ) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any Оҫ вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ s (в„Ұ; H ) , define

Similar to [21], we see that О  s induces the following orthogonal decomposition:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, thanks to Lemma A.1 in [21], we have E Оұ s [ В· ] = E Оұ [ В· ] вүЎ E [ В· |F Оұ вҲһ ]. Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Based on the above, for any 0 в©Ҫ s &lt; T , we further define О  : L 2 F ( s, T ; H ) вҶ’ L 2 F Оұ ( s, T ; H ) as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that for any v ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 ( s, T ; H ), О [ v ( В· )]( t ) is only defined for almost all t вҲҲ [ s, T ], as a process on [ s, T ]. We now show that О  is the orthogonal projection from L 2 F ( s, T ; H ) onto L 2 F Оұ ( s, T ; H ). In fact, first of all, if v ( В· ) = ВҜ v ( В· ) in L 2 F ( s, T ; H ), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which leads to О [ v ( В· )] = О [ВҜ v ( В· )] in L 2 F Оұ ( s, T ; H ). This means that О  is well-defined. Clearly, О  2 = О  and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, О  is a self-adjoint idempotent, which means that О  is an orthogonal projection from L 2 F ( s, T ; H ) onto L 2 F Оұ ( s, T ; H ). Next, we denote О  вҠҘ := I -О , which is the orthogonal projection from L 2 F ( s, T ; H ) onto L 2 F Оұ ( s, T ; H ) вҠҘ , where

Also

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

L 2 F Оұ -( s, T ; H ) вҠҘ := { v ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ ( s, T ; H ) вҠҘ вҲЈ вҲЈ v ( В· ) is F -predictable } = О  вҠҘ ( L 2 F -( s, T ; H ) ) . From the above, we have the following orthogonal decompositions:

Here M 2 F -( s, T ; H ) will be defined later in (2.17). More details on the above orthogonal decompositions can be found in [21]. We also note that all above arguments are valid for T = вҲһ . In the sequel, we will write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.2 An Equivalent Formulation of Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ

Denote Оё i = О  i [ Оё ] for Оё = X,u,b, Пғ, Оҫ . Applying the orthogonal projection О  2 to state equation (1.1), then subtracting from (1.1) leads to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

At the same time, the cost functional (1.2) can be (provided the integrals exist) written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

According to the above, Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ can be equivalently formulated with the state equation (2.8) and the cost functional (2.10).

Now, for the homogeneous case, i.e., b ( В· ) , Пғ ( В· ) , q ( В· ) , ВҜ q ( В· ) , r ( В· ) , ВҜ r ( В· ) are all zero, (2.3) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For convenience, we denote [ A 1 , C 1 , C 2 ; B 1 , D 1 , D 2 ] 1 for the system (2.12) of X 1 ( В· ). Similarly, we denote [ A 2 , B 2 ] 2 the system (2.12) for X 2 ( В· ). The whole system is denoted by { [ A 1 , C 1 , C 2 ; B 1 , D 1 , D 2 ] 1 ; [ A 2 , B 2 ] 2 } . The corresponding LQ problem is denoted by Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ 0 .

Further, if the system is uncontrolled, then it becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

whose solution is X 0 ( В· ) вүЎ X 0 ( В· ; s, Оҫ, Дұ ). We denote such a system simply by [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] вүЎ [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; 0 , 0 , 0 , 0]. Under our orthogonal decomposition, the above can also be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

whose solution is ( X 0 1 ( В· ; Оҫ 1 , Оҫ 2 , Дұ ) , X 0 2 ( В· ; s, Оҫ 1 , Оҫ 2 , Дұ )), where A k ( В· ) , C k ( В· ) ( k = 1 , 2) are given by (2.9). According to our notation, such a system is denoted by { [ A 1 , C 1 , C 2 , 0 , 0 , 0] 1 ; [ A 2 , 0] 2 } вүЎ { A 1 , A 2 , C 1 , C 2 } .

Remark 2.1. Note that condition (2.1) in (A3) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the cost functional for Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ 0 is uniformly convex on U ad [ s, вҲһ ), i.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some Оө &gt; 0 . Consequently, Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ admits a unique open-loop optimal control in U ad [ s, вҲһ ). One of the main focuses in this paper is to find a feedback representation of the open-loop optimal control.

## 2.3 Martingale Measure of Оұ ( В· )

In this subsection, we will construct a martingale associated with the Markov chain. Such a martingale will be used in the BSDEs in the future.

Recall that M = { 1 , В· В· В· , m 0 } , and Оұ : [0 , вҲһ ) Г— в„Ұ вҶ’ M is a continuous-time Markov chain with the transition probability :

We assume that Оұ ( В· ) is homogeneous, i.e., p Дұпҡҫ ( t, s ) = p Дұпҡҫ ( t -s ), where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Denote its transition probability matrix as follows:

For any пҡҫ вҲҲ M\{ Дұ } , let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which follows an exponential distribution, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where О» Дұпҡҫ satisfies the so-called q -property :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we refer to Оӣ = ( О» Дұпҡҫ ) as the generator of the Markov chain Оұ ( В· ). Since Оұ ( В· ) is stationary, one has that (for 0 в©Ҫ s &lt; t &lt; вҲһ )

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, for Дұ = пҡҫ , we define

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by [23], p.35, (21.12) Lemma (see also [11, 24]), M Дұпҡҫ ( В· ) is a purely discontinuous and square-integrable martingale (with respect to F Оұ ). For convenience, we let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We call { M Дұпҡҫ ( В· ) вҲЈ вҲЈ Дұ, пҡҫ вҲҲ M} the martingale measure of Markov chain Оұ ( В· ). Now we want to define the stochastic integral with respect to such a martingale measure. Introduce the following Hilbert spaces

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

It can be seen that M 2 F Оұ -( s, T ; H ) вҠӮ M 2 F -( s, T ; H ). For any П• ( В· ) вҲҲ M 2 F -( s, T ; H ), we write

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is a (local) martingale with quadratic variation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that for any map ОЈ : MвҶ’ H , we have

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we also have the following product rule: for any maps ОЈ 1 , ОЈ 2 : MвҶ’ H , by (2.18),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3 Stability and Stabilizability

In this section, we consider the long-term behavior of the state process X ( В· ) of the controlled state equation so that Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ is well-defined. We first consider the uncontrolled homogeneous state equation (2.14) or (2.15). The following definitions will be necessary.

Definition 3.1. (i) System [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is said to be L 2 -exponentially stable if there are constants K,Оҙ &gt; 0 such that for any ( s, Оҫ, Дұ ) вҲҲ D , the solution of (2.14) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or equivalently, system { A 1 , A 2 , C 1 , C 2 } is said to be L 2 -exponentially stable , if there are K,Оҙ &gt; 0 such that for any ( s, Оҫ 1 , Оҫ 2 , Дұ ) вҲҲ D , the solution of (2.15) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(ii) System [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is said to be L 2 -integrable if for any ( s, Оҫ, Дұ ) вҲҲ D , the solution of (2.14) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

or equivalently, system { A 1 , A 2 , C 1 , C 2 } is said to be L 2 -integrable , if for any ( s, Оҫ 1 , Оҫ 2 , Дұ ) вҲҲ D , the solution of (2.15) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(iii) System [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is said to be dissipative if there exists a measurable function P : MвҶ’ S n ++ such that for some Оө &gt; 0,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any solution X 0 ( В· ) of (2.14); or equivalently, system { A 1 , A 2 , C 1 , C 2 } is said to be dissipative , if there exist measurable functions P 1 , P 2 : MвҶ’ S n ++ such that for some Оө &gt; 0,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any solution ( X 0 1 ( В· ) , X 0 2 ( В· )) of (2.15).

Мё

Note that (3.5) roughly means the map t вҶҰвҶ’ E гҖҲ P ( Оұ ( t )) X 0 ( t ) , X 0 ( t ) гҖү has a negative time-derivative if X 0 ( t ) = 0. This amounts to saying that the quantity E гҖҲ P ( Оұ ( t )) X 0 ( t ) , X 0 ( t ) гҖү is decreasing/dissipative as a map of t .

Next, we introduce the following system of algebraic Lyapunov-type inequalities:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here A i ( В· ) , C i ( В· ) ( i = 1 , 2) are given by (2.9), and at the same time, we also introduce the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Оө &gt; 0. We have a simple proposition.

Proposition 3.2. Lyapunov type inequalities (3.7) admit a finite solution pair ( P 1 ( Дұ ) , P 2 ( Дұ )) ( Дұ вҲҲ M ) if and only if so do (3.8) .

Proof. Because P 1 ( Дұ ) вҲҲ S n ++ , it can be easily seen that the first inequalities in (3.7) and (3.8) are equivalent. For the second parts, we notice that if the first inequality in (3.7) holds for P 1 , it also holds for О»P 1 with any О» &gt; 0. By the arbitrariness of О» &gt; 0, the second inequalities in (3.7) and (3.8) are also equivalent. The proof is complete.

Now, we are ready to prove the following result.

Proposition 3.3. Let (A1) concerning A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C hold. Then the following are equivalent:

- (i) System [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is L 2 -exponentially stable;
- (ii) System [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is L 2 -integrable;
- (iii) System [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is dissipative;
- (iv) System (3.7) (or equivalently (3.8) ) of Lyapunov inequalities admits a positive definite solution ( P 1 ( В· ) , P 2 ( В· )) .

Proof. The proof for (i) вҮ’ (ii) and (iii) вҮ” (iv) is trivial.

(ii) вҮ’ (iv). Let (ОЁ s,О№ 1 ( В· ) , ОЁ s.Дұ 2 ( В· )) solve the following SDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Clearly, for k = 1 , 2 , ОЁ s,Дұ k ( В· ) is L 2 -integrable and invertible. Thus, for L 1 : MвҶҰвҶ’ S n ++ , we may define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, for any given ( s, Дұ, Оҫ 1 , 0) вҲҲ D , applying ItЛҶ o's formula for t вҶҰвҶ’гҖҲ P 1 ( Оұ ( t ))ОЁ 1 ( t ) Оҫ 1 , ОЁ 1 ( t ) Оҫ 1 гҖү , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the definition of P 1 ( В· ), (3.9), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking L 1 ( В· ) = I and noting that ОЁ s,О№ 1 ( В· ) &gt; 0, by the arbitrariness of t 1 &gt; t 2 , О№ and x 1 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now let us construct P 2 . For some L 2 ( В· ) : MвҶҰвҶ’ S n ++ , we define

Similar to P 1 ( В· ) above, taking L 2 ( В· ) = I and one can steadily check that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then (iv) is proved.

(iv) вҮ’ (i). Applying ItЛҶ o's formula, using the couple ( P 1 , P 2 ) in (3.8), one has (with Оұ ( t ) being suppressed)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Grownwall's inequality yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, because P k ( В· ) вҲҲ S n ++ , k = 1 , 2 , we get E 2 вҲ‘ k =1 | X 0 k ( t ) | 2 в©Ҫ Ke -Оө ( t -s ) 2 вҲ‘ k =1 E | Оҫ k | 2 . The proof is complete.

Let us compare the following with (2.14):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The above are m 0 = |M| (the number of elements in M ) decoupled systems with Дұ вҲҲ M as the parameter. Clearly, if system (3.11) is L 2 -exponentially stable for all Дұ вҲҲ M so is (2.14). However, the contrary is not true. Here is a simple example.

Example 3.4. Consider the one-dimensional system with Markov chain-dependent coefficient:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose the Markov chain Оұ ( В· ) has two states M = { 1 , 2 } , with generator Оӣ = ( -10 10 1 -1 ) , and A (1) = 1 , A (2) = -1 . Also consider systems

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is clear that when Дұ = 1, the corresponding system is not stable. Now, we let P 1 , P 2 : MвҶ’ (0 , вҲһ ) such that for k = 1 , 2,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These can be achieved if we select

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, we may take, say, P 1 (1) = P 2 (1) = 1, P 1 (2) = P 2 (2) вҲҲ ( 1 3 , 4 5 ) (for example, P 1 (2) = P 2 (2) = 1 2 ). Thus, the system (3.12) is stable.

Next, we consider the controlled homogeneous SDE (2.12). For any Оҳ 1 , Оҳ 2 : MвҶ’ R m Г— n , we consider the following homogeneous system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which are referred to as feedback controls . Thus, according to our notation, this system should be denoted by { A 1 + B 1 Оҳ 1 , A 2 + B 2 Оҳ 2 , C 1 + D 1 Оҳ 1 , C 2 + D 2 Оҳ 2 } .

Definition 3.5. System [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ] is said to be L 2 -stabilizable if there are (deterministic matrix functions) Оҳ 1 , Оҳ 2 : MвҶ’ R m Г— n such that system { A 1 + B 1 Оҳ 1 , A 2 + B 2 Оҳ 2 , C 1 + D 1 Оҳ 1 , C 2 + D 2 Оҳ 2 } is L 2 -integrable. In this case, (Оҳ 1 , Оҳ 2 ) is called an L 2 -stabilizer of [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ]. We denote the set of all such stabilizers by S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ].

Definition 3.6. The maps (Оҳ 1 , Оҳ 2 ) : M вҶҰвҶ’ R m Г— n Г— R m Г— n is said to be a (uniform) L 2 -dissipative strategy of system [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ] if there exist P 1 , P 2 : MвҶҰвҶ’ S n ++ such that, for any пҡҫ вҲҲ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Proposition 3.3, the following proposition is immediate.

Proposition 3.7. Under (A1) , the following are equivalent:

- (i) (Оҳ 1 , Оҳ 2 ) is an L 2 -stabilizer of system [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ] .
- (ii) (Оҳ 1 , Оҳ 2 ) is an L 2 -dissipative strategy of system [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ] .

The following is an example which shows that if the Markov chain has infinite-many states, then the above (i) does not imply (ii).

Example 3.8. Let the probability space have the decomposition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let M = { 1 , 2 , 3 , В· В· В· } , and consider an infinite state Markov chain Оұ : в„Ұ вҶ’M with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We look at one-dimensional differential equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

Then with u ( В· ) = 0,

Thus

That is, 0 is an L 2 -stabilizer. However, (3.10) cannot be true for any Оө &gt; 0, which implies that 0 is not an L 2 -dissipative strategy.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that similar to Example 3.4, system [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ] is L 2 -stabilizable does not mean that for all Дұ вҲҲ M , the following system is L 2 -stabilizable:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now introduce the following hypotheses.

- (A4) S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ] = вҲ… .

Мё

- (A4) вҖІ (0 , 0) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ], i.e., system [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is L 2 -exponentially stable.

It is obvious that the condition (A4) вҖІ is stronger than (A4) . Now, we consider state equation (2.8) with [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] being L 2 -exponentially stable. It is known that in this case, the homogeneous equation has a solution in L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ). The following proposition says that this is true for nonhomogeneous systems.

Proposition 3.9. Under (A4) вҖІ , for any ( s, Дұ, Оҫ 1 , Оҫ 2 , u 1 ( В· ) , u 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ D Г— U [ s, вҲһ ) , (2.8) admits a unique solution ( X 1 ( В· ) , X 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ) .

Proof. We notice the existence of a solution ( X 1 ( В· ) , X 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ ( s, T ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F Оұ ( s, T ; R n ) to SDE (2.8) for any T &gt; 0 is trivial because of the linear structure. Now let us verify ( X 1 ( В· ) , X 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ). Under (A4) вҖІ , system { A 1 , A 2 , C 1 , C 2 } is L 2 -exponentially stable. Thus, we have P 1 , P 2 :

MвҶҰвҶ’ S n ++ satisfy (3.8). Applying Ito's formula to t вҶҰвҶ’ 2 вҲ‘ k =1 гҖҲ P k ( Оұ ( t )) X k ( t ) , X k ( t ) гҖү , it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the above inequality, we have used the fact that the system is exponentially stable. Then Gronwall's inequality yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that P k ( В· ) вҲҲ S n ++ , k = 1 , 2, it follows that ( X 1 ( В· ) , X 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ).

From the above proposition, we see that under (A4) , one clearly has

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, under (A1) -(A4) , Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ is meaningful.

## 4 Some Notions for Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ

In this section, we introduce some relevant notions for Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ . First of all, the following definition is necessary.

Мё

Definition 4.1. Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ is said to be fi nite at ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ) вҲҲ D if U ad [ s, вҲһ ) = вҲ… , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If the above is true for any ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ) вҲҲ D , we simply say that Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ is finite .

Note that it is not very interesting if Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ is finite at some ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ) вҲҲ D with U ad [ s, вҲһ ) being very small. We now present the following result.

Proposition 4.2. Let (A1) -(A2) hold. Let Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ be finite at some ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ) вҲҲ D . Then U ad [ s, вҲһ ) is a subspace of U [ s, вҲһ ) , J вҲһ ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ; 0) is finite, and u ( В· ) вҶҰвҶ’ J вҲһ ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ; u ( В· )) is convex on U ad [ s, вҲһ ) .

Proof. Let ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ) вҲҲ D such that (4.1) holds. Since the state equation is linear, we must have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, L 0 , etc. are ( s, Дұ )-dependent linear operators with proper domains and ranges. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the above, M 2 is a linear operator from U ad [ s, вҲһ ) into itself, only depending on ( s, Дұ ), M 1 вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ) is linear in its arguments and depends on ( s, Дұ ). Then we obtain that for any ОІ вҲҲ R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, J вҲһ ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ; 0) is finite. Further, when u ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ), one has ОІu ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ), for any ОІ вҲҲ R . This together with the above implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which gives the convexity of u ( В· ) вҶҰвҶ’ J вҲһ ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ; u ( В· )) on U ad [ s, вҲһ ). Now, by (4.4), we see that for u ( В· ) , v ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ), one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, U ad [ s, вҲһ ) is a subspace of U [ s, вҲһ ).

Further, we have the following result if some additional condition holds.

Proposition 4.3. Let (A1) -(A3) hold. Then the following hold:

- (i) u ( В· ) вҶҰвҶ’ J ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ; u ( В· )) is non-negative on U [ s, вҲһ ) , which implies Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ to be finite.
- (ii) u ( В· ) вҶҰвҶ’ J ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ; u ( В· )) is uniformly convex on U ad [ s, вҲһ ) , which implies the following: For given ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ) вҲҲ D , open-loop optimal control ВҜ u ( В· ) uniquely exists and it is characterized by the unique solution of the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. (i) is trivial. (ii) The unform convexity of u ( В· ) вҶҰвҶ’ J ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ; u ( В· )) can be proved similar to [30], p.37, Proposition 2.5.1. Then, by [30], p.7, Proposition 1.3.1, we get the implication.

Next, we assume (A4) holds. Picking any (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ], and v ( В· ) вүЎ v 1 ( В· ) вҠ• v 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ U [ s, вҲһ ), we call them a closed-loop strategy . Take

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is called the outcome of (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· ) , v 1 ( В· ) , v 2 ( В· )), where X ( В· ) вүЎ X 1 ( В· ) вҠ• X 2 ( В· ) is the state process corresponding to the control u ( В· ) = u 1 ( В· ) вҠ• u 2 ( В· ). Any such a form control is called a closed-loop control . Under such a control, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 4.4. A strategy (Оҳ вҲ— 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ вҲ— 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ] and ( v вҲ— 1 ( В· ) , v вҲ— 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ U [ s, вҲһ ) is said be closed-loop optimal at ( s, Дұ ) if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ], ( v 1 ( В· ) , v 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ U [ s, вҲһ ) and Оҫ вүЎ ( Оҫ 1 , Оҫ 2 ) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ s (в„Ұ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F Оұ s (в„Ұ; R n ). When this happens, we say that Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ is closed-loop solvable at ( s, Дұ ).

Note that (4.8) is required to hold for all Оҫ . In the above case, (Оҳ вҲ— 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ вҲ— 2 ( В· ) , v вҲ— 1 ( В· ) , v вҲ— 2 ( В· )) (which is called a closed-loop optimal strategy ) is optimal in the class of closed-loop strategies. Now, if (Оҳ вҲ— 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ вҲ— 2 ( В· ) , v вҲ— 1 ( В· ) , v вҲ— 2 ( В· )) is a closed-loop optimal, with X вҲ— ( В· ) = X вҲ— 1 ( В· ) вҠ• X вҲ— 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F ( s, вҲһ ; R n ) being the corresponding closed-loop optimal state process, then we may write (4.7) as (suppressing Оұ ( В· ))

Hence, by taking

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we have u вҲ— 1 ( В· ) вҠ• u вҲ— 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ). Likewise, for any u 1 ( В· ) вҠ• u 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ), with X ( В· ) = X 1 ( В· ) вҠ• X 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F ( s, вҲһ ; R n ) being the corresponding state process, we may write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, ( u вҲ— 1 ( В· ) , u вҲ— 2 ( В· )) is open-loop optimal. This means that if Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ is closed-loop solvable, then it is open-loop solvable.

Now, let us assume (A4), and let (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ]. Then, under the control (4.6), we have state equation (4.7) and the cost functional J вҲһ ( s, Дұ, Оҫ 1 , Оҫ 2 ; u Оҳ 1 ,v 1 1 ( В· ) , u Оҳ 2 ,v 2 2 ( В· )). The corresponding LQ problem is denoted by Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ , вҲ— . The following result will be useful below in deriving a characterization of open-loop solvability of Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ .

Proposition 4.5. Let (A1) -(A4) hold and (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ] . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We first prove (4.11). Let u ( В· ) = u 1 ( В· ) вҠ• u 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ). Since (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ], for any u 1 ( В· ) вҠ• u 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ), we may write (2.8) as (4.9) replacing (Оҳ вҲ— 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ вҲ— 2 ( В· )) by (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· )). Then X ( В· ) is the state process under strategy (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· ) , v 1 ( В· ) , v 2 ( В· )). This means the left-hand side of (4.11) is in the right-hand side. Conversely, for any v 1 ( В· ) вҠ• v 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ U [ s, вҲһ ), let X ( В· ) be the state process under (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· ) , v 1 ( В· ) , v 2 ( В· )). Then we write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ], the above system is L 2 -exponentially stable. Thus, X ( В· ) = X 1 ( В· ) вҠ• X 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F ( s, вҲһ ; R n ). Then the right-hand side of (4.11) is in the left-hand side. Therefore, we have the equality.

Now, by a similar argument, we are able to show the equivalence of the open-loop solvability of Problems (MF-LQ) вҲһ and (MF-LQ) вҲһ , вҲ— .

## 5 Closed-Loop Solvability

With all the above preparation, we are ready to state the main result of this paper concerning the closed-loop solvability of Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ .

Theorem 5.1. Suppose (A1) -(A4) hold. Then we have the following conclusions:

- (i) There exists a unique solution P 1 , P 2 : MвҶ’ S n ++ to the following ARE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (ii) There exists a unique adapted solution ( Y 1 ( В· ) , Z ( В· ) , Z M 1 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) Г— M 2 F Оұ -(0 , вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ and ( Y 2 ( В· ) , Z M 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) Г— M 2 F Оұ -(0 , вҲһ ; R n ) to the following BSDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here A Оҳ i i = A i + B i Оҳ i and C Оҳ i i = C i + D i Оҳ i .

- (iii) The 4-tuple (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· ) , v 1 ( В· ) , v ( В· )) is the closed-loop optimal strategy of Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, the following outcome

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is the optimal open-loop optimal control.

The above theorem will be proved in the following three subsections. First, we will present the derivation of the ARE (5.1) and BSDE (5.2) through completing the squares. It can also be seen that if both of the two equations admit some required solutions as stated in (i) and (ii), then (ВҜ u 1 ( В· ) , ВҜ u 2 ( В· )) in (iii) is the unique optimal control. Then we complete the proof by establishing the well-posedness of (5.1) and (5.2).

## 5.1 Completing the Squares

The purpose of this section is to approach Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ by a classical method - completing the squares. In what follows, we suppress Оұ ( В· ) and t . First of all, for any P 1 , P 2 : MвҶ’ S n ++ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

In the above, the cross terms are zero, for example,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, let ( Y ( В· ) , Z ( В· ) , Z M ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F ( s, вҲһ ; R n ) Г— L 2 F ( s, вҲһ ; R n ) Г— L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ) be the unique adapted solution of the following BSDE:

with О“( В· ) being undetermined. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying О  2 to the above BSDE, and set Y 1 ( В· ), Z M 1 ( В· ) and О“ 1 ( В· ), etc. as above, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then

and

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume that as T вҶ’вҲһ , the above limits exist, in particular, X k ( T ) вҶ’ 0 and Y k ( T ) is bounded. Then for the terms in L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since P 1 ( В· ) вҲҲ S n ++ , we have R 1 ( В· ) вҲҲ S m ++ . The terms involving X 2 become

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where (compare with (5.5))

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to the above, we also have R 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ S m ++ . Hence, in this case, one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, suppose we are able to do the following:

- The ARE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

admits a unique stabilizing solution P k ( Дұ ), Дұ вҲҲ M , k = 1 , 2, meaning that by defining Оҳ k ( В· ) as in (5.5)-(5.6), one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This will make the quadratic terms of X 1 ( В· ) and X 2 ( В· ) in the completing-squares form of cost functional vanish.

- The following BSDE admits an adapted solution ( Y 1 ( В· ) , Y 2 ( В· ) , Z ( В· ) , Z M 1 ( В· ) , Z M 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) Г— L 2 F (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) Г— L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This will make the weighting matrices of the linear terms of X 1 ( В· ) and X 2 ( В· ) in the completing-squares form of cost functional to be well-defined, and vanish. Note that if the ARE and the above BSDEs have the feature that the (closed-loop) system { A Оҳ 1 1 , A Оҳ 2 2 , C Оҳ 1 1 , C Оҳ 2 2 } is L 2 -exponentially stable. Thus, as far as the well-posedness of BSDEs (5.2) is concerned, it is equivalent to assume that the system [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is already L 2 -exponentially stable, namely (A4) вҖІ holds. Hence, in the following subsections, we will assume (A4) вҖІ for convenience.

- One could choose

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This, together with others, will make the cost functional minimal.

In the above case, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the above, we can see that (ВҜ u 1 ( В· ) , ВҜ u 2 ( В· )) is the unique optimal control Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ if the wellposedness of the ARE (5.1) and BSDE (5.2) holds. The detailed proof will be presented in the next two sections, respectively.

## 5.2 Solvability of AREs

In this subsection, we will establish the solvability of the ARE (5.1), under proper conditions. The main idea is to consider the corresponding homogeneous LQ problem in finite time horizon [0 , T ], denoted by Problem (MF-LQ) T 0 . Under (A1) -(A3) , by [21], Problem (MF-LQ) T 0 is closed-loop solvable so that the corresponding differential Riccati equation admits a solution P T k ( t, Дұ ) and then let T вҶ’ вҲһ to get the limit P вҲһ k ( Дұ ) which will be the proper solution to the ARE (5.1), under (A4) . Now, let us make the above precisely.

Theorem 5.2. Let (A1) -(A4) hold. Then, the ARE (5.1) admits a unique solution ( Лң P 1 ( Дұ ) , Лң P 2 ( Дұ )) , Дұ вҲҲ M , so that ( Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ] , where

Proof. First of all, we recall

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and for T &gt; 0 large, we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( X 0 1 ( В· ) , X 0 2 ( В· )) = ( X 0 1 ( В· ; s, Дұ, Оҫ 1 , u 1 , u 2 ) , X 0 2 ( В· ; s, Дұ, Оҫ 2 , u 2 )) is the solution of (2.12). By (A3) , similar to [30], p.37, Proposition 2.5.1, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

for some Оҙ &gt; 0. Hence, there exists Лң P k : MвҶҰвҶ’ S n ++ and Лң P T k : [0 , T ] Г—MвҶ’ S n ++ such that

Moreover, the following Bellman principle of optimality holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now let P T k ( t ) = Лң P T k ( t, Оұ ( t )). Similar to [21], for k = 1 , 2 , P T k ( В· ) solves the following backward stochastic Riccati equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Letting T вҶ’вҲһ and then Оө вҶ’ 0, we have

Moreover, for any ( u 1 ( В· ) , u 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ U [ s, T ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, for any ( s, Дұ, Оҫ 1 , Оҫ 2 ) вҲҲ D ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We notice that lim T вҶ’вҲһ Лң P T k ( t, Дұ ) is independent of t for any finite t в©ҫ s . Therefore

Because P T k ( t ) is decreasing in T , taking T вҶ’вҲһ in (5.12), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now let us verify ( Лң Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Лң Оҳ 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ]. Suppose that ( Лң X 1 ( В· ) , Лң X 2 ( В· ) , Лң u 1 ( В· ) , Лң u 2 ( В· )) is the optimal pair of Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ 0 . ItЛҶ o's formula yields that

with Оұ ( s ) = О№ is a martingale. The ItЛҶ o's formula on Лң P k ( Оұ ( t )), together the arbitrariness of О№ , yields that Лң P k is the solution to (5.1).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (5.1), long but straightforward calculation yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This says that the optimal control u k ( В· ) = Оҳ k ( Оұ ( В· )) X k ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ), i.e. ( X 1 ( В· ) , X 2 ( В· )) solves the following

Because ( Лң X 1 ( В· ) , Лң X 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F Оұ ( s, вҲһ ; R n ), it follows that ( Лң Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Лң Оҳ 2 ( В· )) is a stabilizer i.e., ( Лң Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Лң Оҳ 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ]. If ( P 1 , P 2 ) is the solution of (5.1), we can actully conclude that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The equality holds when Лң u i ( В· ) = Лң Оҳ k ( Оұ ( В· )) X k ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ). Therefore

which implies the uniqueness directly.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 5.3 BSDE in Infinite Horizon

In this section, we are going to study the well-posedness of BSDE (5.2) in an infinite horizon, with the coefficients depending on the Markov chain. Such a result can be concluded from the following theorem directly.

Theorem 5.3. Under (A1) -(A4) , for any ( П• 1 ( В· ) , П• 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) , the following system of BSDEs on [0 , вҲһ ) admits a unique adapted solution ( Y 1 ( В· ) , Z ( В· ) , Z M 1 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) Г— M 2 F Оұ -(0 , вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ and ( Y 2 ( В· ) , Z M 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) Г— M 2 F Оұ -(0 , вҲһ ; R n ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To illustrate the non-triviality of the above result, let us recall the classical situation. The following is found in [30].

Proposition 5.4. Let [ A,C ] be L 2 -stable, i.e., there exists a P вҲҲ S n ++ such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then for any П• ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F W (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) , the following BSDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

admits a unique adapted solution ( Y ( В· ) , Z ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F W (в„Ұ; C ([0 , вҲһ ); R n )) Г— L 2 F W (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) , and the following holds:

From the above result, we see that if the following are L 2 -exponentially stable for all Дұ вҲҲ M :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then similar to [30], we are able to get the unique solvability of (5.14). However, we have indicated in Section 3 that the L 2 -exponentially stabilizability of system [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ] does not imply that of (5.16). Thus, we need to find a new approach.

Note that BSDE (5.14) is associated with system (4.7) which is L 2 -exponentially stable if we take (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ]. Thus, to investigate the solvability of BSDE (5.14), it suffices to assume the original system [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is L 2 -exponential stable. Hence, we only need to consider the solvability of the following BSDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Theorem 5.3. First of all, as we pointed out in Section 5.1, it suffices for us to look at the case that [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is L 2 -exponential stable, i.e., (A4) вҖІ holds. In what follows, we keep this assumption and let Оҳ 1 = Оҳ 2 = 0. The rest of the proof will be divided into several steps.

Step 1. Since [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is L 2 -exponential stable, we have P 1 , P 2 : MвҶ’ S n ++ such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Because each P k ( Дұ ) вҲҲ S n ++ , it admits a unique square root P k ( Дұ ) 1 2 вҲҲ S n ++ . From (2.18), it can be seen that

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with E i ( Дұ, пҡҫ ) = P k ( пҡҫ ) 1 2 -P k ( Дұ ) 1 2 вҲҲ S n . Suppose that ( X 0 1 ( В· ) , X 0 2 ( В· )) is the solution of (2.15), with s = 0. By (5.18), ItЛҶ o's formula and Gronwall's inequality together yield that for some Оө &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which leads to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that гҖҲ P k ( Оұ ( t )) X 0 k ( t ) , X 0 k ( t ) гҖү = | Лң X k ( t ) | 2 and

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

Step 2. Suppose the following BSDE on [0 , вҲһ ) admits a unique adapted solution ( Лң Y 1 ( В· ) , Лң Z ( В· ) , Лң Z M 1 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ Г— L 2 F (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) Г— M 2 F Оұ -(0 , вҲһ ; R n ) вҠҘ and ( Лң Y 2 ( В· ) , Лң Z M 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 F Оұ (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) Г— M 2 F Оұ -(0 , вҲһ ; R n ):

Then (5.19) leads to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

where Лң П• k ( t ) = P k ( Оұ ( t )) -1 2 П• k ( t ). Then, by letting Y k ( t ) = P k ( Оұ ( t )) 1 2 Лң Y k ( t ), using ItЛҶ o's formula, we have

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

where Z ( t ) = P 1 ( Оұ ( t )) вҠӨ Лң Z ( t ) and Z M 1 ( t, пҡҫ ) = E 1 ( Оұ ( t -) , пҡҫ ) Лң Z M 1 ( t, пҡҫ )+ P 1 ( Оұ ( t -)) 1 2 Лң Z M 1 ( t, пҡҫ ) -E 1 ( Оұ ( t -) , пҡҫ ) Лң Y 1 ( t -). Here we have used the symmetricity of E k ( Дұ, пҡҫ ). Similarly one can derive that

Therefore we have constructed the required solution to (5.17). We also can see that Y k ( t ) and Лң Y k ( t ) have one-to-one correspondence and therefore Y k ( В· ) is uniquely determined. The last limits are clear.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

Мё

Мё

Мё

Мё

Мё

Step 3. Now it suffices to prove that (5.22) has an adapted solution. The proof is split into several substeps.

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

where we used (5.21) in the last step.

Substep 2. Consider the following BSDE on [0 , T ) for finite T &gt; 0:

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

It is a linear BSDE (with mean-field term) on a finite horizon. Due to the orthogonal structure, it admits a unique solution such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying ItЛҶ o's formula to вҲ‘ 2 i =1 | Лң Y i ( t ; T ) | 2 , similar to (5.23), one has

Мё

Then Gronwall's inequality yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

Мё

for some Оө &gt; 0 where K is an uniform constant. Using (5.23), we have, for 0 в©Ҫ t в©Ҫ T ,

Мё

Substep 3. We now let T вҶ’вҲһ . By (5.26) and (5.27), Gronwall's inequality yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This concludes that Лң Y i ( t ; T ) is a Cauchy sequence in L 2 F t as T вҶ’вҲһ with a limit Лң Y i ( t ) for each finite t вҲҲ [0 , вҲһ ) . The above estimate also yields that Лң Y i ( В· ; T ) converges to Лң Y i ( В· ) in L 2 F (0 , T 1 ; R n ) for any finite T 1 &gt; 0. We also notice that lim t вҶ’вҲһ E | Лң Y i ( t ) | 2 = 0 from (5.26) and Лң Y i ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F (0 , вҲһ ; R n ) because

where we used (5.26) in the first inequality. From (5.27), we see that Лң Z ( В· ; T ), Лң Z M 1 ( В· ; T ) and Лң Z M 2 ( В· ; T ) is a Cauchy sequence in L 2 F (0 , T 1 ; R n ), M 2 F Оұ (0 , T 1 ; R n ) вҠҘ and M 2 F Оұ (0 , T 1 ; R n ) respectively, for any T 1 &gt; 0 . Taking T вҶ’вҲһ in (5.24), we have

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

for any t 2 &gt; t 1 в©ҫ 0. This says we have solved the BSDE (5.24) on [0 , T ) for any T &gt; 0. Moreover, we see that Лң Z ( В· ) and Лң Z M ( В· ) are L 2 -integrable on [0 , вҲһ ) from (5.25). Finally, the uniqueness can be concluded from (5.23) directly. The proof is complete.

## 6 Open-Loop Solvability

This section is concerned with the open-loop solvability of Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ based on the solvability of the BSDE (5.2). First of all, under (A4) , by taking (Оҳ 1 ( В· ) , Оҳ 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ S [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ; B, ВҜ B,D, ВҜ D ], we may formulate Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ , вҲ— whose open-loop solvability is equivalent to that of Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ . Thus to investigate the open-loop solvability of Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ , we need only to consider the case that (A4) вҖІ holds. Hence, in what follows, we will keep this assumption, without loss of generality. We now state and prove the following theorem.

Theorem 6.1. Let (A1) -(A3) and (A4) вҖІ hold. Then ( ВҜ X ( В· ) , ВҜ u ( В· )) is an open-loop optimal pair at ( s, Дұ, Оҫ ) вҲҲ D if and only if for some adapted and square integrable ( Y ( В· ) , Z ( В· ) , Z M ( В· )) , the following FBSDE holds

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the following stationarity conditions hold

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The above is a coupled FBSDEs, with the coupling being through the stationarity conditions (6.2) .

Proof. From Proposition 4.3, we know that it suffices to prove the necessary part. Let ВҜ u ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ) be an open-loop optimal control with the corresponding state process ВҜ X ( В· ). Then by its optimality, for any u ( В· ) вҲҲ U ad [ s, вҲһ ) with X ( В· ) being the corresponding state process, one has (see (2.10), suppressing Оұ ( В· ))

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since system [ A, ВҜ A,C, ВҜ C ] is L 2 -exponentially stable, by Theorem 5.3, we see that the BSDEs in (6.1) are solvable. Now, by ItЛҶ o's formula, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence,

Let T вҶ’вҲһ , we get

Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the arbitrariness of u k ( В· ), our conclusion follows.

## 7 Concluding Remarks

In the paper, we have studied the linear quadratic optimal control problems in infinite-horizon for mean-field stochastic differential equations in a switching environment, called Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ . To deal with the mean-field terms involved, an orthogonal projection introduced in [21] is adopted which leads to a new linear optimal control problem on the product of two orthogonal spaces. Under some general assumptions, we find the closed-loop optimal strategy by means of AREs and a system of BSDEs. The solvability of the BSDEs also leads to the characterization of open-loop solvability of Problem (MF-LQ) вҲһ in terms of FBSDEs. The authors admit that the positive-definite conditions have been assumed, for the presentation of the current paper. We will report results without assuming these positive-definite conditions before long.

## References

- [1] B. O. D Anderson and J. B. Moore, Linear Optimal Control, Prentice-Hall Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1971.
- [2] R. Bellman, I. Glicksberg, and O. Gross, Some Aspects of the Mathematical Theory of Control Processes, Rand Corporation, Santa Monica, California, 1958.
- [3] A. Bensoussan, Lecture on Stochastic Control, Lecture Notes in Math. Vol. 972, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1981.
- [4] P. Bernhard, Linear-quadratic, two-person, zero-sum differential games: necessary and sufficient conditions, J. Optim. Theory Appl., 27 (1979), 51-69.
- [5] S. Chen, X. Li and X. Y. Zhou, Stochastic linear quadratic regulators with indefinite weight costs, SIAM J. Control Optim., 36 (1998), 1695-1702.

- [6] S. Chen and J. Yong, Stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems with random coefficients, Chin. Ann. Math., 21 B (2000), 323-338.
- [7] S. Chen and J. Yong, Stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems, Appl. Math. Optim., 43 (2001), 21-45.
- [8] M. H. A. Davis, Linear Estimation and Stochastic Control, Chapman &amp; Hall, London, 1977.
- [9] M. C. Delfour, Linear quadratic differential games: saddle point and Riccati differential equations, SIAM J. Control Optim., 46 (2007), 750-774.
- [10] M. C. Delfour and O. D. Sbarba, Linear quadratic differential games: closed loop saddle points, SIAM J. Control Optim., 47 (2009), 3138-3166.
- [11] C. Donnelly and A. J. Heunis, Quadratic risk minimization in regime0switching model wit portfolio constraints, SIAM J. Control Optim., 50 (2012), 2431-2461.
- [12] J. Huang, X. Li, and J. Yong, A linear-quadratic optimal control problem for mean-field stochastic differential equations in infinite horizon, Math. Control Relat. Fields, 5 (2015), 97-139.
- [13] R. E. Kalman, Contributions to the theory of optimal control, Bol. Soc. Mat. Mexicana, 5 (1960), 102-119.
- [14] H. J. Kushner, Optimal stochastic control, IRE Trans. Auto. Control, 7 (1962), 120-122.
- [15] E. B. Lee and L. Markus, Foundations of Optimal Control Theory, John Wiley, New York, 1967.
- [16] A. M. Letov, Analytic design of regulators, Avtomat. i Telemekh., 21 (1960), 436-441; 561-568; 661-665; 22 (1961), 425-435; 23 (1962), 1405-1413 (in Russian).
- [17] X. Li, J. Shi, and J. Yong, Mean-field linear-quadratic stochastic differential games in an infinite horizon, ESAIM Control Optim. Calc. Var., 27 (2021), 81.
- [18] X. Li, J. Sun, and J. Yong, Mean-field stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems: closed-loop solvability, Probability, Uncertainty and Quantitative Risk, 1 (2016), 2.
- [19] Q. LВЁ u and T. Wang, Optimal feedback controls of stochastic linear quadratic control problems in infinite dimensions with random coefficients, J. Math. Pures Appl., 173 (2023), 195-242.
- [20] P. J. McLane, Optimal stochastic control of linear systems with state- and control-dependent disturbances, IEEE Trans. Auto. Control, 16 (1971), 793-798.
- [21] H. Mei, Q. Wei, and J. Yong, Linear-quadratic optimal control problem for mean-field stochastic differential equations with a type of random coefficients, Numer. Algebra, Control Optim., 14 (2024), 813-852.
- [22] H. Pham, Linear quadratic optimal control of conditional McKean-Vlasov equation with random coefficients and applications, Probab. Uncertain Quantstive Risk, 1 (2016), 7.
- [23] L. R. G. Rogers and D. Williams, Diffusions, Markov Processes and Martingales, Vol.2, 2nd ed., Cambridge Univ., Press, 2000.
- [24] E. J. RolВҙ on GutiВҙ errez, S. L. Nguyen, and G. Yin, Markovian-switching systems: backward and forwardbackward stochastic differential equations, mean-field interactions, and nonzero-sum differential games, Appl. Math. Optim., 89 (2024), 33.
- [25] J. Sun, Mean-field stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems: open-loop solvabilities, ESAIM Control Optim. Calc. Var., 23 (2017), 1099-1127.
- [26] J. Sun, X. Li, and J. Yong. Open-loop and closed-loop solvabilities for stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems, SIAM J. Control Optim., 54 (2016), 2274-2308.

- [27] J. Sun, J. Xiong, and J. Yong, Indefinite stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems with random coefficients: closed-loop representation of open-loop optimal controls. The Annals of Applied Probability, 31 (2021), 460-499.
- [28] J. Sun and J. Yong, Linear quadratic stochastic differential games: Open-loop and closed-loop saddle points, SIAM J. Control Optim., 52 (2014), 4082-4121.
- [29] J. Sun and J. Yong, Stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems in infinite horizon, Appl. Math. Optim., 78 (2018), 145-183,
- [30] J. Sun and J. Yong, Stochastic Linear-Quadratic Optimal Control Theory: Open-Loop and Closed-Loop Solutions, Springer Brief in Math., Springer, 2020.
- [31] J. Sun and J. Yong, Stochastic Linear-Quadratic Optimal Control Theory: Differential Games and Mean-Field Problems, SpringerBrief in Math., Springer, 2020.
- [32] S. Tang, General linear quadratic optimal stochastic control problems with random coefficients: Linear stochastic Hamilton systems and backward stochastic Riccati equations, SIAM J. Control Optim., 42 (2003), 53-75.
- [33] S. Tang, Dynamic programming for general linear quadratic optimal stochastic control with random coefficients, SIAM J. Control Optim., 53 (2015), 1082-1106.
- [34] Q. Wei, J. Yong, and Z. Yu, Linear quadratic optimal control problems with operator coefficients: openloop solutions, ESAIM COCV, 25 (2019). 17.
- [35] J. Wen, X. Li, J. Xiong, X. Zhang, Stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems with random coefficients and Markovian regime switching system, arXiv:2202.04880.
- [36] J. C. Willems, Least squares stationary optimal control and the algebraic Riccati equation, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 16 (1971), 621-634.
- [37] W. M. Wonham, On a matrix Riccati equation of stochastic control, SIAM J. Control, 6 (1968), 681-697.
- [38] W. M. Wonham, Linear Multivariable Control: A Geometric Approach, 2nd Edition, Springer-Verlag, 1979.
- [39] J. Yong, Linear-quadratic optimal control problems for mean-field stochastic differential equations, SIAM J. Control Optim., 51(2013), 2809-2838.
- [40] P. Zhang, Some results on two-person zero-sum linear quadratic differential games, SIAM J. Control Optim., 43 (2005), 2157-2165.
- [41] X. Zhang, X. Li, and J. Xiong, Open-loop and closed-loop solvabilities for stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems of Markovian regime-switching system, ESAIM: COCV, 27 (2021), 69.