## First- and Half-order Schemes for Regime Switching Stochastic Differential Equation with Non-differentiable Drift Coefficient

Divyanshu Vashistha, Chaman Kumar ∗

Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Haridwar, 247667, India

## Abstract

An explicit first-order drift-randomized Milstein scheme for a regime switching stochastic differential equation is proposed and its bi-stability and rate of strong convergence are investigated for a non-differentiable drift coefficient. Precisely, drift is Lipschitz continuous while diffusion along with its derivative is Lipschitz continuous. Further, we explore the significance of evaluating Brownian trajectories at every switching time of the underlying Markov chain in achieving the convergence rate 1 . 0 of the proposed scheme. In this context, possible variants of the scheme, namely modified randomized and reduced randomized schemes, are considered and their convergence rates are shown to be 1 / 2. Numerical experiments are performed to illustrate the convergence rates of these schemes along with their corresponding non-randomized versions. Further, it is illustrated that the half-order non-randomized reduced and modified schemes outperforms the classical Euler scheme.

Keywords: Randomized Milstein scheme, SDEs with Markovian switching, Bi-stability, First- and Half-order schemes, Rate of Convergence.

2020 MSC: 60H35, 65L20, 60H10, 65C30, 60J60.

## 1. Introduction

̸

Let ( ˜ Ω , ˜ F , ˜ P ) be a complete probability space. Consider a ˜ d -dimensional standard Brownian motion B := { B ( t ) } t ≥ 0 with natural filtration ˜ F B := { ˜ F B t } t ≥ 0 . Further, assume that r := { r ( t ) } t ≥ 0 is a Markov chain with finite state space S := { 1 , . . . , m ′ } and generator Q := ( q j 0 k 0 ) j 0 ,k 0 ∈ S where q j 0 k 0 ≥ 0 for j 0 = k 0 and q j 0 j 0 = -∑ k 0 = j 0 q j 0 k 0 which implies that the transition probability matrix of r is given by,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any t ≥ 0, j 0 , k 0 ∈ S and ∆ &gt; 0. The natural filtration of r is denoted by ˜ F r := { ˜ F r t } t ≥ 0 . Also, consider an ˜ F B 0 -measurable random variable X 0 and assume that r , B and X 0 are independent. Define ˜ F := { ˜ F t } t ≥ 0 where ˜ F t := ˜ F B t ∨ ˜ F r t for t ≥ 0. For a fixed T &gt; 0, let b : [0 , T ] × R d × S ↦→ R d and σ : [0 , T ] × R d × S ↦→ R d × ˜ d be Borel measurable functions.

Consider the following d -dimensional regime switching stochastic differential equation, also referred to as stochastic differential equation with Markovian switching (SDEwMS),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∗ Corresponding author

Email addresses: dvashistha@ma.iitr.ac.in (Divyanshu Vashistha), chaman.kumar@ma.iitr.ac.in (Chaman Kumar)

̸

almost surely for any t ∈ [0 , T ] with initial values X (0) = X 0 and r (0) = i 0 ∈ S . Define X := { X ( t ) } t ≥ 0 .

In comparison to the standard SDE, SDEwMS contains a Markov chain r in its coefficients where each state of r signifies a regime and in each regime, one solves an SDE. For example, the hybrid geometric Brownian motion governed by the following equation,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with initial values ˜ S (0) = ˜ S 0 and r (0) = i 0 ∈ S , where µ and σ denote the return and the volatility of the stock price which vary with the state of the Markov chain r , see [29, Chapter 10] and [46, Chapter 11]. In other words, the varying return (interest rate) in different regimes are captured by different states of r by introducing the Markov chain in the coefficients of the SDE. Let us consider another example namely, the mean-reverting process with Markovian switching, used for modeling stochastic volatility or asset price or interest rate, is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with initial values ˜ S (0) = ˜ S 0 &gt; 0 and r (0) = i 0 ∈ S where λ ( i ) , µ ( i ) and σ ( i ) are positive constants for i ∈ S , see [29, Chapter 10]. The work presented in this manuscript covers both the examples as given above. Thus, SDEwMS is considered to be a more appropriate method of modelling such complex systems. For a detailed exposition of SDEswMS and their applications, we refer the interested reader to [29, 46] and the references therein. It is worth mentioning that SDEwMS reduce to a standard SDE when the state space S of the chain r is a singleton set. An exposition on SDEs and their numerical approximation can be found in [16] and [31]. Further, tamed schemes for SDE with super-linear coefficients are developed in [9, 10], see also [1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20, 21, 26, 27, 28, 33, 41, 42, 43] and the references therein.

Similar to the case of SDEs, explicit solutions of SDEwMS are often either unavailable or tedious to find. Thus, the development of efficient numerical schemes becomes crucial for obtaining their approximate solutions. The Euler scheme with a half rate of strong convergence has been studied in [5, 24, 30, 34, 36, 37, 47] and the references therein. For the first and higher-order schemes, the classical technique of applying Itˆ o's formula on the coefficients, used in the context of standard SDEs, does not work here as there is no notion of derivative of a Markov chain dependent function. Moreover, the mixing of discontinuity of the Markov chain r with the continuous dynamics of the solution process X pose additional difficulties. These challenges have been resolved in [35, Lemma 2.2] by developing an Itˆ o's formula for SDEwMS with the help of a martingale associated with the chain r . This martingale captures the number of switchings of r in a given interval. Furthermore, a Milstein-type scheme for SDEwMS is developed with the help of this new Itˆ o's formula and its rate of strong convergence is shown to be 1 . 0 under the Lipschitz continuous coefficients. In comparison with the Milstein scheme for standard SDEs, the first-order scheme of SDEwMS consists of an additional term which involves the Brownian increments { B ℓ ( t j ) -B ℓ ( τ j -1 1 ) } ℓ ∈{ 1 ,..., ˜ d } where 0 = t 0 &lt; t 1 &lt; · · · &lt; t n h = T is a partition of the interval [0 , T ] and τ j -1 1 is the first switching time of the chain r in the time interval ( t j -1 , t j ] for j ∈ 1 , . . . , n h , see also Equation (6) below. The Milstein-type schemes for SDEwMS are further investigated in [22, 23] without assuming second-order derivatives on the drift and diffusion coefficients. Further, a stochastic Itˆ o-Taylor expansion for SDEwMS and its application in developing and analysing general order scheme is investigated in [25]. In [44], authors extend the results of [35] to SDEwMS driven by L´ evy noise by proving an Itˆ o's formula which is then used to derive and study the first order Milstein-type scheme under the assumptions that coefficients and their derivatives satisfy Lipschitz condition. Moreover, [15] explored adaptive numerical methods for SDEwMS. Unlike adaptive strategies that requires careful mesh refinement including the switching times of the Markov chain, the randomized Milstein scheme offers a simpler implementation while capturing the effects of regime-switching. Thus, the first-order schemes for SDEwMS available in the literature, assume coefficients to have at least first-order derivatives whereas randomized approach allows for non-differentiable drift coefficient.

In this manuscript, we develop an explicit first-order numerical scheme for SDEwMS, assuming that the drift coefficient satisfies the Lipschitz continuity but is not differentiable. To achieve this, we employ the drift randomization technique developed in [17] for standard SDEs and propose a randomized Milstein scheme for SDEwMS (see Equations (5) and (6) below). Indeed, the drift coefficient is fully randomized with respect to all the variables, including the Markov chain r . The diffusion coefficient and its derivatives are assumed to be Lipschitz continuous. The rate of strong convergence of the proposed scheme is shown to be 1 . 0 under the above set-up. Additionally, the mean-square error of the randomized Milstein scheme is numerically shown to be less than that of the Milstein scheme for SDEwMS of [35, Equation (4.20)] but at a higher computational cost (see Figure 1a,1b and Table 1). Thus, the randomized Milstein scheme can be used for drift coefficients that are non-differentiable yet Lipschitz continuous, while the classical Milstein scheme is preferable for suffieciently more regular drift coefficients, as developed in [23, 35].

Further, the above observations coincide with that of [17] when the state space of the Markov chain r is a singleton set. Moreover, if there is no randomization ( i.e. , when u j ≡ 0 for all j ∈ N in Equation (5)), the proposed scheme coincides with the Milstein scheme for SDEwMS developed in [35, Equation (4.20)]. There are other works on randomization such as [4, 11, 32, 39, 40] and the references therein, but they do not consider the regime switching SDEs. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first result on the first-order scheme for SDEwMS with Lipschitz continuous and non-differentiable drift coefficient.

Our Achievements: Below, we list the achievements of this manuscript.

- We propose a first-order randomized Milstein scheme for SDEwMS and establish its bi-stability (see Theorem 3.1) and rate of strong convergence (see Theorem 2.2) under a much weaker assumption on the drift coefficient as compared to the existing results (see Assumption 2.2). Precisely, the drift coefficient is Lipschitz continuous and non-differentiable. The diffusion coefficient along with its derivatives is Lipschitz continuous.
- It is worth mentioning that the Brownian trajectory on every switching time of the Markov chain r plays a pivotal role in recovering the rate 1 . 0 of mean-square convergence of the randomized Milstein scheme. To demonstrate this, we explore the possible variations of the proposed scheme by altering the key term associated with the Brownian increments { B ℓ ( t j ) -B ℓ ( τ j -1 1 ) } ℓ ∈{ 1 ,..., ˜ d } as mentioned below. ∗ In the first variation, referred as the modified randomized scheme in this manuscript, the original increment { B ℓ ( t j ) -B ℓ ( τ j -1 1 ) } ℓ ∈{ 1 ,..., ˜ d } is replaced by simple Brownian increments { B ℓ ( t j ) -B ℓ ( t j -1 ) ℓ ∈{ 1 ,..., ˜ d } for j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } .

The impact of these variations is on the rate of convergence which drops to 1 / 2 from 1 (see Theorems 2.3 and 2.4).

} ∗ The second variation, named as the reduced randomized scheme , is derived by completely removing the term involving { B ℓ ( t j ) -B ℓ ( τ j -1 1 ) } ℓ ∈{ 1 ,..., ˜ d } from the scheme.

- Having observed the rate 1 / 2 for the modified and reduced randomized schemes, it is natural to compare them with the half-order randomized Euler scheme as well as with the non-randomized versions of these schemes. The numerical studies indicate that the modified and reduced non-randomized schemes have less mean-squared error than that of the classical Euler schemes (see Figures 2a and Table 2). The modified and reduced randomized schemes has less mean-square error but at a higher computational cost (see Figures 2a,2b and Table 2). Thus, the classical Euler scheme should be used when drift and diffusion coefficients are Lipschitz continuous. On the other hand, the modified and reduced non-randomized schemes can be used when additionally the diffussion coefficient is assumed to be differentiable (see Examples 4.2 and 4.3).

The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows. In Section 2, assumptions under which we perform our analysis are stated along with the statements of the main results. Section 3 contains the proofs of all the essential lemmas and the main results. Finally, the outcomes of the numerical experiments are reported in Section 4.

## 1.1. General Notation

A l denotes the l -th element of A if it is a vector and the l -th column if it is a matrix. AB is matrix multiplication of two compatible matrices A and B . | · | is used for the Euclidean norm. L q (Ω) denotes the class of random variables having finite q -th moment. For a function f : [0 , T ] × R d × S → R d , D x f denotes the gradient of f with respect to the second variable. Moreover, BD A is indicator function of a set A . Throughout, E [ X ] signifies the expectation of a random variable X . Further, K stands for a generic positive constant with values varying from place to place.

## 2. Main Results

We make the following assumptions.

Assumption - 2.1. [ | X 0 | p ] &lt; ∞ for some p ≥ 2 .

BX Assumption - 2.2. There is a constant C &gt; 0 such that, for all t, s ∈ [0 , T ] , x, ¯ x ∈ R d and ı ∈ S ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assumption - 2.3. There is a constant C &gt; 0 such that, for all t, s ∈ [0 , T ] , x, ¯ x ∈ R d and ı ∈ S ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof of the theorem on existence and uniqueness of SDEwMS mentioned below is similar to [29, Theorem 3.23, 3.24].

Theorem 2.1. Let Assumptions 2.1 to 2.3 be satisfied. Then, there exists a unique strong solution X := { X ( t ) } t ∈ [0 ,T ] of SDEwMS (1) and for all ˜ p ∈ [0 , p ] , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## BX 2.1. Randomized Milstein Scheme

where K ( d, T, [ | X 0 | p ] , C ) is a positive constant.

In this section, we introduce an explicit Milstein scheme for SDEwMS (1) by adapting the randomization technique for standard SDEs developed in [17]. Here, the additional challenges of the intertwining of continuous dynamics of the solution process X of SDEwMS (1) with the discontinuous dynamics of the Markov chain r are tackled by introducing a martingale associated with r which follows from [35]. Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Moreover, consider a sequence

Consider a non-equidistant partition

almost surely for any j 0 , k 0 ∈ S , j 0 = k 0 , t ∈ [0 , T ]. Clearly, [ M j 0 k 0 ] := { [ M j 0 k 0 ]( t ) } t ≥ 0 is an optional process, 〈 M j 0 k 0 〉 := {〈 M j 0 k 0 〉 ( t ) } t ≥ 0 is a predictable process and M j 0 k 0 := { M j 0 k 0 ( t ) } t ≥ 0 is a discontinuous squared integrable ˜ F r -martingale. Also, M j 0 k 0 ≡ 0 for k 0 = j 0 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of i.i.d. standard uniformly distributed random variables on a probability space ( ˜ Ω u , ˜ F u , ˜ P u ) which is equipped with the natural filtration ˜ F u := { ˜ F u j } j ∈ N of u . Assume u to be independent of X 0 , B and r .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

of the interval [0 , T ] with n h ∈ N as the number of sub-intervals having lengths h j = t j -t j -1 for j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Define h := max j ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } h j ≤ min(1 , T ). Let us now introduce a product probability space (Ω , F , P ) with Ω := ˜ Ω × ˜ Ω u , F := ˜ F ⊗ ˜ F u and P := ˜ P ⊗ ˜ P u and equip this with a filtration F h := { F h j } j ∈{ 0 ,...,n h } where F h j := ˜ F t j ⊗ ˜ F u j for j ∈ { 0 , . . . , n h } . Also, denote by, for j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The drift-randomized scheme for SDEwMS (1) can be defined in two stages as follows;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following theorem is the main result of this manuscript, stating the strong rate of convergence of our scheme (6). The proof is given in Section 3.

almost surely with initial values X h 0 = X 0 and r (0) = i 0 , where N t j t j -1 is the number of switchings and τ j -1 1 is the first switching time of the Markov chain r in the interval ( t j -1 , t j ] for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Further, we denote by X j := X ( t j ) for j ∈ { 0 , 1 , . . . , n h } .

Theorem 2.2. Let Assumptions 2.1 to 2.3 be satisfied. Then, the drift randomized Milstein scheme (6) converges to the true solution of SDEwMS (1) with strong rate of convergence equal to 1 . 0 , i.e., there exist a positive constant K , independent of h , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.1. When the state space S of the Markov chain r is a singleton set, the scheme defined in Equations (5) and (6) reduces to the randomized Milstein scheme for standard SDE studied in [17, Equation 9]. If there is no randomization in the drift coefficient, i.e., when the standard uniform random variables { u j } j ∈ N in Equation (5) are all replaced by zeros, i.e., for j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } , t u j -1 = t j -1 in Equation (4) and X h,u j = X h j -1 in Equation (6) , then our scheme becomes Milstein scheme of [35, Equation (4.20)]. Although, we do not claim this to be our special case due to the fact that additional regularity assumptions are needed on the drift coefficient to recover rate 1 . 0 , [see 22, 23, 25, 35].

2.2. Importance of the Brownian Increments { B ℓ ( t j ) -B ℓ ( τ j -1 1 ) } Notice that the last term in Equation (6) consists of Brownian increments { B ℓ ( t j ) -B ℓ ( τ j -1 1 ) } ℓ ∈{ 1 ,..., ˜ d } for j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } due to which one requires to evaluate Brownian trajectories on every switching time of the Markov chain r . To illustrate the importance of these increments, the following possible variants of the randomized Milstein scheme defined in Equations (5) and (6) are explored.

## 2.2.1. Modified Randomized Scheme

We examine the rate of convergence of the randomized Milstein scheme when { B ℓ ( t j ) -B ℓ ( τ j -1 1 ) } is replaced by { B ℓ ( t j ) -B ℓ ( t j -1 ) } in Equation (6) and refer this variant as the modified randomized scheme. Formally, it is defined as follows;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely with initial values X h,M 0 = X 0 and r (0) = i 0 .

The following theorem states that the modified randomized scheme given in Equations (7) and (8) has inferior rate of convergence than the original scheme from Equations (5) and (6). The proof is postponed to Section 3 and the numerical illustration is given in Section 4.

Theorem 2.3. Let Assumptions 2.1 to 2.3 be satisfied. Then, the modified randomized scheme given in Equations (7) and (8) converges to the true solution of SDEwMS (1) with a rate 1 / 2 , i.e., there is a positive constant K , not depending on h , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.2.2. Reduced Randomized Scheme

Apart from the modification mentioned in Subsection 2.2.1, it is worth examining the case when the last term of Equation (6), consisting of BD { N t j t j -1 =1 } , is completely removed. We notice that the rate of convergence of the reduced randomized scheme is 1 / 2 which demonstrates that last term of Equation (6) plays an important role in achieving the rate 1 . 0. More formally, the reduced randomized scheme is given by,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely with initial values X h,R 0 = X 0 and r (0) = i 0 .

The following theorem shows that the reduced randomized scheme given in Equations (9) and (10) does not achieve the rate 1 . 0 of the original scheme from Equations (5) and (6). The proof is discussed in Section 3 and the numerical demonstration is shown in Section 4.

Theorem 2.4. Let Assumptions 2.1 to 2.3 hold. Then, the reduced randomized scheme given in Equations (9) and (10) converges to the true solution of SDEwMS (1) with a rate 1 / 2 , i.e., there is a positive constant K , independent of h , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∥ ∥ Remark 2.2. Notice that the rate of convergence of the modified and reduced randomized schemes turns out to be 1 / 2 , which is same as that of the classical Euler scheme for SDEwMS. Thus, it is important to keep track of the values of the driving Brownian noise at the switching times of the Markov chain r to achieve the optimal rate 1 . 0 of Milstein scheme. This is indeed a special structure of both the randomized and non-randomized Milstein schemes of SDEwMS as the last term in Equation (6) can not further be simplified.

Remark 2.3. In Section 4, we demonstrate that the non-randomized modified scheme (i.e. when u j ≡ 0 for all j ∈ N in Equation (7) and (8) ) and the non-randomized reduced scheme (i.e. when u j ≡ 0 for all j ∈ N in Equation (9) and (10) ) exhibit better results than the classical Euler scheme and their randomized versions. It is worth metioning that in Equations (8) and (10) , the derivative of the diffusion coefficient appears. However, it can be avoided by writing the derivative-free versions of these schemes by replacing σ ′ ( t, x, i ) in the scheme by { σ ( t, x + h, i ) -σ ( t, x, i ) } /h for any t &gt; 0 , h &gt; 0 and i ∈ S . Thus, the non-randomized derivative-free modified and reduced schemes can achieve order 1 / 2 of convergence under Lipschitz continuity of the drift and diffussion coefficients. Moreover, these schemes are more efficient than the Euler scheme as illustrated in Section 4.

The following remarks conclude this section.

Remark 2.4. Due to Assumption 2.3, there exist a constant K &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all t, s ∈ [0 , T ] , x, ¯ x ∈ R d , ℓ, ℓ 1 , ℓ 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , ˜ d } and ı ∈ S .

Remark 2.5. By Assumptions 2.2, 2.3 and Remark 2.4, there is a constant K &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all t ∈ [0 , T ] , x ∈ R d , ℓ, ℓ 1 , ℓ 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , ˜ d } and ı ∈ S .

## 3. Rate of Convergence

In order to prove our main result, stated in Theorem 2.2, we require some auxiliary lemmas which are shown below. The following lemma provides the moment estimate of the scheme (6).

Lemma 3.1. Under Assumptions 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3, there exists a constant K &gt; 0 , independent of h , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Using Equation (5) and Remark 2.5, one can obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is an { ˜ F τ n 1 ∧ t n +1 ∨ ˜ F r T } n ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } -martingale. Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Due to Equation (11), Remarks 2.4 and 2.5,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . The proof is completed by using the Gr¨ onwall's inequality.

Following the approach of [17], we introduce the notion of bi-stability and consistency of the scheme (6). For the time-grid ̺ h defined in Equation (3), consider Banach spaces ( G h q , ‖ · ‖ G h q ) and ( G h q,S , ‖ · ‖ G h q,S ) of stochastic grid processes Y h := { ( Y h 0 , . . . , Y h n h ) : Y h j ∈ L q (Ω , F h j , P ; R d ) , j ∈ { 0 , . . . , n h }} where L q (Ω , F h j , P ; R d ) is space of F h j -measurable, R d -valued random variables having finite q -th moment, and the norms ‖ · ‖ G h q and ‖ · ‖ G h q,S are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively. Following Equations (5) and (6), define the increment functions Ξ h := (Ξ h 1 , . . . , Ξ h n h ) on the grid ̺ h ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely for any y ∈ R d , j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } , u ∈ (0 , 1), j 0 , k 0 ∈ S . For a grid process Y h ∈ G h , let us define the residual grid process R [ Y h ] := ( R 0 [ Y h ] , R 1 [ Y h ] , . . . , R n h [ Y h ] ) ∈ G h q,S as,

for j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } .

To prove bi-stability of the randomized Milstein scheme (6), we also require the following lemma.

Lemma 3.2. Let Assumptions 2.2 and 2.3 hold. Then, Y h , Z h ∈ G h q , q ≥ 2 satisfies the following

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . This further implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. From Equation (14),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } which further implies on using Minkowski inequality,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . We now estimate each term on the right side of the above Equation as follows. By Minkowski inequality and Assumption 2.2,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which on using Equation (13) and Assumption 2.2 yields the following,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and then squaring both the sides,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } where h ≤ 1 is used. From Equation (16), notice that { n ∑ j =1 T (2) j } n ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } is a discrete-time martingale with respect to the filtration { F h n } n ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } and thus using martingale's inequality, one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which on squaring both sides and using Minkowski's inequality and Assumption 2.3 yield,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . As before, { n ∑ j =1 T (3) j } n ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } is an { F h n } n ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } -martingale and thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

which taking squaring on both sides and using Minkowski's inequality gives,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Moreover, { n ∑ j =1 T (4) j } n ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } is a martingale with respect to the filtration { ˜ F B τ n 1 ∧ t n +1 ∨ ˜ F r T ⊗ ˜ F u n } n ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } . Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which due to Minkowski's inequality and Assumption 2.3 yields,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . By applying similar arguments, one arrive at the following estimate,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On combining the estimates from Equations (18) to (22) in Equation (17), we obtain

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . This proves the first part which implies the second part of the lemma.

Notice that from Equations (6), (13) and (14), one can write,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely for n ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Clearly, X h ∈ G h q . For any grid process Y h ∈ G h q ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely for n ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Also, on using Equation (23) in Equation (24),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely for any n ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } .

The following theorem gives the bi-stability of the scheme (6). Here, we recall the norms ‖ · ‖ G h q and ‖ · ‖ G h q,S from Equation (12) for clarity.

Theorem 3.1. Let Assumptions 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 hold. Then, for any Y h ∈ G h q with residual R [ Y h ] ∈ G h q,S , q ≥ 2 there exist positive constatnts C 1 and C 2 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. On using Equations (12), (15) and (25),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

which on using Lemma 3.2 yields,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Again, re-arranging Equation (25) as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any n ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } and then Minkowski's inequality and Lemma 3.2 yields,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Further, due to Gr¨ onwall's inequality, one has,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof is complete when Equation (26) is combined with Equation (27).

In order to establish the consistency of the scheme (6) and hence to recover its rate of strong convergence, we require some lemmas as given below. The following lemma is shown in [35, Lemma 4.1], see also [23, Lemma 5].

Lemma 3.3. Define q := max {-q k 0 k 0 : k 0 ∈ S } and let N t s be the number of switchings of the Markov chain r in the interval ( s, t ] for 0 ≤ s &lt; t ≤ T . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If 0 &lt; ( t -s ) &lt; 1 / (2 q ) holds, then there is a constant K &gt; 0 independent of t -s such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof of the following lemma is similar to [35, Lemma 2.2]. However, we additionally include an L 2 ( ˜ Ω)-estimate.

Lemma 3.4. Let τ 1 &lt; τ 2 &lt; . . . &lt; τ N t s be the switching times of the Markov chain r in the interval ( s, t ] for any 0 ≤ s &lt; t ≤ T where t may or may not be the switching time of the chain. Define τ 0 := s and τ N t s +1 := t . For every i 0 ∈ S , if g : [0 , T ] × R d ×{ i 0 } → R d is a Borel measurable function, then

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

̸

First- and Half-order schemes for SDEwMS

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely for any 0 ≤ s &lt; t ≤ T . In addition, if g is 1 / 2 -H¨ older continuous in time and Lipschitz continuous in state, i.e., there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ ∈ ∈ d 0 ∈

for all t, s [0 , T ] , x, ¯ x R and j S , then there is a constant K &gt; 0 , independent of s and t such that

Proof. One can clearly write the following

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely for any 0 ≤ s &lt; t ≤ T . Now, using M i 0 j 0 ( t ) = [ M i 0 j 0 ]( t ) - 〈 M i 0 j 0 〉 ( t ) and r ( τ k ) = r ( u ) for u ∈ ( τ k , τ k +1 ), k ∈ { 1 , . . . , N t s } , one can write,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely, which on substituting completes the first part of the proof. For the second part, using Minkowski inequality, H¨ older's inequality and Theorem 2.1 and Lemma 3.3,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

## D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all s, t ∈ [0 , T ].

The proof of the following lemma on the randomized quadrature rule for stochastic processes can be found in [17]. For this, let us recall the sequence of uniform random variables u := { u j } j ∈ N from Equation (2), the temporal grid ̺ h from Equation (3) and the notations from Equation (4).

Lemma 3.5. Let ˜ p ≥ 2 and Y : [0 , T ] × ˜ Ω ↦→ R d be a stochastic process such that ˜ E [ ∫ T 0 | Y ( t ) | ˜ p dt ] &lt; ∞ . For every n ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } , the randomized Riemann sum approximation of ∫ t n 0 Y ( t ) dt , defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely satisfies the following;

(i) A n u [ Y ] ∈ L ˜ p (Ω) ,

(iii) ∥ ∥ ∥ max n ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } ∣ ∣ A n u [ Y ] -∫ t n 0 Y ( s ) ds ∣ ∣ ∥ ∥ ∥ L ˜ p (Ω) ≤ 2 C ˜ p T ˜ p -2 2˜ p ( ˜ E [ ∫ T 0 | Y ( s ) | ˜ p ds ]) 1 / ˜ p h 1 / 2 where C ˜ p is a constant only depending on ˜ p . In addition, if

̸

(ii) ˜ E u [ A n u [ Y ] ] = ∫ t n 0 Y ( s ) ds ∈ L ˜ p (Ω) , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some γ ∈ (0 , 1) , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In what follows, denote the solution process X of SDEwMS (1) restricted on the time-grid ̺ h defined in Equation (3) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X j := X ( t j ) ∈ L p (Ω , F h j , P ; R d ) for all j ∈ { 0 , . . . , n h } due to Theorem 2.1. Clearly, X ̺ h ∈ G h q . Due to Lemma 3.4, b satisfies the condition of Lemma 3.5 with γ = 1 / 2. Thus, the following corollary is a consequence of Lemmas 3.4 and 3.5.

Corollary 3.1. Let Assumptions 2.1 to 2.3 hold. Then, there is a constant K &gt; 0 , independent of h , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 3.6. Let Assumptions 2.1 to 2.3 be satisfied. Then, there exists a constant K &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Clearly, one can compute

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The first term in the above equation can be estimated by Corollary 3.1. For the second term, one can apply Assumption 2.2 and Minkowski's inequality to obtain,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, for the second term on the right side of Equation (29), one uses Equations (1) and (13) to obtain the following,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which on using Minkowski and H¨ older's inequalities along with u j ≤ 1 yields,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Also, the implementation of Lemma 3.4 leads to the following estimates,

for j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h }

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

Now, using Lemma 3.4 and M j 0 k 0 = [ M j 0 k 0 ] -〈 M j 0 k 0 〉 , one can obtain

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

almost surely for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } and ℓ ∈ { 1 , . . . , ˜ d } where t j -1 = τ 0 &lt; τ 1 &lt; τ 2 &lt; · · · &lt; τ N s t j -1 &lt; τ N s t j -1 +1 = s are switching times of the chain r in the interval ( t j -1 , s ].

By using [35, Lemma 4.3] and observing that r ( τ j -1 1 ) = r ( t j ) on the set { N t j t j -1 = 1 } , the first term on the right side of Equation (30) can be written as,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

almost surely for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } and ℓ ∈ { 1 , . . . , ˜ d } .

For the last term on the right side of Equation (30), one uses Equation (1) to obtain,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } and ℓ ∈ { 1 , . . . , ˜ d } . Moreover, one can also write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, let us substitute Equations (31) and (32) in Equation (30) and then use Equation (33) to obtain,

almost surely for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } and ℓ 1 , ℓ 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , ˜ d } .

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

almost surely for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } .

Lemma 3.7. Let Assumptions 2.1 to 2.3 be satisfied. Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The estimate of the terms involving I 1 , I 2 and I 3 follow from the estimates of the remainder terms R p, 7 , R p, 8 and R p, 5 in [35, Equation 4.21], in Lemmas 4.5, 4.6 and 4.7, respectively. Moreover, one can estimate the terms involving I 4 , I 5 , I 6 and I 7 by following the same path as of remainder terms R n (9), R n (10), R n (11) and R n (12) in [23, Equation 10] and their corresponding Lemmas 8, 6, 7 and 9, respectively.

Let us recall X ̺ h from Equation (28). The following lemma states that the scheme (6) is consistent. Lemma 3.8. Assume that Assumptions 2.1 to 2.3 hold. Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Using the definition of residuals from Equations (14) and (15),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } which due to Equation (12) and Minkowski inequality gives,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, using Lemma 3.6 and Equation (34),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, the use of Lemma 3.7 completes the proof.

Proof of Theorem 2.2 . The proof is a consequence of Theorem 3.1 and Lemma 3.8. Using Bistability Theorem 3.1 for q = 2 with Y h = X ̺ h ∈ G h 2 and Lemma 3.8 gives,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof of the main result is hence completed.

Lemma 3.9. Let Assumptions 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 hold. Then, there exists a constant K &gt; 0 , independent of h , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The proof of the following Lemma is similar to the proof of Lemma 3.1.

Proof of Theorem 2.3 . Using Minkowski inequality and Theorem 2.2,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, it is sufficient to prove that, ∥ ∥ max n ∈{ 0 ,...,n h } | X h n -X h,M n | ∥ ∥ L 2 (Ω) ≤ Kh 1 / 2 . Due to Equations (5) and (7) along with Assumptions 2.2 and 2.3, one can estimate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Next, the use of Equations (6) and (8) yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Observe that, for the second last term,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is an { ˜ F τ n 1 ∧ t n +1 ∨ ˜ F r T } n ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } -martingale and for the last term,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a martingale with respect to the filtration { ˜ F t n ∨ ˜ F r T } n ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } . Hence, the use of Assumption 2.2 yields,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Due to Equation (35), Remarks 2.4, 2.5 and Assumption 2.3

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which on using Lemma 3.3 and 3.9 gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Finally, discrete Gr¨ onwall's inquality leads to,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and thus the proof is completed by taking square-root on both sides.

## D. Vashistha and C. Kumar

Proof of Theorem 2.4 . By the application of Minkowski inequality and Theorem 2.2,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Equations (5) and (9), one uses Assumptions 2.2 and 2.3 to obtain,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Moreover, from Equations (6) and (10),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and notice that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is an { ˜ F τ n 1 ∧ t n +1 ∨ ˜ F r T } n ∈{ 1 ,...,n h } -martingale. Hence, Assumption 2.2 yields,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Further, on using Equation (36), Remarks 2.4, 2.5 and Assumption 2.3, one obtains,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and thus Lemmas 3.1 and 3.3 gives,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any k ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . Finally, applying discrete Gr¨ onwall's inequality and taking square root on both sides completes the proof.

## 4. Numerical Implementation

̸

The randomized Milstein scheme (6) involves the simulation of L´ evy area given by ∫ t j t j -1 ∫ s t j -1 dB ℓ 2 ( v ) dB ℓ 1 ( s ) for ℓ 1 = ℓ 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , ˜ d } which is difficult to simulate. However, under the following diffusion commutative conditions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all x ∈ R d , t ∈ [0 , T ], i 0 ∈ S and l 1 , l 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , ˜ d } , the term involving iterated Brownian integrals can be simplified [see 16, Chapter 10, Equation (3.6)], which leads to the following easily implementable Milstein scheme,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely for any j ∈ { 1 , . . . , n h } . For one-dimensional Brownian motion, the commutative condition is automatically satisfied and the L´ evy area issue does not arise. We also refer the readers to [6] and the references therein for the simulation of L´ evy area arising in the case of standard SDEs.

For the simulation of the Markov chain r , we refer the readers to [45, Section 2.4]. Indeed, if ı is the current state of the chain r , then the switching time to the next state follows exponential distribution with parameter -q ıı . Further, the new state is determined by the random variable Z ı given by,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where U is a standard uniform random variable.

Moreover, for the simulation of randomization component from Equation (5), we generate independent standard uniform random variables { u j } j ∈ N to be used on the finest discretization grid. On subsequent coarser grids, we recursively select the uniform random variables based on Bernoulli (0 . 5) distribution.

Further, we demonstrate numerically the theoretical findings of Theorems 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4. We also mention that these results hold even if the randomization in the drift coefficient is not carried out, i.e. , when u j ≡ 0 for all j ∈ N in Equation (5). In such a case, the randomized Milstein scheme X h in Equation (6) reduces to the Milstein scheme X h,C studied in [35], see also [22, 23, 25]. Unlike the Milstein scheme, the randomized Milstein scheme does not require the drift to be differentiable. Indeed, it is only assumed to be Lipschitz continuous in the state variable. Also, the L 2 -error of the randomized Milstein scheme is numerically shown to be less than that of the Milstein scheme of [35] but at a higher computational cost, see Figures 1a,1b and Table 1. Thus, the randomized Milstein scheme is recommended when the drift coefficient is non-differentiable and Lipschitz continuous. However, for more regular drift coefficients, one should use the Milstein scheme of [35, 23]. Moreover, when the state space of the Markov chain r is a singleton set, the above observations coincide with that of [17]. It is also illustrated that both the modified randomized scheme given in Equations (7) and (8) and the reduced randomized scheme from Equations (9) and (10) performs better than the classical Euler scheme in terms of their errors. Indeed, this is exhibited with non-randomization (when u j ≡ 0 for all j ∈ N ) as well as with randomization (when u j ∼ U (0 , 1) for all j ∈ N ), see Figures 2a,2b and Table 2. Thus, the Euler scheme can be used for Lipschitz continuous drift and diffusion coefficients. However, the non-randomized modified and reduced schemes can be preferred over their randomized versions as well as the classical Euler schemes when diffusion coefficient is aditionally assumed to be differentiable.

Example 4.1. Consider the following one-dimensional SDEwMS,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely for any t ∈ [0 , 1] with initial values X (0) = 1 and r (0) = 1 where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any x ∈ R , t ∈ [0 , 1] and ı ∈ S . Also, we take state space S = { 0 , 1 } and generator Q = ( -0 . 5 0 . 5 0 . 5 -0 . 5 ) . Clearly, b is a non-differentiable function and satisfies Assumption 2.2, and σ satisfies Assumption 2.3 and the commutative condition (37) . A comparison of L 2 -error and CPU time of the randomized Milstein scheme X h from Equations (38) and (39) with the Milstein scheme X h,C from [35, Equation (3.3)] is given in Figures 1a,1b and Table 1. In both cases, the scheme with step-size h j = 2 -15 is taken to be the true solution of the above SDEwMS and the simulation is performed with 160000 number of paths. Clearly, the scheme X h exhibits the rate of convergence as 1 . 0 and hence, the result of Theorem 2.2 is justified.

Figure 1: Randomized Milstein Scheme vs. Milstein Scheme

<!-- image -->

Table 1: Errors and CPU Time of the Randomized Milstein Scheme and the Milstein Scheme

| h  2  -  14  2  -  13  2  -  12  2  -  11  2  -  10  2  -  9  2  -  8  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,C  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00021708  0  .  00060482  0  .  00137690  0  .  00294788  0  .  00603756  0  .  01208470  0  .  02417852  CPU Time  261  .  470582  131  .  341813  65  .  035875  33  .  325486  17  .  089388  9  .  102217  4  .  772586  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00019280  0  .  00049020  0  .  00108269  0  .  00230352  0  .  00455661  0  .  00920727  0  .  01868714  CPU Time  391  .  632137  196  .  778117  99  .  305244  49  .  821193  27  .  357823  13  .  934358  7  .  140480  h  2  -  7  2  -  6  2  -  5  2  -  4  2  -  3  2  -  2  2  -  1  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,C  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  04796301  0  .  09464937  0  .  18408339  0  .  34538574  0  .  62091218  1  .  04555606  1  .  63042997  CPU Time  2  .  587062  1  .  232459  0  .  623805  0  .  361891  0  .  161321  0  .  093668  0  .  034194  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  03726680  0  .  07402992  0  .  14663204  0  .  27959858  0  .  51513882  0  .  91186019  1  .  49448935  CPU Time  3  .  790610  1  .  671852  0  .  876138  0  .  500450  0  .  330213  0  .  116581  0  .  068625   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Remark 4.1. The Milstein scheme need the drift coefficients to be differentiable to achieve rate of convergence 1 . 0 . It is observed in Figure 1a that the classical Milstein scheme shows similar convergence results as the randomized Milstein scheme at a less computational cost, while having non-differentiable drift coefficient. We are unable to find an example of SDEwMS with non-differentiable drift coefficient for which one could observe the difference of the experimental orders of convergence. However, there is no result in the literature which guarantees the convergence rate 1 . 0 of the Milstein scheme for SDEwMS with non-differentiable drift coefficients.

We now proceed for the illustration of results obtained in Theorems 2.3 and 2.4. Indeed, the rate of convergence of the modified randomized scheme X h,M from Equations (7) and (8) and that of the reduced randomized scheme X h,R from Equations (9) and (10) are shown to be 1 / 2 . These two schemes are considered to demonstrate the importance of the last term on the right side of Equation (6) . Further, it is also natural to compare the schemes X h,M and X h,R with the classical Euler scheme X h,E and with the non-randomized modified scheme X h,MC and the non-randomized reduced scheme X h,RC which are defined through X h,M and X h,R , respectively by taking u j ≡ 0 for all j ∈ N . The scheme with a step-size h j = 2 -18 is considered the true solution for all the above schemes and the simulation is carried out with 80000 number of paths. Figure 2a and Table 2 illustrate that the rate of convergence of the schemes X h,E , X h,M , X h,R , X h,MC and X h,RC is 1 / 2 . At last, Figure 2b and Table 2, presents a comparison of computational efficiency of all the above half-order schemes. Thus, non-randomized modified and reduced schemes perform better than Euler scheme and their randomized versions.

(a) Error comparison

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

(b) CPU Time comparison

Figure 2: Randomized and Non-randomized Modified and Reduced Schemes vs. Classical Euler Schemes.

Table 2: Errors and CPU Time of Half-order Schemes.

| h  2  -  17  2  -  16  2  -  15  2  -  14  2  -  13  2  -  12  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,E  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00599139  0  .  01026297  0  .  01565156  0  .  02287485  0  .  03247471  0  .  04560142  CPU Time  379  .  549801  193  .  294414  99  .  640363  55  .  591084  38  .  355161  21  .  217252  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,RC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00254758  0  .  00408114  0  .  00646238  0  .  00921385  0  .  01328638  0  .  01892801  CPU Time  833  .  698372  421  .  096085  213  .  971714  110  .  782109  59  .  234410  32  .  016569  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,MC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00241768  0  .  00413479  0  .  00636003  0  .  00943673  0  .  01331740  0  .  01846128  CPU Time  871  .  231586  438  .  688588  221  .  942274  111  .  028098  59  .  387437  30  .  414296  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,R  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00254793  0  .  00408174  0  .  00646433  0  .  00921364  0  .  01328279  0  .  01889861  CPU Time  1239  .  085105  627  .  439369  327  .  828209  182  .  257985  141  .  139272  68  .  163751  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,M  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00241773  0  .  00413333  0  .  00635909  0  .  00943438  0  .  01331625  0  .  01843175  CPU Time  1292  .  855992  658  .  936470  334  .  851178  186  .  414961  137  .  908831  62  .  501852   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

| h  2  -  11  2  -  10  2  -  9  2  -  8  2  -  7  2  -  6  2  -  5  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,E  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  06583836  0  .  09392476  0  .  13115728  0  .  18428536  0  .  26035255  0  .  36210007  0  .  53869722  CPU Time  8  .  644915  4  .  310352  2  .  178243  1  .  241116  0  .  467730  0  .  328214  0  .  122277  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,RC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  02703500  0  .  03779432  0  .  05309653  0  .  08012178  0  .  12137365  0  .  17662309  0  .  28952555  CPU Time  15  .  479152  8  .  300158  4  .  174976  2  .  137459  1  .  111581  0  .  474894  0  .  225357  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,MC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  02701819  0  .  03726813  0  .  05561194  0  .  08391667  0  .  12436160  0  .  20276714  0  .  31159843  CPU Time  16  .  398693  8  .  485918  4  .  510199  2  .  204941  1  .  218397  0  .  578837  0  .  362392  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,R  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  02696280  0  .  03754892  0  .  05253226  0  .  07807442  0  .  11588008  0  .  16053614  0  .  25189485  CPU Time  27  .  278655  13  .  447136  7  .  119449  3  .  486635  1  .  515935  0  .  755092  0  .  403815  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,M  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  02695261  0  .  03700100  0  .  05474560  0  .  08171425  0  .  11913306  0  .  19038216  0  .  27754029  CPU Time  26  .  865898  13  .  511409  6  .  545521  3  .  310891  1  .  452824  0  .  712814  0  .  336374   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

In the following examples, we demonstrate the results of Theorem 2.3 and 2.4 for their non-randomized versions as explained in the Remark 2.3. The both examples 4.2 and 4.3 illustrate that the non-randomized half-order modified and reduced schemes are more efficient than the Euler scheme for SDEwMS.

Example 4.2.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely for any t ∈ [0 , 1] with initial values S (0) = 1 and r (0) = 1 where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any ı ∈ S . The state space S and generator Q are same as in the above example.

The scheme with a step size of h = 2 18 is treated as the reference solution for the non-randomized modified and reduced schemes, as well as the Euler scheme with 120000 sample paths.

Figure 3: Non-Randomized Scheme vs. Euler Scheme

<!-- image -->

Table 3: Errors and CPU Time of Non-Randomized Scheme vs. Euler Scheme.

| h  2  -  17  2  -  16  2  -  15  2  -  14  2  -  13  2  -  12  2  -  11  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,E  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00174194  0  .  00304148  0  .  00459130  0  .  00676149  0  .  00970590  0  .  01383017  0  .  01968373  CPU Time  269  .  588664  136  .  806453  70  .  149249  36  .  701544  20  .  651390  10  .  742751  5  .  689832  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,RC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00041906  0  .  00076148  0  .  00120115  0  .  00176037  0  .  00253617  0  .  00366260  0  .  00509693  CPU Time  592  .  890530  297  .  713474  150  .  758637  76  .  182308  40  .  325831  22  .  881096  11  .  925231  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,MC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00044127  0  .  00076134  0  .  00115479  0  .  00168737  0  .  00241640  0  .  00343895  0  .  00496271  CPU Time  621  .  616301  311  .  166626  158  .  814760  80  .  205689  44  .  784252  24  .  610021  13  .  245413  h  2  -  10  2  -  9  2  -  8  2  -  7  2  -  6  2  -  5  2  -  4  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,E  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  02782465  0  .  04003413  0  .  05641012  0  .  08044909  0  .  11207857  0  .  15294952  0  .  21636128  CPU Time  3  .  051900  1  .  610595  0  .  817714  0  .  417378  0  .  208293  0  .  112406  0  .  052256  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,RC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00730283  0  .  01046996  0  .  01486517  0  .  02120103  0  .  03112168  0  .  04852725  0  .  07664768  CPU Time  6  .  215551  3  .  216110  1  .  634604  0  .  823510  0  .  411850  0  .  207960  0  .  091015  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,MC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00712208  0  .  01030526  0  .  01433771  0  .  02111886  0  .  03125974  0  .  04829711  0  .  07641096  CPU Time  6  .  801000  3  .  539509  1  .  801996  0  .  907911  0  .  454155  0  .  226215  0  .  097151   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Example 4.3. Consider the geometric Brownian motion under regime-switching from [29, Chapter 10]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

almost surely for any t ∈ [0 , 1] with initial values S (0) = 1 and r (0) = 1 where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The scheme with a step size of h = 2 is treated as the reference solution for the non-randomized modified

for any ı ∈ S . The state space S and generator Q are same as in the above example. 18 and reduced schemes, as well as the Euler scheme with 120000 sample paths.

(a) Error comparison

<!-- image -->

Figure 4: Non-Randomized Scheme vs. Euler Scheme

<!-- image -->

Table 4: Errors and CPU Time of Non-Randomized Scheme vs. Euler Scheme.

| h  2  -  17  2  -  16  2  -  15  2  -  14  2  -  13  2  -  12  2  -  11  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,E  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00696620  0  .  01244411  0  .  01817137  0  .  02506831  0  .  03511297  0  .  05058783  0  .  07075726  CPU Time  271  .  885095  138  .  255123  72  .  796728  38  .  806524  24  .  044686  11  .  837339  6  .  066299  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,RC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00222535  0  .  00349048  0  .  00532228  0  .  00762568  0  .  01098563  0  .  01556446  0  .  02164663  CPU Time  621  .  345458  311  .  865020  157  .  700352  79  .  881855  41  .  785814  22  .  727607  11  .  845724  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,MC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00195249  0  .  00331843  0  .  00504374  0  .  00732219  0  .  01053223  0  .  01519923  0  .  02152456  CPU Time  653  .  652224  327  .  488034  164  .  415902  83  .  680012  42  .  555446  22  .  411890  12  .  350858  h  2  -  10  2  -  9  2  -  8  2  -  7  2  -  6  2  -  5  2  -  4  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,E  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  10210168  0  .  14538977  0  .  21155731  0  .  30165312  0  .  42392983  0  .  62579877  0  .  81950137  CPU Time  3  .  122983  1  .  667210  0  .  851681  0  .  434447  0  .  216406  0  .  120192  0  .  054415  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,RC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  02980105  0  .  04327009  0  .  06399915  0  .  09358755  0  .  13255435  0  .  21287613  0  .  32588021  CPU Time  6  .  103634  3  .  190577  1  .  595359  0  .  824581  0  .  412425  0  .  210510  0  .  096383  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,MC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  03076803  0  .  04511263  0  .  06760361  0  .  10139557  0  .  15162888  0  .  24887437  0  .  41566770  CPU Time  7  .  034642  3  .  687141  1  .  862924  0  .  938056  0  .  468824  0  .  236277  0  .  104439   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Finally, as discussed in Remark 2.3, we demonstrate the derivative-free forms of non-randomized modified scheme X DMC and non-randomized reduced schemes X DRC alongside the Euler scheme X E in the following example.

Example 4.4. Consider the same model as discussed in Example 4.1 and construct the derivative-free versions of the non-randomized modified and reduced schemes as discussed in Remark 2.3. A step size of h = 2 18 is chosen as the true solution to compare the non-randomized derivative-free modified and reduced schemes with the Euler scheme, using 120000 sample paths.

(a) Error comparison

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: Non-Randomized Scheme vs. Euler Scheme

<!-- image -->

Table 5: Errors and CPU Time of Non-Randomized Scheme vs. Euler Scheme.

| h  2  -  17  2  -  16  2  -  15  2  -  14  2  -  13  2  -  12  2  -  11  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,E  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00566716  0  .  00964748  0  .  01534008  0  .  02220148  0  .  03164935  0  .  04540611  0  .  06447661  CPU Time  305  .  549772  155  .  396309  79  .  767932  42  .  570644  25  .  566442  12  .  675962  6  .  106815  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,DRC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00231833  0  .  00405278  0  .  00640632  0  .  00920944  0  .  01325757  0  .  01809466  0  .  02641738  CPU Time  806  .  553308  406  .  110562  204  .  820692  103  .  234321  55  .  153552  28  .  690261  14  .  448302  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,DMC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  00252518  0  .  00398567  0  .  00614552  0  .  00992798  0  .  01355151  0  .  01967248  0  .  02759418  CPU Time  833  .  856323  418  .  168368  210  .  136879  105  .  777307  55  .  534373  28  .  644622  14  .  909527   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

| h  2  -  10  2  -  9  2  -  8  2  -  7  2  -  6  2  -  5  2  -  4  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,E  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  08980111  0  .  12584179  0  .  18388249  0  .  25691523  0  .  37341561  0  .  53082773  0  .  75359352  CPU Time  3  .  147398  1  .  643780  0  .  824708  0  .  417155  0  .  208715  0  .  111426  0  .  053475  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,DRC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  02980105  0  .  04327009  0  .  06399915  0  .  09358755  0  .  13255435  0  .  21287613  0  .  32588021  CPU Time  7  .  436777  3  .  831167  1  .  936506  0  .  973538  0  .  489165  0  .  246314  0  .  114055  ‖  X  n  h  -  X  h,DMC  n  h  ‖  L  2  (Ω)  0  .  03835858  0  .  05721629  0  .  08165519  0  .  13263672  0  .  18662305  0  .  29739362  0  .  50869141  CPU Time  7  .  813160  4  .  033923  2  .  045251  1  .  028350  0  .  513834  0  .  259656  0  .  120086   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## Acknowledgement

The second author gratefully acknowledges the financial support provided by National Board for Higher Mathematics (NBHM), Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), India under the project no. DAE-2188-MTD.

## References

## References

- [1] J. Bao, C. Reisinger, P. Ren and W. Stockinger (2021). First-order convergence of Milstein schemes for McKean-Vlasov equations and interacting particle systems. Proc. R. Soc. A , 477(2245), 20200258. The Royal Society Publishing.
- [2] W. J. Beyn, E. Isaak and R. Kruse (2016). Stochastic C-stability and B-consistency of explicit and implicit Euler-type schemes. J. Sci. Comput. , 67, 955-987.
- [3] W. J. Beyn, E. Isaak and R. Kruse (2017). Stochastic C-stability and B-consistency of explicit and implicit Milstein-type schemes. J. Sci. Comput. , 70, 1042-1077.
- [4] S. Biswas, C. Kumar, Neelima, G. Dos Reis and C. Reisinger (2024). An explicit Milstein-type scheme for interacting particle systems and McKean-Vlasov SDEs with common noise and non-differentiable drift coefficients. Ann. Appl. Probab. , 34(2), 2326-2363.
- [5] K. Dareiotis, C. Kumar and S. Sabanis (2016). On tamed Euler approximations of SDEs driven by L´ evy noise with applications to delay equations. SIAM J. Numer. Anal. , 54(3), 1840-1872.
- [6] A. M. Davie (2015). Pathwise approximation of stochastic differential equations using coupling. https://www.maths.ed.ac.uk/ ~ sandy/coum.pdf .
- [7] G. Dos Reis, S. Engelhardt and G. Smith (2022). Simulation of McKean-Vlasov SDEs with super linear growth. IMA J. Numer. Anal. , 42(1), 874-922. Oxford University Press.
- [8] Q. Guo, W. Liu, X. Mao and R. Yue (2017). The partially truncated Euler-Maruyama method and its stability and boundedness. Appl. Numer. Math. , 115, 235-251. Elsevier.
- [9] M. Hutzenthaler, A. Jentzen and P. E. Kloeden (2012). Strong convergence of an explicit numerical method for SDEs with nonglobally Lipschitz continuous coefficients. Ann. Appl. Probab. , 22(4), 1611-1641.
- [10] M. Hutzenthaler and A. Jentzen (2015). Numerical approximations of stochastic differential equations with non-globally Lipschitz continuous coefficients. Mem. Am. Math. Soc. , 236, 1112.
- [11] A. Jentzen and A. Neuenkirch (2009). A random Euler scheme for Carath´ eodory differential equations. J. Comput. Appl. Math. , 224(1), 346-359.
- [12] C. Kelly and G. J. Lord (2018). Adaptive time-stepping strategies for nonlinear stochastic systems. IMA J. Numer. Anal. , 38(3), 1523-1549. Oxford University Press.
- [13] C. Kelly and G. J. Lord (2022). Adaptive Euler methods for stochastic systems with non-globally Lipschitz coefficients. Numer. Algorithms , 89(2), 721-747.
- [14] C. Kelly, G. J. Lord and F. Sun (2023). Strong convergence of an adaptive time-stepping Milstein method for SDEs with monotone coefficients. BIT , 63(2), 33. Springer.
- [15] C. Kelly and K. O'Donovan (2024). Adaptive mesh construction for the numerical solution of Stochastic Differential Equations with Markovian Switching. arXiv preprint , https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.14931v1 .

- [16] P. E. Kloeden and E. Platen (1992). Numerical Solution of Stochastic Differential Equations. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg .
- [17] R. Kruse and Y. Wu (2019). A randomised Milstein method for stochastic differential equations with non-differentiable drift coefficients. Discrete Contin. Dyn. Syst. Ser. B , 24(8), 3475-3502.
- [18] C. Kumar and Neelima (2021). On explicit Milstein-type scheme for McKean-Vlasov stochastic differential equations with super-linear drift coefficient. Electron. J. Probab. , 26, 1-32. The Institute of Mathematical Statistics and the Bernoulli Society.
- [19] C. Kumar, Neelima, C. Reisinger and W. Stockinger (2022). Well-posedness and tamed schemes for McKean-Vlasov equations with common noise. Ann. Appl. Probab. , 32(5), 3283-3330. Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
- [20] C. Kumar and S. Sabanis (2017). On Tamed Milstein Schemes of SDEs Driven by L´ evy Noise. Discrete Contin. Dyn. Syst. - B , 22(2), 421-463.
- [21] C. Kumar and S. Sabanis (2019). On Milstein approximations with varying coefficients: the case of super linear diffusion coefficients. BIT , 59(4), 929-968. Springer.
- [22] C. Kumar and T. Kumar (2020). On explicit Milstein-type scheme for stochastic differential equation with Markovian switching. J. Comput. Appl. Math. , 377, 112917.
- [23] C. Kumar and T. Kumar (2021). A note on explicit Milstein-type scheme for stochastic differential equation with Markovian switching. J. Comput. Appl. Math. , 395, 113594.
- [24] C. Kumar and S. Sabanis (2017). On explicit approximations for L´ evy driven SDEs with superlinear diffusion coefficients. Electron. J. Probab. , 22(73), 1-19.
- [25] T. Kumar and C. Kumar (2022). On Itˆ o-Taylor expansion for stochastic differential equations with Markovian switching and its application in γ ∈ { n/ 2 : n ∈ N } -order scheme. arXiv preprint , https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.11657 .
- [26] G. Lord and M. Wang (2024). Convergence of an exponential tamed method for a general interest rate model. Appl. Math. Comput. , 467, 128503. Elsevier.
- [27] X. Mao (2015). The truncated Euler-Maruyama method for stochastic differential equations. J. Comput. Appl. Math. , 290, 370-384. Elsevier.
- [28] X. Mao (2016). Convergence rates of the truncated Euler-Maruyama method for stochastic differential equations. J. Comput. Appl. Math. , 296, 362-375. Elsevier.
- [29] X. Mao and C. Yuan (2006). Stochastic differential equations with Markovian switching . Imperial College Press, London.
- [30] X. Mao, C. Yuan and G. Yin (2007). Approximations of Euler-Maruyama type for stochastic differential equations with Markovian switching, under non-Lipschitz conditions. J. Comput. Appl. Math. , 205(2), 936-948. Elsevier.
- [31] G. N. Milstein and M. V. Tretyakov (2021). Stochastic Numerics for Mathematical Physics . Springer Nature.
- [32] P. M. Morkisz and P. Przybysuppress lowicz (2021). Randomized derivative-free Milstein algorithm for efficient approximation of solutions of SDEs under noisy information. J. Comput. Appl. Math. , 383, 113112.
- [33] Neelima, S. Biswas, C. Kumar, G. Dos Reis and C. Reisinger (2020). Well-posedness and tamed Euler schemes for McKean-Vlasov equations driven by L´ evy noise. arXiv preprint , https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.08585 .
- [34] S. L. Nguyen and G. Yin (2012). Pathwise convergence rates for numerical solutions of Markovian switching stochastic differential equations. Nonlinear Anal. Real World Appl. , 13(3), 1170-1185.
- [35] S. L. Nguyen, T. A. Hoang, D. T. Nguyen and G. Yin (2017). Milstein-type procedures for numerical solutions of stochastic differential equations with Markovian switching. SIAM J. Numer. Anal. , 55(2), 953-979.
- [36] D. T. Nguyen, S. L. Nguyen, T. A. Hoang and G. Yin (2018). Tamed-Euler method for hybrid stochastic differential equations with Markovian switching. Nonlinear Anal. Hybrid Syst. , 30, 14-30.
- [37] D. T. Nguyen and S. L. Nguyen (2019). Euler-Maruyama method for regime switching stochastic differential equations with H¨ older coefficients. Commun. Stoch. Anal. , 13(3), 4.
- [38] P. Przybysuppress lowicz, V. Schwarz and M. Sz¨ olgyenyi (2024). Randomized Milstein algorithm for approximation of solutions of jump-diffusion SDEs. J. Comput. Appl. Math. , 440, 115631.
- [39] P. Przybysuppress lowicz and M. Sobieraj (2024). On the randomized Euler scheme for SDEs with integral-form drift. arXiv preprint , arXiv:2405.20481.
- [40] P. Przybysuppress lowicz, Y. Wu and X. Xie (2024). On approximation of solutions of stochastic delay differential equations via randomized Euler scheme. Appl. Numer. Math. , 197, 143-163.
- [41] S. Sabanis (2013). A note on tamed Euler approximations. Electron. Commun. Probab. , 18, 1-10.
- [42] S. Sabanis (2016). Euler approximations with varying coefficients: The case of superlinearly growing diffusion coefficients. Ann. Appl. Probab. , 26(4), 2083-2105.
- [43] M. V. Tretyakov and Z. Zhang (2013). A fundamental mean-square convergence theorem for SDEs with locally Lipschitz coefficients and its applications. SIAM J. Numer. Anal. , 51(6), 3135-3162.
- [44] D. Vashistha and C. Kumar (2024). Milstein scheme for stochastic differential equation with Markovian switching and L´ evy noise. J. Math. Anal. Appl. , 536(1).
- [45] G. Yin and Q. Zhang (2012). Continuous-time Markov chains and applications: a two time scale approach . Springer Science and Business Media.
- [46] G. Yin and C. Zhu (2010). Hybrid Switching Diffusions: Properties and Applications . Springer, New York.
- [47] C. Yuan and X. Mao (2004). Convergence of the Euler-Maruyama method for stochastic differential equations with Markovian switching. Math. Comput. Simulation , 64(2), 223-235. Elsevier.