## An infinite horizon sufficient stochastic maximum principle for regime switching diffusions and applications ∗

Kai Ding † Xun Li ‡ Siyu Lv § Xin Zhang ¶

## Abstract

This paper is concerned with a discounted stochastic optimal control problem for regime switching diffusion in an infinite horizon. First, as a preliminary with particular interests in its own right, the global well-posedness of infinite horizon forward and backward stochastic differential equations with Markov chains and the asymptotic property of their solutions when time goes to infinity are obtained. Then, a sufficient stochastic maximum principle for optimal controls is established via a dual method under certain convexity condition of the Hamiltonian. As an application of our maximum principle, a linear quadratic production planning problem is solved with an explicit feedback optimal production rate. The existence and uniqueness of a non-negative solution to the associated algebraic Riccati equation are proved. Numerical experiments are reported to illustrate the theoretical results, especially, the monotonicity of the value function on various model parameters.

Keywords: Infinite horizon, stochastic maximum principle, regime switching, production planning, algebraic Riccati equation

## 1 Introduction

The regime switching model has gained considerable attention in recent years, especially in the fields of finance and economics, due to their superior empirical performance compared to traditional diffusion models. For example, Zhang [25] developed an optimal stock selling rule by using a regime switching geometric Brownian motion model, which can capture different appreciation and volatility rates of the stock under different market treads. Hardy [8] further demonstrated that the regime switching model fits real financial market much better than other conventional models based on analysis of the data from Standard &amp; Poor's 500 and Toronto Stock Exchange 300 indexes. In the past few decades, extensive research on optimal control theory and applications has been conducted for regime switching models, such as linear quadratic (LQ for short) optimal control

∗ This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (12471414, 12171086), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20242023), the Jiangsu Province Scientific Research Center of Applied Mathematics (BK20233002), and the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong (15226922, 15225124, PolyU 4-ZZVB, PolyU 4-ZZP4, PolyU 1-ZVXA).

† School of Mathematics, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China (dkaiye@163.com).

‡ Department of Applied Mathematics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China (li.xun@polyu.edu.hk).

§ School of Mathematics, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China (lvsiyu@seu.edu.cn).

¶ School of Mathematics, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China (x.zhang.seu@gmail.com).

(see Li and Zhou [11] and Zhang et al. [26]), mean-variance portfolio selection (see Zhou and Yin [29] and Hu et al. [10]), and European and American option pricing (see Yao et al. [22] and Buffington and Elliott [2]).

Stochastic maximum principle (SMP for short) is well known as one of the fundamental methods for solving stochastic optimal control problems. Among others, we would like to review the following papers that are closely relevant to our work (i.e., in a regime switching model). In the spirit of Zhou [28], Donnelly [3] proposed a sufficient SMP for regime switching diffusion. Nguyen et al. [14, 15] obtained local and general SMPs for optimal control problems with both regime switching and mean-field interactions. Lv et al. [12] proved a partial information SMP when the underlying Markov chain can not be observed. Note that these results are all based on a finite horizon. On the other hand, there is relatively less literature on SMP in an infinite horizon. In view of this fact, this paper is concerned with a sufficient SMP for optimal control problem with regime switching in an infinite horizon and discounted formulation (see also Maslowski and Veverka [13] and Zheng and Shi [27] for the case with no regime switching).

To establish an SMP in an infinite horizon, it is crucial to address the global well-posedness and asymptotic property of infinite horizon stochastic Hamiltonian system, which is a kind of infinite horizon forward-backward stochastic differential equation (FBSDE for short). Typically, there are two main frameworks to deal with this issue: one imposes the so-called L 2 -stabilizability condition (see Sun and Yong [18]) to guarantee that E [ ∫ ∞ 0 | ϕ t | 2 dt ] &lt; ∞ and lim T →∞ E [ | ϕ T | 2 ] = 0 for the solution ϕ = X,Y , while the other one introduces a negative parameter K to suppress the growth of X and Y through an exponentially discounted term e 2 Kt , which leads to that E [ ∫ ∞ 0 e 2 Kt | ϕ t | 2 dt ] &lt; ∞ and lim T →∞ E [ e 2 KT | ϕ T | 2 ] = 0 for ϕ = X,Y (see Peng and Shi [16], Yu [24], and Wei and Yu [21]). Benefiting from the presence of a discount factor r in the cost functional of our discounted formulation, this paper naturally adopts the latter framework.

The problem of production planning has been an important topic of great interests in management and manufacturing. The seminal work can be traced back to Thompson and Sethi [19], where the goal is to minimize a quadratic loss function, which measures the deviation of inventory and production from their target levels, and an optimal linear decision rule was derived by using the maximum principle of deterministic control problems. Then, Bensoussan et al. [1] and Fleming et al. [4] studied stochastic production planning problems by analyzing the corresponding Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations. However, existing literature on this subject exhibits limitations in capturing random switching among different market regimes. To make up this gap, in this paper we suppose that the market parameters are modulated by a finite-state Markov chain and employ our sufficient SMP to obtain an optimal production rate.

The main contributions of this paper include the following three aspects:

(i) We establish the global well-posedness of infinite horizon SDEs and BSDEs with Markov chains. In the meanwhile, we prove the asymptotic property of their solutions at infinity; such a result is indispensable for us to establish the sufficient SMP. Moreover, we determine a suitable range of the discount factor r , which ensures the existence and uniqueness of solutions to the associated stochastic Hamiltonian system.

(ii) We present a sufficient SMP for the discounted optimal control problem with regime switching in an infinite horizon. In particular, with the help of the asymptotic property of solutions to the stochastic Hamiltonian system, we do not need to additionally assume the transversality condition imposed by Haadem et al. [7] to prove the SMP.

(iii) We apply our sufficient SMP to solve a production planning problem in a regime switching market, which turns out to be, essentially, an infinite horizon LQ optimal control problem. Based on the so-called four-step scheme , we decouple the stochastic Hamiltonian system and get an algebraic Riccati equation (ARE for short). Utilizing matrix analysis and a kind of elimination method , we prove the existence and uniqueness of a nonnegative solution to the ARE. Then, an explicit optimal production rate is obtained, which has a feedback form of the inventory process and the market regime. A set of numerical tests are also provided to display the effects of regime switching and the monotonicity of the value function on various model parameters.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formulates the discounted stochastic optimal control problem under consideration. Section 3 deals with the unique solvability and asymptotic property of infinite horizon SDEs and BSDEs with Markov chains. Section 4 establishes the sufficient stochastic maximum principle. Section 5 applies the SMP to solve a production planning problem and reports some numerical results. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper with some further remarks.

## 2 Problem formulation

Let (Ω , F , P ) be a complete probability space with the natural filtration F = {F t } t ≥ 0 generated by the following two mutually independent stochastic processes: a one-dimensional standard Brownian motion W t , t ≥ 0, and a finite-state Markov chain α t , t ≥ 0, taking values in M = { 1 , . . . , m } with generator (i.e., the matrix of transition rates) Q = ( q ij ) i,j ∈M .

̸

For each i, j = 1 , . . . , m with i = j , let N ij ( t ) be the number of jumps of the chain α from state i to state j up to time t , i.e.,

where 1 A denotes the zero-one indicator function of a set A . Note that N ij ( t ) is a counting process, whose optional and predictable quadratic variation processes are given by

and

respectively. It follows from Nguyen et al. [14, 15] that the process M ij ( t ), t ≥ 0, defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a purely discontinuous and F α -square integrable martingale, where F α = {F α t } t ≥ 0 is the natural filtration of the Markov chain α . Furthermore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any given F -adapted process Λ = { Λ ij } i,j ∈M with Λ ij taking values in R n , we denote

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let T ∈ (0 , ∞ ) and K ∈ R . We introduce the following two spaces of processes which will be used frequently in this paper: L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) denotes the space of all R n -valued F -adapted processes X such that

and M 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) denotes the space of all Λ = { Λ ij } i,j ∈M with each Λ ij is an R n -valued F -adapted process such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now introduce the discounted optimal control problem that will be studied in this paper. Consider the following state equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X ∈ R n is the state process, u ∈ R k is the control process, and b, σ : R n ×M× R k ↦→ R n are two given functions.

The cost functional is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r &gt; 0 is the discount factor and f : R n ×M× R k ↦→ R is a given function.

The optimal control problem is to find an element u ∗ ∈ U ad such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the admissible control set U ad is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this paper, we aim to establish a sufficient condition for an optimal control in U ad . We impose the following assumptions on the coefficients ( b, σ, f ).

(H1) The functions b and σ are uniformly Lipschitz continuous with respect to x , i.e., there exist constants κ b &gt; 0 and κ σ &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, b (0 , i, u ) and σ (0 , i, u ) have a linear growth with respect to u , i.e., there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(H2) The function b satisfies a monotonic condition with respect to x in the sense that there exists a constant κ 1 ∈ R such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(H3) The function f has a quadratic growth with respect to ( x, u ), i.e., there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3 Infinite horizon (B)SDEs with Markov chains

## 3.1 Infinite horizon SDEs with Markov chains

Under Assumption (H1), we know that (see Shen and Siu [17]) on any finite horizon [0 , T ] and u ∈ L 2 F (0 , T ; R k ), the SDE (2.1) admits a unique strong solution X such that E [sup 0 ≤ t ≤ T | X t | 2 ] &lt; ∞ . However, we cannot further obtain that E [ ∫ ∞ 0 | X t | 2 dt ] &lt; ∞ in the infinite horizon. The following theorem establishes the global solvability of infinite horizon SDEs with Markov chains in the space L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) with an appropriate K . In the sequel, we shall denote by C a generic constant, which may vary from line to line.

Theorem 3.1. Let Assumptions (H1)-(H3) hold. For any u ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R k ) , the SDE (2.1) admits a unique strong solution X ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) with K &lt; ( κ 1 -1 2 κ 2 σ ) ∧ 0 . Moreover, for any ε &gt; 0 , we have

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Applying Itˆ o's formula to e 2 Ks | X s | 2 over [ t, T ] gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking expectation on both sides of (3.2) and using Assumptions (H1)-(H2) together with the elementary inequality ab ≤ εa 2 + 1 ε b 2 for any ε &gt; 0, one has

Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now choosing K &lt; ( κ 1 -1 2 κ 2 σ ) ∧ 0 and ε &lt; κ 1 -1 2 κ 2 σ -K , we get (let t = 0)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Sending T →∞ and applying the monotonic convergence theorem, we have X ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ). Next, we show (3.1) holds. Substituting T with T 2 and t with T 1 in (3.3) leads to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In view of X ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) and u ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R k ), it follows that the map T ↦→ E [ | X T e KT | 2 ] is uniformly continuous. Then, E [ ∫ ∞ 0 e 2 Ks | X s | 2 ds ] &lt; ∞ gives the asymptotic property (3.1).

## 3.2 Infinite horizon BSDEs with Markov chains

First, the Hamiltonian of our discounted optimal control problem is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, the adjoint equation reads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, φ x denotes the partial derivative of φ = b, σ, f, H with respect to x . This subsection is devoted to the global well-posedness of adjoint equation (3.6). More generally, let's first consider the following general infinite horizon BSDE with Markov chain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where F : R n × R n ×M↦→ R n is a given function and ϕ is a given process in L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ). For convenience, we denote l 0 = E [ ∫ ∞ 0 e 2 Kt | ϕ t | 2 dt ] &lt; ∞ .

Definition 3.2. A triple ( Y, Z, Λ) ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × M 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) is called a solution to (3.7) if for any T &gt; 0 , it satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We introduce the following assumptions on the coefficients ( F, ϕ ) of the BSDE (3.7).

(A1) The function F is Lipschitz continuous with respect to y, z , i.e., there exist constants κ Fy &gt; 0 and κ Fz &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, F (0 , 0 , i ) = 0 for any i ∈ M .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(A2) The function F satisfies a monotonic condition with respect to y in the sense that there exists a constant κ 2 ∈ R such that

Next, we present a priori estimate for Y , the first component of the solution ( Y, Z, Λ) to BSDE (3.7), on any finite horizon [0 , T ]. Such an estimate will be used in Lemma 3.4, which provides a priori estimate for ( Y, Z, Λ) on the infinite horizon [0 , ∞ ).

Lemma 3.3. Let Assumption (A1) hold. Let ( Y, Z, Λ) ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × M 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) be a solution to BSDE (3.7). Then, for any T &gt; 0 , there exists a constant C &gt; 0 , which depends on κ Fy , κ Fz , and K , such that

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The proof is postponed and given in the Appendix A.

Lemma 3.4. Let Assumptions (A1)-(A2) hold. Let ( Y, Z, Λ) ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × M 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) be a solution to BSDE (3.7). Then, for K &gt; -κ 2 + κ 2 Fz 2 and any ε &gt; 0 , we have

In particular, there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Applying Itˆ o's formula to | Y t e Kt | 2 on [0 , T ] yields

Taking expectation on both sides of (3.11) leads to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the monotonic condition of F in Assumption (A2), for any ε &gt; 0, one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting (3.13) into (3.12) gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By letting T →∞ and noting the asymptotic property (3.9) in Lemma 3.3, we have the desired priori estimate (3.10).

Based on Lemma 3.4 and the method in Peng and Shi [16], we obtain the following theorem.

Theorem 3.5. Let Assumptions (A1)-(A2) hold. Then, for K &gt; -κ 2 + κ 2 Fz 2 , the BSDE (3.7) admits a unique solution ( Y, Z, Λ) ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × M 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) .

Proof. The uniqueness follows immediately from the priori estimate (3.10). In the next, we show the existence of a solution to BSDE (3.7). For N = 1 , 2 , . . . , we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ϕ N ( s ) = ϕ s 1 [0 ,N ] ( s ). It can be seen that ϕ N ( s ) converges to ϕ s in L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ). Consider the following finite horizon BSDE with Markov chain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any N ≥ 1, the finite horizon BSDE (3.14) admits a unique solution ( Y ( N ) t , Z ( N ) t , Λ ( N ) t ); see Nguyen et al. [14, Theorem 3.4]. Then, we can construct the following processes (for Φ = Y, Z, Λ):

which satisfy the following infinite horizon BSDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Lemma 3.4, there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that for any N,L ∈ N ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that { ( ˜ Y ( N ) , ˜ Z ( N ) , ˜ Λ ( N ) ) } ∞ N =1 is a Cauchy sequence in the product Banach space L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × M 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ). We then denote by ( Y, Z, Λ) the limit of the sequence, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

lim N →∞ E [ ∫ ∞ 0 e 2 Ks [∣ ∣ ∣ ˜ Y ( N ) s -Y s ∣ ∣ ∣ 2 + ∣ ∣ ∣ ˜ Z ( N ) s -Z s ∣ ∣ ∣ 2 ] ds + ∫ ∞ 0 e 2 Ks ∣ ∣ ∣ ˜ Λ ( N ) s -Λ s ∣ ∣ ∣ 2 · d [ M ] s ] = 0 . Note that, for any T &gt; 0 and any N &gt; T ,

By sending N →∞ , it follows that the limit ( Y, Z, Λ) turns out to be a solution to BSDE (3.7).

Now, we return to the adjoint equation (3.6) of our discounted optimal control problem. Clearly, this equation is a special case of BSDE (3.7). Hence, it is natural to impose the following assumptions on the equation (3.6).

(H4) The functions b and σ are continuously differentiable with respect to x . Furthermore, there exist constants κ B &gt; 0, κ Σ &gt; 0, and λ b ∈ R such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(H5) The function f is continuously differentiable with respect to x , and there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

where I n × n denotes the ( n × n ) identity matrix, B ( x, i, u ) . = b ⊤ x ( x, i, u ) b x ( x, i, u ), Σ( x, i, u ) . = σ ⊤ x ( x, i, u ) σ x ( x, i, u ), and S ( A ) . = 1 2 ( A + A ⊤ ) represents the symmetrization of a matrix A . In addition, for two symmetric matrices M,N , M ≤ N means N -M is positive semi-definite.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(H6) The discount factor r &gt; ( κ 2 σ -2 κ 1 ) ∨ ( κ Σ +2 λ b ). From Assumption (H4), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and similarly,

Moreover, for any X ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) and u ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R k ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So the integrability requirement for the inhomogeneous term in (3.6) is also satisfied. From Theorem 3.5, we have the following result.

Corollary 3.6. Let Assumptions (H4)-(H6) hold and λ b + κ Σ 2 -r &lt; K &lt; 0 . Then, for any given ( X,u ) ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R k ) , the adjoint equation (3.6) admits a unique solution ( Y, Z, Λ) ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × M 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) .

## 3.3 The associated stochastic Hamiltonian system

In our problem, the associated stochastic Hamiltonian system takes the following form (a kind of infinite horizon FBSDE with Markov chain):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the following theorem, we will find a common K (= -r 2 ) so that both the SDE and the BSDE in (3.15) admit unique solutions.

Theorem 3.7. Let Assumptions (H1)-(H6) hold. Then, for any u ∈ U ad , the stochastic Hamiltonian system (3.15) admits a unique solution ( X,Y,Z, Λ) ∈ ( L 2 , -r 2 F (0 , ∞ ; R n )) 3 × M 2 , -r 2 F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) . Moreover, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. From Theorem 3.1, for any u ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R k ), the SDE in (3.15) admits a unique solution X ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) for K &lt; ( κ 1 -κ 2 σ 2 ) ∧ 0. Given such an X , then from Corollary 3.6, the BSDE in (3.15) admits a unique solution ( Y, Z, Λ) ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × M 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) for λ b + κ Σ 2 -r &lt; K &lt; 0. On the other hand, by noting the constraint r &gt; ( κ 2 σ -2 κ 1 ) ∨ ( κ Σ +2 λ b ) in Assumption (H6), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which gives a room that we can choose K = -r 2 so that the FBSDE (3.15) admits a unique solution ( X,Y,Z, Λ) ∈ ( L 2 , -r 2 F (0 , ∞ ; R n )) 3 × M 2 , -r 2 F (0 , ∞ ; R n ). Moreover, (3.1) in Theorem 3.1 and (3.9) in Lemma 3.3 yield the the asymptotic property (3.16) holds.

## 4 Sufficient stochastic maximum principle

In this section, we establish a sufficient SMP for the infinite horizon discounted optimal control problem with regime switching considered in this paper. The key tools used in the proof include a dual method, convex analysis, and the asymptotic property given by (3.16).

Theorem 4.1. Let Assumptions (H1)-(H6) hold. Let u ∗ ∈ U ad be an admissible control and ( X ∗ , Y ∗ , Z ∗ , Λ ∗ ) be the corresponding unique solution to the stochastic Hamiltonian system (3.15). Moreover, suppose that:

- (i) H ( X ∗ t , α t , u ∗ t , Y ∗ t , Z ∗ t ) = min u ∈ R k H ( X ∗ t , α t , u, Y ∗ t , Z ∗ t ) ,

(ii) The map ( x, u ) ↦→ H ( x, α t , u, Y ∗ t , Z ∗ t ) is a convex function. Then we have u ∗ is an optimal control.

Proof. Taking an arbitrary u ∈ U ad . Let X = X u be the corresponding unique solution to (2.1). By the definition of the Hamiltonian (3.5), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying Itˆ o's formula to e -rt 〈 X ∗ t -X t , Y ∗ t 〉 on [0 , T ] for any T &gt; 0, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In view of (3.16) in Theorem 3.7, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking expectation on both sides of (4.2) and sending T →∞ , we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Plugging (4.4) into (4.1), one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By condition (i), we have 0 ∈ ∂ u H ( X ∗ t , α t , u ∗ t , Y ∗ t , Z ∗ t ), and together with condition (ii), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∂ u H (respectively, ∂ x,u H ) denotes the Clarke generalized gradient of H with respect to u (respectively, ( x, u )); see Yong and Zhou [23, Chapter 3] for more details about the generalized gradient. Then, it follows that

So we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e., u ∗ is an optimal control.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 4.2. In comparison, the sufficient SMPs obtained by Donnelly [3] and Haadem et al. [7] require an additional integrability condition or transversality condition, respectively, which are not needed in Theorem 4.1.

More precisely, Donnelly [3, Theorem 4.1] imposed an integrability condition to ensure that the stochastic integrals in (4.2) are martingales. Such an integrability condition can be naturally satisfied by the prior estimate in Lemma 3.4. Haadem et al. [7, Theorem 4.1] proposed a so-called transversality condition for a reward maximization problem:

Then, for a cost minimization problem, the above transversality condition becomes:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which can be verified by the asymptotic property of X and Y at infinity; see (3.16) and (4.3).

## 5 A production planning problem

## 5.1 Model and solution

In this section, we apply the sufficient SMP (i.e., Theorem 4.1) established in the last section to solve a production planning problem in a regime switching market. An explicit optimal production rate in a feedback form will be obtained via an algebraic Riccati equation (ARE for short) and an additional linear algebraic equation. It is mentioned that the production planning problem is a classical and important topic in the fields of management and manufacturing; see [19, 1, 4] and more recently [5, 6, 20]. In this paper, the formulation of the production planning problem is modified by incorporating the regime switching of the market into consideration, which, as a more realistic model, better reflects the random market environment.

In this section, all variables and processes are assumed to be one-dimensional. Let X be the inventory level , u be the production rate , and θ ( i ), i ∈ M , be the demand rates under different market regimes. The inventory process X is described as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where σ ( i ), i ∈ M , are positive constants representing the volatility rates under different market regimes. The objective is to minimize the following cost functional:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the positive constants c ( i ) and h ( i ), i ∈ M , are factory-optimal inventory levels and production rates under different market regimes, respectively, and the positive constants N ( i ) and R ( i ), i ∈ M , represent weighting coefficients corresponding to inventory cost and production cost, respectively. Note that a negative production rate u t can be interpreted as the scrapping rate of the existing inventory; this situation occurs rarely when those h ( i ), i ∈ M , are large, but nevertheless shall be permitted in the model (see [19]).

The associated Hamiltonian of the problem is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, the corresponding adjoint equation reads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and, from Theorem 4.1, the optimal control should have the following form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the two functions ϕ : M→ R and ψ : M→ R to be determined later. Then, the optimal control (5.3) becomes the following feedback form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the one hand, applying Itˆ o's formula to (5.4), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By inserting (5.5) into the above equation, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, it follows from the original adjoint equation (5.2) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We conjecture that By comparing (5.6) and (5.7), we obtain the following ARE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and a linear algebraic equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the solution to the ARE (5.8) in general may not be unique. However, the following lemma shows that a non-negative solution to (5.8) is unique, which not only is an inherent requirement from the production planning problem (see Remark 5.3), but also further guarantees the uniqueness of solution to the linear algebraic equation (5.9).

Lemma 5.1. The algebraic equations (5.8) and (5.9) admit unique solutions ϕ ( i ) and ψ ( i ) , respectively, with ϕ ( i ) ≥ 0 , i ∈ M .

Proof. The proof is postponed and given in the Appendix B.

Theorem 5.2. The optimal production rate u ∗ for the production planning problem is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ϕ and ψ are solutions to (5.8) and (5.9), respectively, with ϕ ( i ) ≥ 0 , i ∈ M , and X ∗ is the optimal inventory process corresponding to u ∗ . Moreover, the value function is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We adopt the method of completing the square to verify the optimality of the feedback control (5.10) and compute the value function (5.11) of the problem. To this end, applying Itˆ o's formula to e -rt ϕ ( α t ) X 2 t , we have (for convenience, only the dt part is preserved)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, applying Itˆ o's formula to e -rt ψ ( α t ) X t , one obtains

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Noting that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as T →∞ (see (3.16) in Theorem 3.7), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows that u ∗ defined by (5.10) is an optimal control and (5.11) is the value function.

Remark 5.3. The requirement that ϕ should be a non-negative solution arises from two aspects. Firstly, the cost functional of the production planning problem is non-negative. Hence, the value function (5.11) must be non-negative as well for any ( x, i ) . Note that v ( x, i ) is a quadratic function of x with the coefficient of x 2 being ϕ ( i ) , which necessarily requires that ϕ ( i ) ≥ 0 , i ∈ M . Secondly, given a non-negative solution ϕ , the associated stochastic Hamiltonian system with the optimal control u ∗ given by (5.10) is uniquely solvable for any r &gt; 0 . In fact, under (5.10), the state equation (5.1) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So we can choose κ σ = 0 and κ 1 = min i ∈M { ϕ ( i ) } ≥ 0 in Assumptions (H1)-(H3), by noticing that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

From Theorem 3.1, the state equation (5.12) admits a unique solution X ∗ ∈ L 2 , -r 2 F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) if -r 2 &lt; ( κ 1 -1 2 κ 2 σ ) ∧ 0 = min i ∈M { ϕ ( i ) } ∧ 0 = 0 , which is equivalent to r &gt; 0 . Then, by selecting κ B = κ Σ = λ b = 0 in Assumptions (H4)-(H6) and from Corollary 3.6, the following triple of processes defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

turns out to be the unique solution to the adjoint equation (5.2).

## 5.2 Numerical experiments

In the following, we provide a numerical example to illustrate the theoretical results obtained in the last subsection. We will first consider a basic case with a set of benchmark model parameters, and then conduct a sensitivity analysis by varying some of these parameters.

## 5.2.1 A basic case

Let us consider a Markov chain α having two states { 1 , 2 } , which means the market switches between two regimes 1 ('good' or 'bull') and 2 ('bad' or 'bear'), and the generator of the Markov chain is supposed to be

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, let r = 0 . 05, and θ ( i ), σ ( i ), c ( i ), h ( i ), i ∈ { 1 , 2 } , be given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the weighting coefficients of inventory cost and production cost are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Given the above set of benchmark model parameters, the solutions of the ARE (5.8) and the linear algebraic equation (5.9) are computed to be:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, from Theorem 5.2, the optimal production rate u ∗ takes the following feedback form of the inventory level X ∗ and the market regime i ∈ { 1 , 2 } :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the value function v ( x, i ) and a simulation result of X ∗ and u ∗ are presented in Figures 1 and 2, respectively.

## 5.2.2 Sensitivity analysis

In the next, based on the set of benchmark model parameters given in Subsubsction 5.2.1, we present a sensitivity analysis (or monotonic dependence) of the value function v ( x, i ) on four parameters of particular interests, including the discount factor r , the generator Q , and the coefficients θ ( i ) and σ ( i ) of the inventory process. In the numerical experiments, we will vary only one of the four parameters at a time while keeping the other three unchanged. On the other hand, the values of N ( i ), R ( i ), c ( i ), h ( i ) are fixed to be the same with those in Subsubsction 5.2.1.

We first investigate the impact of the discount factor r on v ( x, i ) across three levels: (i) a low level r = 0 . 03, (ii) a medium level r = 0 . 05, and (iii) a high level r = 0 . 08. Figure 3a shows that the value function shifts downward as r increases. Furthermore, Table 1 indicates that ϕ falls as r rises, which suggests that the negative feedback of the production rate u ∗ on the inventory level X ∗ gets weakened.

Next, we assume q 12 = q 21 ≡ q in Q and analyze three different transition rates: (i) q = 1, (ii) q = 2, and (iii) q = 5. It can be seen from Figure 3b that an increase in q leads to an increase in v ( x, 1) (good market) and a decrease in v ( x, 2) (bad market). This convergence (i.e., moving closer to each other) of v ( x, 1) and v ( x, 2) reflects that as the two states switch more and more rapidly, they are becoming more like a single state. The opposite monotonicity of ϕ (1) vs. ϕ (2) and ψ (1) vs. ψ (2) with respect to q in Table 1 supports such a fact.

Figure 1: Value function v ( x, i ).

<!-- image -->

Figure 2: Simulation of X ∗ t and u ∗ t .

<!-- image -->

Then, the value functions for three different demand rates are plotted in Figure 3c, include: (i) [ θ (1) , θ (2)] = [4 , 1 . 5], (ii) [ θ (1) , θ (2)] = [4 , 2 . 5], and (iii) [ θ (1) , θ (2)] = [5 , 2 . 5]. Increasing either θ (1) or θ (2) decreases the value function. This is natural as an increasing demand rate leads to a higher sale opportunity, which further reduces the inventory cost. On the other hand, Table 1 shows that ϕ remains the same while ψ declines when θ grows up, which implies a stability in the feedback component and an increase in the fixed component of the optimal production rate u ∗ t .

Finally, we examine the effect of volatility rate σ on the value function with three levels: (i) [ σ (1) , σ (2)] = [0 . 1 , 0 . 3], (ii) [ σ (1) , σ (2)] = [0 . 4 , 0 . 6], and (iii) [ σ (1) , σ (2)] = [0 . 8 , 1 . 2]. We observe from Figure 3d that the value function increases as σ gets larger. A larger volatility rate means a greater uncertainty, which results in a bigger cost. From Table 1, ϕ and ψ remain unchanged for different volatility rates, and so does the optimal production rate u ∗ t . The reason may be that the control u does not enter the diffusion term of the inventory process X .

Figure 3: Dependency of value functions on model parameters.

<!-- image -->

Table 1: Values of ϕ and ψ for different r , q , θ , σ .

| ϕ  (1)  ϕ  (2)  ψ  (1)  ψ  (2)  r  = 0  .  03  0.413  0.366  -0.548  -0.230  r  = 0  .  05  0.408  0.362  -0.549  -0.233  r  = 0  .  08  0.402  0.356  -0.550  -0.236  q  = 1  0.408  0.362  -0.549  -0.233  q  = 2  0.400  0.370  -0.485  -0.291  q  = 5  0.392  0.377  -0.420  -0.339  θ  = (4  ,  1  .  5)  ⊤  0.408  0.362  -0.412  0.022  θ  = (4  ,  2  .  5)  ⊤  0.408  0.362  -0.549  -0.233  θ  = (5  ,  2  .  5)  ⊤  0.408  0.362  -0.850  -0.387  σ  = (0  .  1  ,  0  .  3)  ⊤  0.408  0.362  -0.549  -0.233  σ  = (0  .  4  ,  0  .  6)  ⊤  0.408  0.362  -0.549  -0.233  σ  = (0  .  8  ,  1  .  2)  ⊤  0.408  0.362  -0.549  -0.233   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 6 Concluding remarks

In this paper, we established a sufficient SMP for an infinite horizon discounted optimal control problem with regime switching. By choosing an appropriate discount factor, we prove the global solvability of infinite horizon forward and backward SDEs with Markov chains and the asymptotic property of their solutions at infinity. As an application, we utilize the sufficient SMP to solve a production planning problem. An explicit expression of the optimal production rate in a feedback form is derived via an ARE and a linear algebraic equation.

There are several interesting questions that deserve further investigation. Firstly, in this paper the optimal control problem is formulated to be completely observed. A more realistic scene is to consider a partially observed setup, for example, the state process X can be available but the Markov chain α cannot be observed (see [12]). Secondly, the production planning problem is essentially a special kind of LQ problem. It is interesting and, in the meantime more difficult, to study general infinite horizon LQ optimal control problems with regime switching and the associated AREs. Thirdly, together with another popular topic, recently the mean-field control problem with regime switching has attracted great research interests (see [14, 15]). We also expect to establish an infinite horizon sufficient SMP within such a framework.

## A Proof of Lemma 3.3

Proof. In the structure of a forward SDE, the backward SDE (3.7) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, applying Itˆ o's formula to | Y s e Ks | 2 over [0 , t ], we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that

Note that

Combining (A.1) and (A.2), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting (A.4) into (A.3), we have

which yields the estimate (3.8). Then, by using the same method as Theorem 3.1, we can show that the map T ↦→ E [ | Y T e KT | 2 ] is uniformly continuous. This combined with Y ∈ L 2 ,K F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) give the asymptotic property (3.9).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## B Proof of Lemma 5.1

̸

Proof. Uniqueness . We first prove the uniqueness of solution to the ARE (5.8). Suppose there exist two non-negative solutions ( ϕ (1) , ϕ (2) , . . . , ϕ ( m )) ⊤ and ( ˜ ϕ (1) , ˜ ϕ (2) , . . . , ˜ ϕ ( m )) ⊤ to (5.8). By the property q ii = -∑ j = i q ij and subtracting the two equations satisfied by ϕ and ϕ , we obtain

̸

̸

For simplicity, we denote ∆ ϕ ∈ R m with its i -th element ∆ ϕ ( i ) . = ϕ ( i ) -ϕ ( i ) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Then, the equation (B.1) can be rewritten in a matrix form as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that A ϕ is a strictly diagonally dominant matrix, since

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

It follows from Horn and Johnson [9, Theorem 6.1.10] that A ϕ is an invertible matrix. Therefore, equation (B.2) has only zero solution, i.e., ∆ ϕ ( i ) = 0, and thus ϕ ( i ) = ϕ ( i ), i ∈ M .

˜ To proceed, we denote b ∈ R m with its i -th element b ( i ) . = ( h ( i ) -θ ( i )) ϕ ( i ) + N ( i ) c ( i ) and

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Similarly, B ϕ is also a strictly diagonally dominant matrix and then an invertible matrix. Moreover, the equation (5.9) can be rewritten in a matrix form as follows:

which admits a unique solution B -1 ϕ b .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Existence . Next, we prove the existence of a non-negative solution to (5.8). The procedure below to find a solution is essentially based on the so-called elimination method . Without loss of

̸

̸

generality, we assume R ( i ) ≡ 1, i ∈ M . The proof will be similar for the general case. Then, (5.8) becomes

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We introduce a transformation:

̸

a function f i : R m ↦→ R :

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

and a number of sets S d , d = 0 , 1 , . . . , m -1, defined by:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In order to show the equation (5.8) admits at least one non-negative solution, it suffices to show the vector-value function ( f 1 , . . . , f m ) has at least one zero point ( y ∗ 1 , . . . , y ∗ m ) ∈ S 0 . In the following, the proof is divided into three steps.

Step 1 . For the function f 1 (given ( y 2 , . . . , y m ) ∈ S 1 ), we can find a zero point

Clearly, y ∗ 1 is a continuous function of ( y 2 , . . . , y m ) ∈ S 1 . In addition, by the elementary inequality √ a + b ≤ √ a + √ b for any a, b &gt; 0, there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Step 2 . Substituting y ∗ 1 into the function f 2 (given ( y 3 , . . . , y m ) ∈ S 2 ), we denote

From the intermediate value theorem, there exists at least one y ∗ 2 ≥ l 2 such that u ( y ∗ 2 ) = 0 (noting that u ( l 2 ) ≤ 0 and lim y 2 →∞ u ( y 2 ) = ∞ due to the estimate (B.5)). Moreover, by Young's inequality 4 √ a ≤ 1 2 C a + C 3 8 for any a, C &gt; 0, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which leads to that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Plugging the above inequality into (B.5), one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So far, we deduce that y ∗ 1 , y ∗ 2 are dependent only on ( y 3 , . . . , y m ) ∈ S 2 , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Step 3 . By applying the elimination method repeatedly, we can obtain y ∗ 1 , y ∗ 2 , . . . , y ∗ m -1 , which are dependent only on y m , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

We claim that there exists a zero point of g ( y m ) in [ l m , ∞ ), which is denoted as y ∗ m . In fact, note that

Substituting y ∗ 1 , y ∗ 2 , . . . , y ∗ m -1 into f m , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

Hence, from the intermediate value theorem, there exists a y ∗ m ≥ l m such that g ( y ∗ m ) = 0.

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Through the above three steps, we finally obtain a zero point ( y ∗ 1 , . . . , y ∗ m ) ∈ S 0 for the function ( f 1 , . . . , f m ), which gives the existence of a non-negative solution to the ARE (5.8).

## Declarations

Competing Interests. The authors do not have any competing interests.

## References

- [1] A. Bensoussan, S. P. Sethi, R. Vickson, N. Derzko, Stochastic production planning with production constraints, SIAM J. Control Optim., 22 (1984), 920-935.

- [2] J. Buffington, R. J. Elliott, American options with regime switching, Int. J. Theor. Appl. Finance, 5 (2002), 497-514.
- [3] C. Donnelly. Sufficient stochastic maximum principle in a regime-switching diffusion model, Appl. Math. Optim., 64 (2011), 155-169.
- [4] W. H. Fleming, S. P. Sethi, H. M. Soner, An optimal stochastic production planning problem with randomly fluctuating demand, SIAM J. Control Optim., 25 (1987), 1494-1502.
- [5] A. Garcia, R. L. Smith, Solving nonstationary infinite horizon stochastic production planning problems, Oper. Res. Lett., 27 (2000), 135-141.
- [6] X. Gong, S. X. Zhou, Optimal production planning with emissions trading, Oper. Res., 61 (2013), 908-924.
- [7] S. Haadem, B. Øksendal, F. Proske, Maximum principles for jump diffusion processes with infinite horizon, Automatica, 49 (2013), 2267-2275.
- [8] M. R. Hardy, A regime-switching model of long-term stock returns, N. Amer. Actuarial J., 5 (2001), 41-53.
- [9] R. A. Horn, C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 2012.
- [10] Y. Hu, X. Shi, Z. Q. Xu, Constrained stochastic LQ control with regime switching and application to portfolio selection, Ann. Appl. Probab., 32 (2022), 426-460.
- [11] X. Li, X. Y. Zhou, Indefinite stochastic LQ controls with Markovian jumps in a finite time horizon, Commun. Inf. Syst., 2 (2002), 265-282.
- [12] S. Lv, J. Xiong, W. Xu, Stochastic maximum principle for hybrid optimal control problems under partial observation, Systems Control Lett., 181 (2023), Paper No. 105651.
- [13] B. Maslowski, P. Veverka, Sufficient stochastic maximum principle for discounted control problem, Appl. Math. Optim., 70 (2014), 225-252.
- [14] S. L. Nguyen, D. T. Nguyen, G. Yin, A stochastic maximum principle for switching diffusions using conditional mean-fields with applications to control problems, ESAIM Control Optim. Cal. Var., 26 (2020), Paper No. 69.
- [15] S. L. Nguyen, G. Yin, D. T. Nguyen, A general stochastic maximum principle for mean-field controls with regime switching, Appl. Math. Optim., 84 (2021), 3255-3294.
- [16] S. Peng, Y. Shi, Infinite horizon forward-backward stochastic differential equations, Stoch. Process. Appl., 85 (2000), 75-92.
- [17] Y. Shen, T. K. Siu, The maximum principle for a jump-diffusion mean-field model and its application to the mean-variance problem, Nonlinear Anal. Theory Meth. Appl., 86 (2013), 58-73.
- [18] J. Sun, J. Yong, Stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems in infinite horizon, Appl. Math. Optim., 78 (2018), 145-183.

- [19] G. L. Thompson, S. P. Sethi, Turnpike horizons for production planning, Management Sci., 26 (1980), 229-241.
- [20] L. Wang, D. D. Yao, Production planning with risk hedging under a conditional value at risk objective, Oper. Res., 71 (2023), 1055-1072.
- [21] Q. Wei, Z. Yu, Infinite horizon forward-backward SDEs and open-loop optimal controls for stochastic linear-quadratic problems with random coefficients, SIAM J. Control Optim., 59 (2021), 2594-2623.
- [22] D. D. Yao, Q. Zhang, X. Y. Zhou, A regime-switching model for European options, In: Stochastic Processes, Optimization, and Control Theory: Applications in Financial Engineering, Queueing Networks, and Manufacturing Systems, 281-300, Springer, New York, 2006.
- [23] J. Yong, X. Y. Zhou, Stochastic Controls: Hamiltonian Systems and HJB Equations, Springer, New York, 1999.
- [24] Z. Yu, Infinite horizon jump-diffusion forward-backward stochastic differential equations and their application to backward linear-quadratic problems, ESAIM Control Optim. Cal. Var., 23 (2017), 1331-1359.
- [25] Q. Zhang, Stock trading: An optimal selling rule, SIAM J. Control Optim., 40 (2001), 64-87.
- [26] X. Zhang, X. Li, J. Xiong, Open-loop and closed-loop solvabilities for stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems of Markovian regime switching system, ESAIM Control Optim. Cal. Var., 27 (2021), Paper No. 69.
- [27] Y. Zheng, J. Shi, The maximum principle for discounted optimal control of partially observed forward-backward stochastic systems with jumps on infinite horizon, ESAIM Control Optim. Calc. Var., 29 (2023), Paper No. 34.
- [28] X. Y. Zhou, Sufficient conditions of optimality for stochastic systems with controllable diffusions, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 41 (1996), 1176-1179.
- [29] X. Y. Zhou, G. Yin, Markowitz's mean-variance portfolio selection with regime switching: A continuous-time model, SIAM J. Control Optim., 42 (2003), 1466-1482.