## Turnpike Property of Mean-Field Linear-Quadratic Optimal Control Problems in Infinite-Horizon with Regime Switching

Hongwei Mei ∗ , Svetlozar Rachev † and Rui Wang ‡

November 4, 2025

Abstract. This paper considers an optimal control problem for a linear mean-field stochastic differential equation having regime switching with quadratic functional in the large time horizons. Our main contribution lies in establishing the strong turnpike property for the optimal pairs when the time horizon tends to infinity. To work with the mean-field terms, we apply the orthogonal decomposition method to derive a closed-loop representation of the optimal control problem in a finite time horizon. To analyze the asymptotic behavior of the optimal controls, we examine the convergence of the solutions of Riccati equations and backward differential equations as the time horizon tends to infinity. The strong turnpike property can be obtained based on these convergence results. Finally, we verify the optimality of the limit optimal pair in two cases: integrable case and local-integrable case.

Keywords. Turnpike property, linear-quadratic, mean-field, regime switching, Riccati equation, backward differential equation

AMS 2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. 49N10, 60F15, 93E15, 93E20.

∗ Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409, USA; email: hongwei.mei@ttu.edu . This author is partially supported by Simons Travel Grant MP-TSM-00002835.

† Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409, USA; email: zari.rachev@ttu.edu

‡ Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409, USA; email: rui-math.wang@ttu.edu

## 1 Introduction

Let (Ω , F , P ) be a complete probability space on which a standard one-dimensional Brownian motion W = { W ( t ); t ⩾ 0 } and a Markov chain α ( · ) with a finite state space M = { 1 , 2 , 3 , · · · , m 0 } are defined, for which they are assumed to be independent. The generator of α ( · ) is denoted by ( λ ıȷ ) m 0 × m 0 . We now denote by F W = { F t W } t ⩾ 0 (resp. F α = { F α t } t ⩾ 0 , F = { F t } t ⩾ 0 ) the usual augmentation of the natural filtration generated by W ( · ) (resp. by α ( · ), and by ( W ( · ) , α ( · ))). Write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider the following controlled mean-field linear stochastic differential equation (MFSDE, for short), with regime switchings:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

under the following quadratic cost functional

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume the following throughout the paper.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, the superscript ⊤ denotes the transpose of matrices; ⟨· , ·⟩ denotes the inner product of two vectors (possibly in different spaces). The S n , S n + and S n ++ are defined by the sets of all ( n × n ) symmetric, positive semi-definite, and positive definite matrices, respectively. For any Euclidean space H (such as R n , R n × m , etc.),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also write L 2 F t ( H ) by the set of F t -measurable, H -valued random variables with finite second moment.

In (1.1), any ( s, x, ı ) is called an initial pair if ( x, ı ) ∈ L 2 F s ( R n ) ×M and s ∈ [0 , ∞ ). Write the set of all initial pairs by D . When T &lt; ∞ , the control process u ( · ) is taken from the space

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Provided (A1), it is well-known that for each ( s, x, ı ) ∈ D and u ( · ) ∈ U [ s, T ], (1.1) admits a unique solution X ( · ) ≡ X ( · ; s, x, ı ; u ( · )) ∈ L 2 F ( s, T ; R n ). Consequently, the cost functional J T ( s, x, ı ; u ( · )) is finite for all u ( · ) ∈ U [ s, T ]. Then it is natural to consider the following optimal control problem.

Problem (MF-LQ) T . For a given initial pair ( s, x, ı ) ∈ D , find a control ¯ u s,x,ı T ( · ) ∈ U [ s, T ] such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Problem (MF-LQ) T is usually referred to as mean-field linear-quadratic (MF-LQ, for short) optimal control problems with regime switchings over a finite horizon. Under some mild conditions, Problem (MF-LQ) T admits a unique (open-loop) optimal control ¯ u s,x,ı T ( · ) ∈ U [ s, T ]. Write ¯ X s,x,ı T ( · ) by the corresponding optimal state processes .

For the cases without mean-field terms, it is proven in [22, 23] that there exists some stochastic processes ( ¯ X ∞ ( · ) , ¯ u ∞ ( · )) with initial (0 , x, ı ), some absolute constants β, K &gt; 0, and a function h ( · ) : [0 , ∞ ) → [0 , ∞ ) independent of 0 &lt; T &lt; ∞ , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all t ∈ [0 , T ]. Such an asymptotic behavior is called the strong turnpike property (STP, for short) for the optimal pair ( ¯ X 0 ,x,ı T ( · ) , ¯ u 0 ,x,ı T ( · )) as T →∞ .

Investigation on turnpike property (for deterministic economics systems) can be dated back to von Neumann [27, 24] where the name turnpike property intuitively was suggested by the highway system of the United States in [8]. Since then the turnpike property has been found to hold for a large class of (deterministic, finite or infinite dimensional) optimal control problems. Numerous relevant results can be found in [19, 4, 7, 35, 40, 10, 39, 17, 3, 28, 9] and the references cited therein. In particular, [4] deals with some stochastic systems with jumps and the corresponding turnpike property was studied. At about the same time, certain stability for a finite time horizon multi-person discrete stochastic game was investigated and using the idea of turnpike property, it was shown the existence of an equilibrium for a stationary (discrete random) games ([18]). For continuous-time stochastic optimal LQ control problems, one can refer to [31, 6, 5, 33, 34, 13, 29, 2]. For stochastic LQ systems with Markovian jumps, [22, 23] generalizes the Turnpike property to three different cases: homogeneous cases, integrable cases and non-integrable cases. In the homogeneous cases, the main effort is devoted to proving the exponential convergence of Riccati equation, while in the latter two cases, the main focus is placed on the convergence of backward stochastic differential equations (BSDEs). It is worth mentioning that the non-homogeneous coefficients in [23] are allowed to be a stochastic process instead of deterministic constants which are necessary in the previous literature such as [33, 34]. Recently, [15] establishes the similar results for homogeneous two player zero-sum games.

In this paper, we focus on the mean-field stochastic optimal control with switching (1.1) under the cost functional (1.2), which generals the LQ optimal control problem studied in [22, 23]. In particular, the mean-field interactions E α t [ X ( t )] and E α t [ u ( t )] are involved. Similarly, we will prove two types of asymptotic behaviors of the open-loop optimal pair to Problem (MF-LQ) T :

- Integrable Case : b ( · ) , σ ( · ) , q ( · ) , ¯ q ( · ) ∈ L 2 F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) and r ( · ) , ¯ r ( · ) ∈ L 2 F (0 , ∞ ; R m ). In this case, h ( · ) is a non-negative integrable function on [0 , ∞ ). In particular, when b ( · ) , σ ( · ) , q ( · ) , r ( · ) , ¯ q ( · ) , ¯ r ( · ) are all 0 (i.e. homogeneous case), we have h ( t ) ≡ 0. In the integrable case, we will see that the ( ¯ X ∞ ( · ) , ¯ u ∞ ( · )) is the optimal control for an infinitehorizon problem.
- Local-Integrable Case : For any 0 &lt; T &lt; ∞ , b ( · ) , σ ( · ) , q ( · ) , ¯ q ( · ) ∈ L 2 F (0 , T ; R n ) and r ( · ) , ¯ r ( · ) ∈ L 2 F (0 , T ; R m ) with some additional assumptions. In this case, we can take h ( t ) ≡ 1. In the local-integrable case, we will see that the ( ¯ X ∞ ( · ) , ¯ u ∞ ( · )) is the optimal control for an ergodic control problem.

Based on [22, 23], the main novelty of this paper lies in studying the convergence of a system of Riccati equations and mean-field BSDEs. The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. In Section 2, we obtain an equivalent formulation of Problem (MF-LQ) T through orthogonal decomposition method to derive the closed-loop representation of the optimal control. Then Section 3 studies the asymptotic behavior of the optimal controls as T →∞ where the main efforts are placed on the convergence of Riccati equations and mean-field BSDEs. Our main results on STP are proved in Section 4, together with the corresponding optimality for integrable case and local-integrable case. Finally, some concluding remarks are made in Section 5.

## 2 Optimal Control for Problem (MF-LQ) T

In this section, we will recall some results in [21] on the optimal control ( ¯ X s,x,ı T ( · ) , ¯ u s,x,ı T ( · )) for Problem (MF-LQ) T . The section is divided into several subsections.

## 2.1 Martingale Measure

Recall that α ( · ) is a Markov chain whose state space M is finite. Thus, we may let its generator be ( λ ıȷ ) m 0 × m 0 ∈ R m 0 × m 0 , which is a real matrix so that the following hold:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

We now proceed with a martingale measure of Markov chain α ( · ). For ı = ȷ , we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The above M ıȷ ( · ) is a square-integrable martingale (with respect to F α ). For convenience, we let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then { M ıȷ ( · ) ∣ ∣ ı, ȷ ∈ M} is the martingale measure of Markov chain α ( · ).

Now, let F -be the smallest filtration containing {F t W } t ⩾ 0 and {F α t -} t ⩾ 0 augumented with all P -null sets. To define the stochastic integral with respect to such a martingale measure, we need to introduce the following Hilbert spaces

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, for any φ ( · ) ∈ M 2 F -( t, T ; H ), we define its stochastic integral against dM by the following:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

whose quadratic variation is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.2 Orthgonal Decomposition

In this section, we will derive an equivalent formulation for Problem (MF-LQ) T . In addition, we will also propose two optimal control problems over the infinite horizon, which will be used in verifying the optimality for the limit process in the later section.

For any φ ( · ) ∈ L 2 F ( s, T ; H ), define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that Π[ φ ]( t ) ∈ F α t and the definition is in point-wise sense. For any φ 1 ( · ) = φ 2 ( · ) ∈ L 2 F ( s, T ; H ), it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This yields that Π defines a linear map from L 2 F ( s, T ; H ) to L 2 F α ( s, T ; H ). Note that for any φ ( · ) ∈ L 2 F ( s, T ; H ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore Π induces the following orthogonal decomposition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It can be easily seen that the above also holds for T = ∞ . With such a decomposition, we will reformulate Problem (MF-LQ) T in the product space instead.

Now we apply the orthogonal decomposition on Problem (MF-LQ) T . Write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

By Lemma A.1 in [20], we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The cost functional (1.2) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here Γ 1 ( ı ) = Γ( ı ) , Γ 2 ( ı ) = Γ( ı ) + ¯ Γ( ı ) , for Γ = A,B,C,D,Q,R,S,q,r.

Using such a decomposition, we also rewrite the set of admissible initial states and the set of admissible controls by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

After the orthogonal decomposition, Problem (MF-LQ) T can be equivalently stated as follows.

Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ T . For any ( s, ı, x 1 ⊕ x 2 ) ∈ D , find a ¯ u 1 ( · ) ⊕ ¯ u 2 ( · ) ∈ U [ s, T ] such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our main effort in the sequel is devoted to studying the strong Turnpike property for the optimal couple for Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ T as T →∞ . To identify the optimality of the limit process, it is natural to arise two infinite-horizon optimal control problems where a stabilizibility condition is necessary.

## 2.3 Stabilizability and Infinite-Horizon Optimal Control Problems

In this subsection, we propose the following optimal control problems over the infinite horizon [0 , ∞ ) to identify the optimality of the limit pair. The following are the two problems.

Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ . For any ( s, ı, x 1 ⊕ x 2 ) ∈ D , find a ¯ u 1 ( · ) ⊕ ¯ u 2 ( · ) ∈ U s,x,ı ad [ s, ∞ ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ E . For any ( s, ı, x 1 ⊕ x 2 ) ∈ D , find a ¯ u 1 ( · ) ⊕ ¯ u 2 ( · ) ∈ U s,x,ı ad [ s, ∞ ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the above two problems, we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X ( · ; x, i, u ( · )) is the solution of (1.1) with initial ( x, ı ) = ( x 1 ⊕ x 2 , ı ) and control u ( · ) = u 1 ( · ) ⊕ u 2 ( · ) . The admissible control U s,x,ı ad [0 , ∞ ) in Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ is a subset of U [0 , ∞ ) which is used to guaranttee J ∞ ( s, x 1 ⊕ x 2 , ı ; u 1 ( · ) ⊕ u 2 ( · )) to be finite (so that Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ is well-defined).

Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ is usually referred to as the infinite-horizon control problem and Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ E is usually referred to as the ergodic control problem . We will see that if we impose different assumptions on the non-homogeneous terms, then the limit process ( X ∞ ( · ) , u ∞ ( · )) turns out to be the optimal couple for either Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ or Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ E .

We notice that in Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ , the set of admissible controls, U s,x,ı ad [ s, ∞ ), is dependent on the initial value ( s, x, ı ). Moreover, we also see that U s,x,ı ad [ s, ∞ ) may not be a linear space necessarily. The following is a counter example.

Example 2.1. Consider the following 1-dimensional ordinary differential equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let u ( t ) = -2 x 0 e -t . It can be easily seen that X ( t ) = x 0 e -t with ∫ ∞ 0 | X ( t ) | 2 dt &lt; ∞ . Therefore u ( · ) ∈ U x 0 ad [0 , ∞ ) .

Let v ( t ) = -2 λx 0 e -t = λu ( t ). Under such a control, the state process satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any λ = 1 , v ( · ) = λu ( · ) / ∈ U x 0 ad [0 , ∞ ). Such an example justifies that U s,x,ı ad [ s, ∞ ) may not be a linear space necessarily.

̸

Because U s,x,ı ad [ s, ∞ ) may not be a linear space, ( u 1 ( · )+ εv 1 ( · )) ⊕ ( u 2 ( · )+ εv 2 ( · )) may not belong to U s,x,ı ad [ s, ∞ ) given u 1 ( · ) ⊕ u 2 ( · ) , v 1 ( · ) ⊕ v 2 ( · ) ∈ U s,x,ı ad [ s, ∞ ). Therefore the classical calculation of variation method is not directly applicable for Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ . To overcome this difficulty, we need to derive some new equivalent forms for Problem (MFLQ) ∗ T , Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ and Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ E to remove such a dependence. To achieve this, we consider the following stabilizability condition which for (1.1).

Definition 2.2. (1). (Θ 1 ( · ) , Θ 2 ( · )) : M↦→ R m × n × R m × n is said to be a stabilizer for the following system (with α ( t ) suppressed)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

admits a unique solution ( X 1 ( · ) , X 2 ( · )) ∈ L 2 F α ( s, ∞ ; R n ) ⊥ × L 2 F α ( s, ∞ ; R n ) for any ( s, x 1 ⊕ x 2 , ı ) ∈ D .

(2) (Θ 1 ( · ) , Θ 2 ( · )) : M↦→ R m × n × R m × n is said to be a dissipative strategy of system (2.4) if there exist Σ 1 , Σ 2 : M↦→ S n ++ such that, for any ȷ ∈ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for k = 1 , 2.

It has been proved in [21] that those two definitions are equivalent. Therefore, we write the set of all possible stabilizers by S [ A 1 , A 2 , C 1 , C 2 ; B 1 , B 2 , D 1 , D 2 ] . We now introduce the following assumption.

̸

(A2) . S [ A 1 , A 2 , C 1 , C 2 ; B 1 , B 2 , D 1 , D 2 ] = ∅ , or equivalently there exists a ( ̂ Θ 1 ( · ) , ̂ Θ 2 ( · )) ∈ S [ A 1 , A 2 , C 1 , C 2 ; B 1 , B 2 , D 1 , D 2 ].

In fact, it can be easily seen that (Θ 1 ( · ) , Θ 2 ( · )) ∈ S [ A 1 , A 2 , C 1 , C 2 ; B 1 , B 2 , D 1 , D 2 ] if and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

admits a unique solution ( X 1 ( · ) , X 2 ( · )) ∈ L 2 F α ( s, ∞ ; R n ) ⊥ × L 2 F α ( s, ∞ ; R n ) for any ( s, x 1 ⊕ x 2 , i ) ∈ D .

Now let us adopt (A2) to remove the dependence of the admissible control set U s,x,ı ad [ s, ∞ ) on the initial value. For any u ( · ) = u 1 ( · ) ⊕ u 2 ( · ) ∈ U s,x,ı ad [ s, ∞ ), write the solution by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then v ( · ) = v 1 ( · ) ⊕ v 2 ( · ) ∈ U [ s, ∞ ) and X ( · ; s, x, ı ; u ( · )) = ̂ X ( · ; s, x, ı ; v ( · For any v ( · ) = v 1 ( · ) ⊕ v 2 ( · ) ∈ U [ s, ∞ ), define

).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then u ( · ) = u 1 ( · ) ⊕ u 2 ( · ) ∈ U s,x,ı ad [ s, ∞ ) and X k ( · ; s, x, ı ; u ( · )) = ̂ X k ( · ; s, x, ı ; v ( · )). Here ̂ X k ( · ; s, x, ı ; v ( · )) is the solution to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also define a new cost functional

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observed from above, Problem (MF-LQ) T , Problem (MF-LQ) ∞ and Problem (MFLQ) E can be further equivalently stated as follows.

Problem (MF-LQ) ∗∗ T . For any ( s, ı, x 1 ⊕ x 2 ) ∈ D , find a ¯ v 1 ( · ) ⊕ ¯ v 2 ( · ) ∈ U [ s, T ] such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Problem (MF-LQ) ∗∗ ∞ . For any ( s, ı, x 1 ⊕ x 2 ) ∈ D , find a ¯ v 1 ( · ) ⊕ ¯ v 2 ( · ) ∈ U [ s, ∞ ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Problem (MF-LQ) ∗∗ E . For any ( s, ı, x 1 ⊕ x 2 ) ∈ D , find a ¯ v 1 ( · ) ⊕ ¯ v 2 ( · ) ∈ U loc [ s, ∞ ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

At the same time (A2) reduces to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Without loss of generality, we assume that ̂ Θ 1 ( · ) = ̂ Θ 2 ( · ) = 0. Then (A2) can be represented as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the sequel, we will consider Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ T , Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ and Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ E under (A2)'. Otherwise, we will work with Problem (MF-LQ) ∗∗ T , Problem (MF-LQ) ∗∗ ∞ and Problem (MF-LQ) ∗∗ E .

## 2.4 Optimal Control for Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ T

Now we are ready to study the optimal control for Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ T . We need the following positive-definiteness condition in the sequel.

(A3) . For each ı ∈ M and k = 1 , 2,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we can state the results on the optimal control of Problem (MF-LQ) T .

Theorem 2.3. Suppose (A1), (A2)' and (A3) hold. Then the following are true.

- (i) There exists a unique solution P 1 ,T ( · ) , P 2 ,T ( · ) : [0 , T ] ×M→ S n ++ to the following ARE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(ii) There exists a unique adapted solution ( η 1 ,T ( · ) , ζ T ( · ) , ζ M 1 ,T ( · )) ∈ L 2 F α (0 , ∞ ; R n ) ⊥ × L 2 F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × M 2 F α -(0 , ∞ ; R n ) ⊥ and ( η 2 ,T ( · ) , ζ M 2 ,T ( · )) ∈ L 2 F α (0 , ∞ ; R n ) × M 2 F α -(0 , ∞ ; R n ) to the following BSDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where φ k,T ( t, ı ) = P k,T ( t, ı ) b k ( t )+( C Θ k,T k ( t, ı )) ⊤ P 1 ,T ( t, ı ) σ k ( t )+ q k ( t )+Θ ⊤ k,T ( t, ı ) r k ( t ) . Write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(iii) The optimal control of Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ T admits the following closed-loop representation,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here ( ¯ X 1 ,T ( · ) , ) ¯ X 2 ,T ( · )) is the solution to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Until now, we have presented the expilcit form of the optimal control for Problem (MF-LQ) T . The rest of the paper is focused on the asymptotic behavior of the optimal control in (2.11). Before finishing this section, let us make the following remark.

Remark 2.4 . (1) Note Theorem 2.3 also holds if (A2)' is replaced by (A2). In particular, it is worth to emphasize that the optimal control in (2.11) is independent of the choice of ( ̂ Θ 1 ( · ) , ̂ Θ 2 ( · )) in Problem (MF-LQ) ∗∗ T . For more details, one check [21].

(2) The assumption (A3) can be possibly weaken by some uniform convexity assumption on the cost functional. This paper will not consider this part.

## 3 Asymptotic Behavior of the Optimal Controls

With the closed-loop representation of the optimal control in (2.11), this section is devoted to studying the asymptotic behavior as T → ∞ . We will consider Θ k,T ( · ) and v k,T ( · ) separately.

## 3.1 Riccati Equation

To study the asymptotic behavior of ( P 1 ,T ( · ) , P 2 ,T ( · )) as T →∞ , we consider the following ARE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following proposition presents the convergence of ( P 1 ,T ( · ) , P 2 ,T ( · )).

Proposition 3.1. Suppose (A1), (A2)' and (A3) hold. The following are true.

(i) . The ARE (3.1) admits a unique solution ( P 1 ( · ) , P 2 ( · )) : M ↦→ S n ++ such that (Θ 1 , ∞ ( · ) , Θ 2 , ∞ ( · )) ∈ S [ A 1 , A 2 , C 1 , C 2 ; B 1 , B 2 , D 1 , D 2 ] .

(ii) . For any given t ∈ [0 , ∞ ) , the following convergence holds

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(iii) . There exists a δ ∗ &gt; 0 and K &gt; 0 (independent of T ) so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. (i) and (ii) have been proved in [21].

(iii). Because of (3.3), we know that Θ k,T ( t, ı ) = Θ k,T -t (0 , ı ) → Θ k, ∞ ( ı ) as T → ∞ . Moreover, there exists Σ k ( · ) : M→ S n ++ such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, there exists a t 0 &gt; 0 independent of T such that for

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all t ∈ [ s, T -t 0 ] and for all T &gt; s + t 0 .

Now we consider the homogeneous case of Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ T and Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ and we write J 0 T ( s, x 1 ⊕ x 2 ; u 1 ( · ) ⊕ u 2 ( · )) and J 0 ∞ ( s, x 1 ⊕ x 2 ; u 1 ( · ) ⊕ u 2 ( · )) by the corresponding cost functionals. Let ( ¯ X 0 1 ,T ( · ) , ¯ X 0 2 ,T ( · )) be the solution to (2.12) with v k,T ( · ) , b ( · ) , σ ( · ) = 0 which is the optimal state process for Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ T . Now applying Itˆ o's formula on

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(3.6) yields that for t ∈ [ s, T -t 0 ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Grownwall's inequality implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For t ∈ [ T -t 0 , T ], due to the boundedness of A k , B k , C k , D k , Θ k , it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Grownwall's inequality implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is to say

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now let us prove (3.3). By the dynamic programming principle and (3.7), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the arbitrariness of x 1 ⊕ x 2 ∈ L 2 F s ( R n ), we have (3.3). (3.4) follows from the definition of Θ k,T and Θ k, ∞ and the uniform boundedness of R k + D ⊤ k P 1 ,T D k &gt; 0 from below.

## 3.2 BSDEs

In this subsection, we will consider the asymptotic behavior of v k,T ( · ). The main effort is devoted to studying BSDEs (2.9) as T →∞ . Write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We need the following assumption to study the asymptotic behavior the BSDE (2.9). (A3) It follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let T →∞ in (2.9), it is natural to arise the following BSDE over [0 , ∞ ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have the following proposition.

Proposition 3.2. (i) The BSDE (3.9) admits a unique solution solution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(ii) The BSDE (3.9) admits a unique solution solution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here L 2 ,loc H (0 , ∞ ; R n ) = ∩ T&gt; 0 L 2 H (0 , T ; R n ) , M 2 ,loc H -(0 , ∞ ; R n ) = ∩ T&gt; 0 M 2 H -(0 , T ; R n ) , for H = F , F α .

(iii) For k = 1 , 2 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It also holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(iv) The following are true.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The results here are parallel to Proposition 3.5 and Proposition 3.7 in [23] where the key difference lies in the mean-field terms in (2.9) and (3.9). To tackle this, we will propose two BSDEs without mean-field terms so that the the solutions to (2.9) and (3.9) can be repsented using mappings Π 1 and Π 2 .

We consider the following two BSDEs:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For (3.18), we will solve the first BSDE first. Seeing ˇ ζ T ( · ) as a given stochastic process, one then proceed with the second BSDE. In this case, (3.18) is essentially a regular BSDE without mean-field terms. The similar idea can be applied to (3.19). Observed from this, we are allowed to apply the previous results in [23] on (3.18) and (3.19).

By Proposition 3.5 in [23], (3.18) and (3.19) admits a unique solution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Through the orthogonal decomposition, it can be verified that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is the solution to (2.9) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is the solution to (3.9). Provided the estimates in Proposition 3.7 in [23], (3.12)-(3.17) hold. The proof is complete.

## 4 Strong Turnpike Property

Now we are ready to prove our main results on the strong turnpike property. Without loss of generality, we assume s = 0 in the sequel. Recall that the optimal state process for Problem (MF-LQ) T satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To define the limit process, we consider the following control

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the state process ¯ X 1 , ∞ ( · ) ⊕ ¯ X 2 , ∞ ( · ) satisfies the following SDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We will first present our main result on the Turnpike property in the paper. Then we will verify the optimality of the control in (4.2) for Problem (MF-LQ) ∞ or Problem (MF-LQ) E under different assumptions.

Theorem 4.1. Suppose (A1), (A2) and (A3) hold. Then there exist absolute constants β, K &gt; 0 independent of ( t, T ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all t ∈ [0 , T ] .

Proof. In the proof, the top index (0 , x, ı ), t and α ( t ) are suppressed. By (4.1) and (4.3), it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The applying Itˆ o's formula on

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(3.4) and (3.5) yield that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using (3.14), Grownwall's inequality implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using (3.14) again, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof is complete.

Until now, we have proved the strong Turnpike property for Problem (MF-LQ) T as T → ∞ . One can see that the key of the process lies in deriving the control strategy (4.2) by studying the convergence of Riccati equations in (2.8) and BSDEs in (2.9). With appropriate assumptions, one can conclude those two systems converge to (3.1) and (3.9) respectively. Now the rest of this section aims to examine the optimality ¯ u 1 , ∞ ( · ) ⊕ ¯ u 2 , ∞ ( · ). We will see that ¯ u 1 , ∞ ( · ) ⊕ ¯ u 2 , ∞ ( · ) is the optimal control for either Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ or Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ E under different assumptions. We have two different cases.

Integrable Case. Instead of (A3), we assume the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is obvious that (IC) is stronger than (A3). Therefore, all the previous results hold in such a case. Recall the Problem (MF-LQ) ∞ (or Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ ∞ equivalently). By [21], we directly have the following proposition.

Proposition 4.2. Under (A1), (A2) and (LC), ( ¯ X 0 ,x,ı ∞ ( · ) , ¯ u 0 ,x,ı ∞ ( · )) is the unique optimal pair for Problem (MF-LQ) ∞ .

In this case, it follows that ¯ X 0 ,x,ı ∞ ( · ) ∈ L 2 F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) and therefore we call such a case by integrable case.

Non-Integrable Case. In addition to (A3), we further assume the following

(LIC).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this case, we can verify that ¯ u 0 ,x,ı ∞ ( · ) = ¯ u 0 ,x,ı 1 , ∞ ( · ) ⊕ ¯ u 0 ,x,ı 2 , ∞ ( · ) is the optimal control of Problem (MF-LQ) ∗ E as follows.

Proposition 4.3. Suppose (A1), (A2), (A3) and (LIC) hold. For any (0 , x, ı ) ∈ D , ¯ u 0 ,x,ı ∞ ( · ) is the optimal control and ¯ X 0 ,x,ı ∞ ( · ) is the corresponding optimal trajectory for Problem (MF-LQ) E . Moreover, J E (0 , x, ı ; ¯ u 0 ,x,ı ∞ ( · )) is finite.

Proof. Without loss generality, we assume (A2)' instead of (A2). We also suppress the top index (0 , x, ı ) in the proof. From (3.12)-(3.17), it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we see

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking T →∞ , it follows that for any u ( · ) ∈ U loc [0 , ∞ ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, the uniform boundedness of E | ¯ X k, ∞ ( · ) | 2 and (4.5) together imply that J E (0 , x 1 ⊕ x 2 , ı ; ¯ u ∞ ( · ) ⊕ ¯ u 2 , ∞ ( · )) is finite. Moreover, ¯ u 1 , ∞ ( · ) ⊕ ¯ u 2 , ∞ ( · ) is the optimal control process in U loc [0 , ∞ ) and ¯ X 1 , ∞ ( · ) ⊕ ¯ X 2 , ∞ ( · ) is the corresponding trajectory for Problem (MF-LQ) E .

In this case, it follows that ¯ X 0 ,x,ı ∞ ( · ) ∈ L 2 ,loc F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) and therefore we call such a case by local-integrable case.

## 5 Concluding Remarks

In this paper, we obtained the turnpike property for mean-field LQ optimal control in an infinite horizon with a regime-switching state. To work with the mean-field terms, an orthogonal decomposition method is introduced. Based on the integrability of the nonhomogeneous terms over the infinite horizon, we prove that the limit process verifies two different types of optimalities: integrable cases and local-integrable case. The idea in the paper is applicable in future works on the strong turnpike property for the equilibrium strategies for LQ two-player games with mean-field interactions. We hope to report those results in future works.

## 6 Declaration

The authors claim there is no conflict of interests. The authors did not use any generative AI or AI-assisted technologies in the writing process of this paper.

## References

- [1] M. Basei and H. Pham, A weak martingale approach to linear-quadratic McKeanVlasov stochastic control problems, J. Optim. Theory Appl., 181 (2019), 347-382.
- [2] E. Bayraktar and J. Jian, Ergodicity and turnpike properties of linear-quadratic mean field control problems, arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08935.
- [3] T. Breiten and L. Pfeiffer, On the turnpike property and the receding-horizon method for linear-quadratic optimal control problems, SIAM J. Control Optim., 58 (2020), 1077-1102.
- [4] D. A. Carlson, A. B. Haurie, and A. Leizarowitz, Infinite Horizon Optimal Control - Deterministic and Stochastic Systems, 2nd ed., Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991.
- [5] Y. Chen and P. Luo, Turnpike properties for stochastic backward linear-quadratic optimal problems, arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03456.
- [6] G. Conforti, Coupling by reflection for controlled diffusion processes: Turnpike property and large time behavior of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equations, Ann. Appl. Probab., 33 (2023), 4608-4644.
- [7] T. Damm, L. Gr¨ une, M. Stieler, and K. Worthmann, An exponential turnpike theorem for dissipative discrete time optimal control problems, SIAM J. Control Optim., 52 (2014), 1935-1957.
- [8] R. Dorfman, P. A. Samuelson, and R. M. Solow, Linear Programming and Economics Analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1958.
- [9] T. Faulwasser and L. Gr¨ une, Turnpike properties in optimal control: An overview of discrete-time and continuous-time results, Numerical Control: Part A, 23 (2022), 367-400.
- [10] L. Gr¨ une and R. Guglielmi, Turnpike properties and strict dissipativity for discrete time linear quadratic optimal control problems, SIAM J. Control Optim., 56 (2018), 1282-1302.
- [11] L. Gr¨ une and R. Guglielmi, On the relation between turnpike properties and dissipativity for continuous time linear quadratic optimal control problems, Math. Control Relat. Fields, 11 (2021), 169-188.
- [12] J. Huang, X. Li, and J. Yong, A linear-quadratic optimal control problem for meanfield stochastic differential equations in infinite horizon, Math. Control Relat. Fields, 5 (2015), 97-139.
- [13] J. Jian, S. Jin, Q. Song, and J. Yong, Long-Time Behaviors of Stochastic LinearQuadratic Optimal Control Problems, arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11633.
- [14] N. Li, X. Li, and Z. Yu, Indefinite mean-field type linear-quadratic stochastic optimal control problems, Automatica, 122 (2020), 109267.

- [15] X, Li, F. Wu, and X. Zhang. Turnpike properties for zero-sum stochastic linear quadratic differential games of Markovian regime switching system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.09358. 2025 Sep 11.
- [16] Q. L¨ u, Stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems for mean-field stochastic evolution equation, ESAIM Control Optim. Calc. Var., 26 (2020), 127.
- [17] H. Lou and W. Wang, Turnpike properties of optimal relaxed control problems, ESAIM Control Optim. Calc. Var., 25 (2019), 74.
- [18] R. Marimon, Stochastic turnpike property and stationary equilibrium, J. Economic Theory, 47 (1989), 282-306.
- [19] L. W. McKenzie, Turnpike theory, Econometrica, 44 (1976), 841-865.
- [20] H. Mei, Q. Wei, and J. Yong, Linear-quadratic optimal control problem for mean-field stochastic differential equations with a type of random coefficients, Numer. Algebra, Control Optim., 14 (2024), 813-852.
- [21] H. Mei, Q. Wei, and J. Yong, Linear-optimal control for mean-field stochastic differential equations in infinite-horizon with regime switching, preprint.
- [22] H. Mei, Q. Wei, and J. Yong, Turnpike Property of Stochastic Linear-Quadratic Optimal Control Problems in Large Horizons with Regime Switching I: Homogeneous Cases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09337. 2025 Jun 11.
- [23] H. Mei, R. Wang, and J. Yong, Turnpike Property of a Linear-Quadratic Optimal Control Problem in Large Horizons with Regime Switching II: Non-Homogeneous Cases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04993. 2025 Aug 7.
- [24] J. von Neumann, A model of general economic equilibrium, Rev. Econ. Stud., 13 (1945), 1-9.
- [25] A. Porretta and E. Zuazua, Long time versus steady state optimal control, SIAM J. Control Optim., 51 (2013), 4242-4273.
- [26] A. Porretta and E. Zuazua, Remarks on long time versus steady state optimal control, Mathematical Paradigms of Climate Science, Springer INdAM Ser. 15, Springer, New York, 2016, 67-89.
- [27] F. P. Ramsey, A mathematical theory of saving, The economic journal, 38 (1928), 543-559.
- [28] N. Sakamoto and E. Zuazua, The turnpike property in nonlinear optimal control-A geometric approach, Automatica, 134 (2021), 109939.
- [29] J. Schiessl, M. H., Baumann, T. Faulwasser, and L. Gr¨ une, L., On the relationship between stochastic turnpike and dissipativity notions, arXiv:2311.07281v2 [math.OC] 21 Aug 2024.
- [30] J. Sun, Mean-field stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems: Open-loop solvabilities, ESAIM Control Optim. Calc. Var., 23 (2017), 1099-1127.
- [31] J. Sun, H. Wang, and J. Yong, Turnpike properties for stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems, Chin. Ann. Math., Ser B, 43 (2022), 999-1022.
- [32] J. Sun and J. Yong, Stochastic Linear-Quadratic Optimal Control Theory: OpenLoop and Closed-Loop Solutions, Springer Briefs Math., Springer, 2020.

- [33] J. Sun and J. Yong, Turnpike properties for stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems with periodic coefficients, J. Diff. Equ., 400 (2024), 189-229.
- [34] J. Sun and J. Yong, Turnpike properties for mean-field linear-quadratic optimal control problems, SIAM J. Control Optim., 62 (2024), 752-775.
- [35] E. Tr´ elat and E. Zuazua, The turnpike property in finite-dimensional nonlinear optimal control, J. Diff. Equ., 258 (2015), 81-114.
- [36] J. Yong, Linear-quadratic optimal control problems for mean-field stochastic differential equations, SIAM J. Control Optim. 51 (2013), 2809-2838.
- [37] J. Yong, Optimization Theory: A Concise Introduction, World Scientific, Singapore, 2018.
- [38] A. J. Zaslavski, Turnpike Properties in the Calculus of Variations and Optimal Control, Nonconvex Optim. Appl. 80, Springer, New York, 2006.
- [39] A. J. Zaslavski, Turnpike Theory of Continuous-Time Linear Optimal Control Problems, Springer Optim. Appl. 148, Springer, 2019.
- [40] E. Zuazua, Large time control and turnpike properties for wave equations, Ann. Rev. Control, 44 (2017), 199-210.
- [41] X. Zhang, X. Li, and J. Xiong, Open-loop and closed-loop solvabilities for stochastic linear quadratic optimal control problems of Markovian regime switching system, ESAIM: Control, Optim. Calc. Var., 27(2021), 69.