## Infinite Horizon Linear Quadratic Mean Field Problems with Common Noise and Regime Switching via Conditional McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs ∗

Qingmeng Wei † Yaqi Xu ‡

November 24, 2025

## Abstract

This paper studies infinite horizon linear quadratic (LQ) mean field problems with common noise and regime switching, covering both control and game formulations. To establish a theoretical foundation for the LQ framework, we first analyze fully coupled forward-backward stochastic differential equations (FBSDEs) of conditional McKean-Vlasov type with Markovian switching and establish its well-posedness under a generalized domination-monotonicity condition. Building upon this solvability result, we then derive necessary and sufficient conditions for both the open-loop optimal control in the control problem and the mean-field Nash equilibria in the game problem.

Keywords: infinite horizon FBSDEs, markovian switching, conditional McKean-Vlasov, common noise, open-loop optimal control, mean-field Nash equilibria

AMS Mathematics Subject Classification. 93E20, 60H10, 49N10

## 1 Introduction

This work investigates infinite horizon linear quadratic mean field control and game problems that incorporate common noise and Markovian switching. Research in this area dates back to the pioneering contributions of Huang et al. [19] and Lasry, Lions [21], which established mean field game theory as a rigorous mathematical framework for analyzing large-scale systems of interacting agents. For comprehensive overviews of the theory and applications of mean field methods, we refer to [15, 3, 10, 11, 13] and references therein. It is widely recognized that the theoretical framework of mean field problems is built on two complementary approaches: the analytic approach and the probabilistic approach. The analytic approach to mean-field problems relies on a system of coupled Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman and Fokker-Planck equations. This framework is ultimately unified and generalized by the master equation-an infinite-dimensional partial differential equation (PDE) that captures the game's dynamics directly in the space of measures. Complementarily, the probabilistic method provides a powerful alternative for studying mean field problems, refer to [7, 1, 2], etc. It employs Pontryagin's maximum principle and coupled forward-backward stochastic differential equations (FBSDEs) of McKean-Vlasov type to describe optimal control/equilibria from a stochastic viewpoint, providing a natural framework for handling complex stochastic environments.

∗ This work is supported by the National Key R&amp;D Program of China (No. 2023YFA1009002), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 12371443) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jilin Province for Outstanding Young Talents (No. 20230101365JC).

† School of Mathematics and Statistics, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, P. R. China; E-mail: weiqm100@nenu.edu.cn

‡ School of Mathematics and Statistics, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, P. R. China; E-mail: xuyq222@nenu.edu.cn

Early literature on mean-field games generally assumes that agents are influenced by mutually independent idiosyncratic noises, thereby excluding common noise. While this simplification facilitates mathematical formulation, it limits the model's capacity to capture real-world phenomena such as systemic risk and collective dependence. Therefore, recent research has increasingly focused on mean field problems that incorporate common noise, aiming to advance the theory and precisely model complex interconnected systems, see [14, 11, 1, 20], etc. The presence of common noise invalidates many key analytical techniques in mean field theory ineffective, thereby challenges traditional PDE methods. Owing to inherent advantages in handling stochastic dynamics, the probabilistic method has a distinct advantage for studying large-scale interactive systems. Consequently, the related theoretical frameworks are relatively well-developed in the finite-time horizon setting, refer to [7, 9, 14, 1, 20, 27] and the references therein. Due to the theoretical and practical importance, infinite horizon mean field problems have got increasing research attention, such as [18, 2, 30, 17], etc. Furthermore, the inclusion of regime switching further enables models to capture structural changes in the environment, which is essential for representing real-world phenomena such as economic fluctuations, policy shifts, and market regime transitions as discussed in [22, 27] among others. Motivated by these developments, this study shall adopt a probabilistic approach to investigate infinite horizon linear quadratic mean field control and game problems that incorporate both common noise and Markovian switching.

Our objective is to characterize optimal control and equilibria by analyzing infinite horizon coupled FBSDEs of conditional McKean-Vlasov type with Markovian switching, referred to as Hamiltonian systems. Due to the broad applicability of FBSDEs, we first develop the theoretical foundations in a general nonlinear framework, even though our primary focus is on the linear systems inherent to the LQ setting. While the theory of coupled FBSDEs is relatively well-established (see e.g., [16, 25, 32, 31, 29]), the study of such systems incorporating key features as infinite horizon, conditional mean-field interactions, and Markovian switching remains underdeveloped.

Consequently, our first step is to establish the well-posedness of such systems. To this end, we utilize the method of continuity, as introduced in [16, 25], and generalize the dominationmonotonicity condition (see [31, 32, 29, 17]) to accommodate our framework. While such conditions are typically expressed in a probabilistic form within the mean-field literature [4, 1, 29], we introduce a version using state variables and measures to make the underlying structural relationships more explicit. We emphasize that this latter formulation ensures the validity of the probabilistic conditions.

For conditional LQ mean field control problems, we characterize the open-loop optimal control via an infinite horizon coupled FBSDEs of conditional McKean-Vlasov type with Markovian switching. This characterization is established via the variational method under a semi-positive definite condition. In doing so, we perform a linear transformation, motivated by our previous findings [31, 30] concerning the role of cross-term coefficients in the optimal control space, to elimi- nate these terms from the cost functional, thereby enabling a unified analysis. Within this setting, the domination-monotonicity condition is explicitly specified for the resulting linear Hamiltonian system, which in turn ensures its well-posedness.

We proceed to extend our analysis to game problems. The characterization of Nash equilibrium is equivalent to a fixed-point problem, whose solvability is closely tied to the well-posedness of an associated Hamiltonian system. Existing well-posedness results, such as those in [1, 14], typically require the removal of all conditional mean-field terms involving both the state and control from the state equation, as well as all conditional mean-field terms of control from the cost functional. Our framework accommodates conditional mean-field controls in both the state dynamics and cost functional, thereby extending the existing theory.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We begin by introducing some necessary notations in Section 2. Section 3 is devoted to a preliminary analysis of infinite horizon conditional McKeanVlasov SDEs and BSDEs with Markovian switching. We then proceed, in Section 4, to establish the well-posedness of infinite horizon coupled FBSDEs of conditional McKean-Vlasov type with Markovian switching. The theoretical results are subsequently applied in Section 5 to characterize optimal control and equilibria in conditional mean field control and game problems over an infinite horizon.

## 2 Preliminaries

We work on the underlying probability space (Ω , F , P ), which is the complete product space of (Ω 0 , F 0 , P 0 ) and (Ω 1 , F 1 , P 1 ) specified as follows.

- (Ω 0 , F 0 , P 0 ) is a complete filtered probability space endowed with a d 0 -dimensional standard Brownian motion W 0 . Moreover, F 0 = {F 0 s } s ⩾ 0 is the natural filtration generated by W 0 and augmented by all the P 0 -null sets.
- (Ω 1 , F 1 , P 1 ) is also a complete filtered probability space, on which a d -dimensional standard Brownian motion W and a continuous-time Markov chain { α s } s ⩾ 0 are defined. The chain { α s } s ⩾ 0 takes values in a finite state space M = { 1 , . . . , m 0 } and is assumed to be independent of W . Denoting by F 1 ,W = {F 1 ,W s } s ⩾ 0 and F 1 ,α = {F 1 ,α s } s ⩾ 0 the filtrations generated by W and α , resp., we introduce F 1 = {F 1 s } s ⩾ 0 with F 1 s := F 1 ,W s ⊗F 1 ,α s , augmented by all P 1 -null sets.

Then, Ω := Ω 0 × Ω 1 , F := F 0 ⊗F 1 , P := P 0 ⊗ P 1 with F completed with respect to P . The filtration F = {F s } s ⩾ 0 on (Ω , F , P ) is given with F s := F 0 s ⊗F 1 s and augmented by all P -null sets. In what follows, W 0 and W is referred to as common noise and individual noise, resp.

̸

We now specify the Markov chain { α s } s ⩾ 0 . Under P 1 , its generator is given by A ( · ) = ( a ij ) m 0 × m 0 , where a ij denotes the transition intensity from state i to state j , if i = j , while a ii = -∑ j = i a ij for all i, j ∈ M . As usual, a canonical martingale associated with α can be con-⩾

̸

structed as follows. For each pair ( i, j ) ∈ M × M and t 0, define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then M ij ( · ) := [ M ij ] · - ⟨ M ij ⟩ · is a square-integrable purely discontinuous F 1 ,α -martingale; we refer to [26] (Lemma IV.21.12) and [12, 27] for further details. For an F -predictable function φ ( · ) = ( φ ij ( · )) i,j ∈ M , we write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let H be a Euclidean space and P ( H ) be the space of probability measures on H . For any H -valued random variable ξ on (Ω , F , P ), for each fixed ω 0 ∈ Ω 0 , we denote the law of ξ ( ω 0 , · ) by L 1 ξ ( ω 0 ) = L ξ ( ω 0 , · ) . Then, by Lemma 2.4 in [11], L 1 ξ defines a random variable from (Ω 0 , F 0 , P 0 ) into ( P ( H ) , B ( P ( H ))), and provides a conditional law of ξ given F 0 .

Next, we recall the space of probability measures with finite second moments

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is complete under the following Wassersteinp metric (or simply w p -metric ), for µ 1 , µ 2 ∈ P p ( H ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For i = 0 , 1, E i [ · ] denotes the expectation taken over ω i ∈ Ω i , and δ 0 represents the Dirac measure at the origin. For ξ 1 , ξ 2 ∈ L 2 F (Ω , H ) with conditional distributions µ 1 and µ 2 given F 0 , resp., the following inequality holds,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For some constant κ ∈ R , p ⩾ 1 and for any 0 ⩽ t &lt; T &lt; ∞ , we introduce several spaces of random variables and stochastic processes as follows.

- L p F t (Ω; H ) := { ξ : Ω → H | ξ is F t -measurable, and E [ | ξ | p ] &lt; ∞ } ;
- D p := { ( t, x t , ι ) | t ∈ [0 , ∞ ) , x t ∈ L p F t (Ω; R n ) , ι ∈ M } ;
- S p F ( t, T ; H ) := { φ : Ω × [ t, T ] → H | φ is F -progressively measurable with continuous paths,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- L ∞ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; H ) := { φ : Ω 0 × [ t, ∞ ) × M → H | φ is F 0 -progressively measurable, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- L p,κ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; H ):= { φ : Ω 0 × [ t, ∞ ) → H | φ is F 0 -progressively measurable,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To simplify the notations, we introduce the following abbreviations,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The inner product ⟨· , ·⟩ and the norm |·| of R are introduced as follows, for any θ = ( y ⊤ , z ⊤ , ( z 0 ) ⊤ ), ¯ θ = (¯ y ⊤ , ¯ z ⊤ , (¯ z 0 ) ⊤ ) ⊤ ∈ R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3 Infinite horizon conditional McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs with markovian switching-decoupled case

In this section, we study infinite horizon conditional McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs with Markovian switching in the decoupled setting. Let us be given the following mappings

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any initial condition ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 , we first consider the following forward SDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and then the following BSDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To simplify the notations, we set Γ := ( b ⊤ , σ ⊤ , ˜ σ ⊤ ) ⊤ , Θ := ( Y ⊤ , Z ⊤ , ( Z 0 ) ⊤ ) ⊤ and define the following operators

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for ( s, x, µ, ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × R n × P ( R n ) × M and V ( · , ı ) ∈ C 2 ( R n ).

## 3.1 Infinite horizon conditional McKean-Vlasov SDEs with markovian switching

Let p ⩾ 2, we now make the following assumptions on the coefficient Γ of (3.1).

- (A1) (i) For any ( x, ı ) ∈ R n × M , µ ∈ P ( R n ), Γ( · , x, µ, ı ) is F -progressively measurable;
- (ii) There exist nonnegative constants l h x , l h µ such that, for all ( ω, s, ı ) ∈ Ω × [0 , ∞ ) × M , and ( x, µ ), (¯ x, ¯ µ ) ∈ R n × P p ( R n ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where h = b, σ, ˜ σ , resp.

- (A2) p For all ı ∈ M , Γ( · , 0 , δ 0 , ı ) ∈ L p,κ ∗ F (0 , ∞ ; R ) for some κ ∗ ∈ R .
- (A3) There exist a function V : R n × M → R + being twice continuously differentiable in x ∈ R n , a function φ : R n → R + satisfying φ ( x ) ⩽ V ( x, ι ), a function λ 3 ( · ) ∈ L 1 ,κ ∗ F (0 , ∞ ; R + ) and constants λ 1 ∈ R , λ 2 ∈ R + such that,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds for all ( s, x, ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × R n × M and µ ∈ P V ( R n ) := { µ ∈ P ( R n ) | ∫ R n V ( x, ı ) µ (d x ) &lt; ∞ , ∀ ı ∈ M } .

The following is the result about the existence and uniqueness of the solution of (3.1).

## Proposition 3.1. Let p ⩾ 2 and (A1) , (A2) p hold.

- (i) For any ( t, x t , ı ) ∈ D p and T ⩾ t , the conditional McKean-Vlasov SDE (3.1) admits a unique solution X ∈ S p F ( t, T ; R n ) .
- (ii) If in addition (A3) is assumed, then for any s ⩾ t and κ ⩽ κ ∗ , the following estimates hold,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. (i) For any T ⩾ t , we know almost every sample path of the Markov process α is a right continuous step function with finitely many simple jumps on [ t, T ]. So we can construct a sequence of stopping times { τ k } k ⩾ 0 as follows

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to satisfy

- for almost every ω ∈ Ω, there is a finite k ∗ = k ∗ ( ω ) for t = τ 0 &lt; τ 1 &lt; · · · &lt; τ k ∗ = T and τ k = T , if k &gt; k ∗ ;
- for k ⩾ 0, α s = α τ k , s ∈ [[ τ k , τ k +1 [[.

When s ∈ [[ τ 0 , τ 1 ]], (3.1) reduces to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is a classical conditional McKean-Vlasov SDE. By extending Proposition 2.8 in [11] to the case p ⩾ 2, we obtain the existence and uniqueness of X ∈ S p F ( τ 0 , τ 1 ; R n ) satisfying (3.4).

Next, using the obtained X τ 1 ∈ L p F τ 1 (Ω; R n ), we consider

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying [11, Proposition 2.8] again provides a unique X ∈ S p F ( τ 1 , τ 2 ; R n ) to satisfy the above equation. Repeating this procedure iteratively up to the final interval [[ τ k ∗ -1 , τ k ∗ ]], we get a unique solution X ∈ S p F ( t, T ; R n ) of (3.1) on [ t, T ].

- (ii) Applying the generalized Itˆ o's formula to e κs V ( X s , α s ) and using (A3) , we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The desired estimates therefore follow.

From the preceding proof, we observe that the role of assumption (A3) is to ensure the following inequality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With this in mind, we may specify a suitable Lyapunov function in (A3) to derive an L p -estimate ( p ⩾ 2) for the solution of (3.1) via Proposition 3.1 (ii). To this end, we impose the following condition on the coefficient Γ.

- (A4) p There exist two constants κ x , κ xµ ∈ R such that, for all ı ∈ M and s ⩾ 0, ( x, µ ) , (¯ x, ¯ µ ) ∈ R n × P p ( R n ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 3.2. Using (A1) -(ii) and (A4) p , we carry out the following preliminary computation. For any ε &gt; 0 and ( s, x, µ, ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × R n × P 2 ( R n ) × M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C p,ε is a nonnegative constant depending on p and ε . Then, taking V ( x, ı ) = | x | p , we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In what follows, we abbreviate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Corollary 3.3. Let p ⩾ 2 and assume (A1), (A2) p and (A4) p hold. For ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D p , the solution X of (3.1) belongs to L p,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) with κ &lt; κ p . Moreover, the following estimates hold,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, let ¯ X denote by the solution of (3.1) associated with another initial state ¯ x t ∈ L p F t (Ω; R n ) and coefficient ¯ Γ satisfying (A1), (A2) p and (A4) p . Then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Taking V ( x, ι ) = | x | p , from Remark 3.2, for any ε &gt; 0, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which corresponds to (3.5). When κ &lt; κ p , (3.6) follows from Proposition 3.1 (ii). The stability estimate (3.7) can be proved using analogous arguments.

## 3.2 Infinite horizon conditional McKean-Vlasov BSDEs with markovian switching

This section focuses on the backward equation (3.2). The driver f is assumed to satisfy the following conditions.

- (B1) (i) For any ( x, θ, ı ) ∈ R n × R × M and ν ∈ P ( R n × R ), f ( · , x, θ, ν, ı ) is F -progressively measurable;
- (ii) For all ı ∈ M , f ( · , 0 , δ 0 , ı ) ∈ L 2 ,κ ∗ F (0 , ∞ ; R n ) for some κ ∗ ∈ R ;
- (iii) There exist nonnegative constants l fx , l fy , l fz , l fz 0 , l fν such that for all ( ω, s, ı ) ∈ Ω × [0 , ∞ ) × M , and ( x, θ, ν ), (¯ x, ¯ θ, ¯ ν ) ∈ R n × R × P 2 ( R n × R ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (B2) There exist constants κ y , κ yν ∈ R such that,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds for all ( s, ω, ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × Ω × M , x ∈ R n , θ = ( y, z, z 0 ) , ¯ θ = (¯ y, z, z 0 ) ∈ R and ν, ¯ ν ∈ P 2 ( R n × R ) that have identical marginal distributions on R n × R nd × R nd 0 under the projection ( x, y, z, z 0 ) ↦→ ( x, z, z 0 ).

For convenience in subsequent analysis, we define κ := 2( κ y + κ yν 1 { κ yν &gt; 0 } + l 2 fx + l 2 fz + l 2 fz 0 + l 2 fν ). Following the approach in [31], we first have the following result.

Lemma 3.4. Suppose the condition (B1) holds. Let ( Y, Z, Z 0 , K ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) be the solution to (3.2) , then lim T →∞ E [ e κT | Y T | 2 ] = 0 .

We now present an a priori estimate for BSDE (3.2).

Proposition 3.5. Assume (A1), (A2) 2 , (A4) 2 , (B1), (B2) hold. Let κ ∈ ( κ, κ ) and ( Y, Z, Z 0 , K ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) be the solution of the conditional McKean-Vlasov BSDE (3.2) with ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 . Then there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, under the conditions in Corollary 3.3, if ( ¯ Y , ¯ Z, ¯ Z 0 , ¯ K ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) is the solution of (3.2) associated with ¯ X and another coefficient ¯ f satisfying (B1) and (B2) , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. For any T ∈ ( t, ∞ ), κ ⩽ κ ∗ and ε &gt; 0, applying the generalized Itˆ o's formula to e κs | Y s | 2 , we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where l 2 f := l 2 fx + l 2 fz + l 2 fz 0 + l 2 fν and c ν,ε ζ = l 2 fζ 2 l 2 fζ + ε + l 2 fν 2 l 2 fν + ε for ζ = x, z, z 0 , resp. In the above, we have used the Young inequality and (2.1), for example,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combined with (3.6)-(ii) ( p = 2), we get some constant C ε &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, when κ ∈ ( κ, κ ), letting T →∞ yields (3.8). Finally, (3.9) follows similarly by considering the difference between two solutions.

Theorem 3.6. Suppose that (A1), (A2) 2 , (A4) 2 , (B1), (B2) hold. Then the conditional McKean-Vlasov BSDE (3.2) admits a unique solution ( Y, Z, Z 0 , K ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) with κ ∈ ( κ, κ ) .

This result can be demonstrated by employing the methods used in [24] and [31], so we will not repeat the details here.

## 4 Infinite horizon conditional McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs with markovian switching-fully coupled case

This section is devoted to the study of the following infinite horizon conditional McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs with Markovian switching,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the coefficients

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the forward and backward equations (4.1) are fully coupled. We assume the coefficients to satisfy the following conditions.

- (C1) (i) For any ( x, θ, ν, ı ) ∈ R n × R × P ( R n × R ) × M , f ( · , x, θ, ν, ı ) and Γ( · , x, θ, ν, ı ) are F -progressively measurable;
- (ii) For all ı ∈ M , Φ(0 , δ 0 , ı ) ∈ L 2 F t (Ω; R n ) and f ( · , 0 , δ 0 , ı ) ∈ L 2 ,κ ∗ F (0 , ∞ ; R n ), Γ( · , 0 , δ 0 , ı ) ∈ L 2 ,κ ∗ F (0 , ∞ ; R ) for some κ ∗ ∈ R ;
- (iii) There exist nonnegative constants l h x , l h y , l h z , l h z 0 , l h ν , l Φ x , l Φ υ such that, for all ( ω, s, ı ) ∈ Ω × [0 , ∞ ) × M , ( x, θ, ν ), (¯ x, ¯ θ, ¯ ν ) ∈ R n × R × P 2 ( R n × R ) and υ, ¯ υ ∈ P 2 ( R n ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

hold, where h = b, σ, ˜ σ, f , resp.

- (C2) There exist constants κ x , κ xµ , κ y , κ yν ∈ R such that, for all s ⩾ t and ( X, Θ) , ( ¯ X, ¯ Θ) ∈ L 2 F s (Ω; R n × R ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(C3) There exist nonnegative constants α, β 1 , β 2 and measurable Lipschitz continuous functions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

satisfying ϕ ( 0 , δ 0 , ı ) ∈ L 1 F (Ω; R n ), ψ ( · , 0 , δ 0 , ı ) , φ ( · , 0 , δ 0 , ı ) ∈ L 1 ,κ F (0 , ∞ ; R ) such that (i) Case 1: β &gt; 0, β = 0 or Case 2: β = 0, β &gt; 0;

- 1 2 1 2 (ii) (Domination condition) For all s ⩾ t and ( X, Θ) , ( ¯ X, ¯ Θ) ∈ L 2 F s (Ω; R n × R ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where h = b, σ, ˜ σ , resp.

(iii) (Monotonicity condition) For all s ⩾ t and ( X, Θ) , ( ¯ X, ¯ Θ) ∈ L 2 F s (Ω; R n × R ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, with a bit of abuse of notations, when β 1 = 0 (resp. β 2 = 0 ), 1 /β 1 (resp. 1 /β 2 ) means + ∞ . This means the corresponding domination constraints vanish when β 1 = 0 or β 2 = 0.

Remark 4.1. In line with the conventional approach in the mean-field literature (e.g., [4, 1, 29], etc.), our conditions are formulated in probabilistic terms, i.e., using random variables and their distributions, as this framework is more natural and better suited for the derivations carried out in the proofs. While this approach is natural for the derivations, we also present a version of these conditions in terms of state variables and measures to make the underlying structural relationships more explicit. We emphasize that this latter formulation ensures the validity of the probabilistic conditions.

We first set π x ( x, θ ) := x, π y ( x, θ ) := y, π x,z,z 0 ( x, θ ) := ( x, z, z 0 ) , π θ ( x, θ ) := θ for ( x, θ ) ∈ R n × R . For all ( ω, s, ı ) ∈ Ω × [0 , ∞ ) × M , all ( x, θ, ν ) , (¯ x, ¯ θ, ¯ ν ) ∈ R n × R × P 2 ( R n × R ) , υ, ¯ υ ∈ P 2 ( R n ) , µ 1 , ¯ µ 1 ∈ P 2 ( R n × R ) with µ 1 ◦ π -1 θ = ¯ µ 1 ◦ π -1 θ , µ 2 , ¯ µ 2 ∈ P 2 ( R n × R ) with µ 2 ◦ π -1 x = ¯ µ 2 ◦ π -1 x , ν 1 , ¯ ν 1 ∈ P 2 ( R n × R ) with ν 1 ◦ π -1 x,z,z 0 = ¯ ν 1 ◦ π -1 x,z,z 0 , the following holds, P -a.s.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 4.2. Assumption ( C3 ) gives rise to the following four distinct combinations,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The main results of this section will be established under ( C3 . 1 ) . The other cases can be handled similarly via analogous verification.

We now present the main result of this section.

Theorem 4.3. Suppose the coefficients (Φ , f, Γ) satisfy Assumptions ( C1 ) , ( C2 ) and ( C3 . 1 ) . Then there exists a constant ϱ &gt; 0 such that conditional McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs (4.1) admits a unique solution ( X, Θ , K ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) ×L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) for any κ satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, the following estimate holds,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C &gt; 0 is a constant depending on the Lipschitz constants κ x , κ xµ , κ y , κ yν and β 1 .

Furthermore, let ( ¯ X, ¯ Θ , ¯ K ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) be the solution to FBSDEs (4.1) associated with another triple of coefficients ( ¯ Φ , ¯ f, ¯ Γ) satisfying ( C1 ) , ( C2 ) and ( C3 . 1 ) . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the same constant C as in (4.3) .

Theorem 4.3 will be proved by the method of continuation. To this end, we introduce a family of auxiliary equations parameterized by λ ∈ [0 , 1]. Precisely, for any ( ξ 0 , f 0 , Γ 0 ) ∈ L 2 F t (Ω; R n ) × L 2 ,κ ∗ F (0 , ∞ ; R n × R ), consider

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where for all ( s, ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × M , ( x, θ, ν ) ∈ R n × R × P 2 ( R n × R ) and ( y, υ ) ∈ R n × P 2 ( R n ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any λ ∈ [0 , 1], we first establish the a priori estimate for McKean-Vlasov FBSDE (4.5), which is key when applying the continuation method.

Proposition 4.4. Let (Φ , f, Γ) satisfy ( C1 ) , ( C2 ) , ( C3 . 1 ) and κ ∈ ( κ, κ ) . For any ( ξ 0 , f 0 , Γ 0 ) , ( ¯ ξ 0 , ¯ f 0 , ¯ Γ 0 ) ∈ L 2 F t (Ω; R n ) × L 2 ,κ ∗ F (0 , ∞ ; R n × R ) , denote ( X λ , Θ λ , K λ ) , ( ¯ X λ , ¯ Θ λ , ¯ K λ ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) by the solution to conditional McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs (4.5) associated with (Φ λ +

ξ 0 , f λ + f 0 , Γ λ +Γ 0 ) and (Φ λ + ¯ ξ 0 , f λ + ¯ f 0 , Γ λ + ¯ Γ 0 ) , resp. Then, there exists some constant ϱ &gt; 0 such that, for all κ ∈ [ -κ x 2 + κ y , -κ x 2 + κ y + ϱ ) and λ ∈ [0 , 1] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C &gt; 0 is a constant depending on the Lipschitz constants κ x , κ xµ , κ y , κ yν and β 1 .

Proof. For convenience, we set ( ̂ X λ , ̂ Y λ , ̂ Z λ , ̂ Z 0 λ , ̂ K λ ) := ( X λ , Y λ , Z λ , Z 0 λ , K λ ) -( ¯ X λ , ¯ Y λ , ¯ Z λ , ¯ Z 0 λ , ¯ K λ ). For ̂ X λ , applying the estimate (3.7) with p = 2, when κ &lt; κ , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where K 1 is a constant and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with h = b, σ, ˜ σ and h 0 = b 0 , σ 0 , ˜ σ 0 , resp.

Then, applying (C3)-(ii) (or (C3) ′ -(ii)) to (4.7), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where K 2 &gt; 0 depends on β 1 .

Next, for ( ̂ Y λ , ̂ Z λ , ̂ Z 0 λ , ̂ K λ ), we apply the estimate (3.9). When κ ∈ ( κ, κ ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining (4.8) and (4.9), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, applying Itˆ o's formula to e κs ⟨ ̂ X λ s , ̂ Y λ s ⟩ on [ t, T ], we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using (C3)-(iii)-Case 1 (or (C3) ′ -(iii)-Case 1) and lim T →∞ ∣ ∣ E [e κT ⟨ ̂ X λ T , ̂ Y λ T ⟩ ] ∣ ∣ = 0, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since κ ⩾ -κ x 2 + κ y , substituting (4.11) into (4.10) leads to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where K 5 := K 4 ( κ + κx 2 -κ y ) 2 β 1 and K 6 := K 4 ( 1 + K 4 β 2 1 ) .

Finally, choosing ϱ = 3 β 1 2 K 4 , when κ &lt; -κ x 2 + κ y + ϱ , we get K 5 &lt; 3 4 . Then the desired estimate (4.6) follows from (4.12).

With the help of the a priori estimate (4.6), we establish the following continuation result.

Lemma 4.5. Under the same conditions as the ones in Proposition 4.4, there exists some constant δ 0 &gt; 0 independent of λ , such that if for λ 0 ∈ [0 , 1) , McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs (4.5) is uniquely solvable in L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) with any ( ξ 0 , f 0 , Γ 0 ) ∈ L 2 F t (Ω; R n ) × L 2 ,κ ∗ F (0 , ∞ ; R n × R ) , then the same holds for all λ ∈ ( λ 0 , ( λ 0 + δ 0 ) ∧ 1] .

Proof. Let δ 0 &gt; 0 be some constant to be determined. Suppose ( X, Θ , K ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) solves (4.5) with λ = λ 0 and ( ξ 0 , f 0 , Γ 0 ) ∈ L 2 F t (Ω; R n ) × L 2 ,κ ∗ F (0 , ∞ ; R n × R ). For any δ ∈ [0 , δ 0 ∧ (1 -λ 0 )], we consider the following McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Clearly ( ξ 1 , f 1 , Γ 1 ) ∈ L 2 F t (Ω; R n ) × L 2 ,κ ∗ F (0 , ∞ ; R n × R ), so (4.13) admits a unique solution ( X , Θ , K ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) ×L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ). This defines the following mapping from L 2 F t (Ω; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) into itself,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we show that J λ 0 + δ is contractive for sufficiently small δ . Take any ( Y t , X, Θ , K ), ( ¯ Y t , ¯ X, ¯ Θ , ¯ K ) ∈ L 2 F t (Ω; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) ×L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) and let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the a priori estimate (4.6) and Lipschitz continuity of (Φ , f, Γ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the constant C &gt; 0 is independent of λ 0 and δ . Choosing δ 0 = 1 2 √ C , we see that for any δ ∈ [0 , δ 0 ∧ (1 -λ 0 )], the mapping J λ 0 + δ is contractive. Hence, there exists a unique fixed point ( ¯ Y t , ¯ X , ¯ Θ , ¯ K ) ∈ L 2 F t (Ω; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) ×L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ )) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and ( ¯ X , ¯ Θ , ¯ K ) is thereby the unique solution to McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs (4.5) with λ = λ 0 + δ .

Now, we give the proof of Theorem 4.3 as follows.

Proof of Theorem 4.3 . We first note that (4.2) implies the condition κ ∈ (2 κ y , min {-κ x , κ ∗ } ). Setting λ = 0 in (4.5) yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Corollary 3.3 and Theorem 3.6, for κ ∈ (2 κ y , min {-κ x , κ ∗ } ), the forward and backward equations in (4.15) can be solved separately for any ( ξ 0 , f 0 , Γ 0 ) ∈ L 2 F t (Ω; R n ) × L 2 ,κ ∗ F (0 , ∞ ; R n × R ). Subsequently, Lemma 4.5 then implies that the McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs (4.5) with λ = 1 is uniquely solvable. In particular, choosing ( ξ 0 , f 0 , Γ 0 ) = (0 , 0 , 0) reduces system (4.5) to the original FBSDEs (4.1), which therefore admits a unique solution.

Further, the estimate (4.4) follows from (4.6) by taking λ = 1, ( ξ 0 , f 0 , Γ 0 ) = (0 , 0 , 0) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as in Proposition 4.4. Finally, taking ( ¯ Φ , ¯ f, ¯ Γ) = (0 , 0 , 0) in (4.4) gives the estimate (4.3).

## 5 Infinite Horizon Linear Quadratic Mean Field Problems with Common Noise and Regime-Switching

In this section, we apply the established theoretical results to linear-quadratic models. Let's begin with an infinite horizon linear-quadratic mean-field control problem.

## 5.1 Infinite horizon linear quadratic mean-field control problems

For any initial ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 , consider

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where E 0 s [ · ] is short for the conditional expectation E [ · | F 0 s ]. The cost is introduced as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where κ ∈ R is a constant, and for ( s, ω 0 , x, x ′ , u, u ′ , ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × Ω 0 × R n × R n × R m × R m × M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let the set of admissible controls be U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) := L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R m ). We now formulate the control problem informally as follows.

Problem (C) κ S For any ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 , find an admissible control u ∗ ∈ U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

When S ( · , · ) = ¯ S ( · , · ) ≡ 0, the above problem is denoted by Problem (C) κ 0 . In what follows, we often suppress the explicit dependence of the coefficients on their variables for notational simplicity.

To ensure the well-posedness of Problem (C) κ S , the constant κ must be carefully chosen to define the admissible set U κ ad [ t, ∞ ). However, as indicated in our previous studies [31, 30], an optimal control may fail to exist in this predefined set when the cross-term coefficients S ( · ) and ¯ S ( · ) are not both identically zero. This issue persists in the present setting. To address it in a unified manner, we introduce a transformation for Problem (C) κ S , which can eliminate S ( · ) and ¯ S ( · ) from the cost functional. Precisely, we introduce the following notations,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and apply the control transformation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to the state equation (5.1) and the cost (5.2). This yields the following transformed system,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the following transformed cost,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where for ( s, ω 0 , x, x ′ , ✉ , ✉ ′ , ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × Ω 0 × R n × R n × R m × R m × M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now formulate the following optimal control problem based on the transformed system (5.6) and (5.7).

Problem (C) κ For any ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 , find an admissible control ✉ ∗ ∈ U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this case, ✉ ∗ · is called an open-loop optimal control for Problem (C) κ at ( t, x t , ι ), the corresponding state process X ≡ X ( · ; t, x t , ι, ✉ ∗ ) is called the optimal state trajectory, and ( ✉ ∗ , X ) is called an optimal pair.

Let S n be the set of all ( n × n ) symmetric matrices. For any S n -valued stochastic process Λ( · ), if Λ( s, ω ) ⩾ 0 (resp. &gt; 0 , ⩽ 0 , &lt; 0) for almost all ( ω, s ) ∈ Ω × [0 , ∞ ), we denote Λ( · , · ) ⩾ 0 (resp. &gt; 0 , ⩽ 0 , &lt; 0). Moreover, we write Λ( · , · ) ≫ 0 (respectively, ≪ 0) if there exists a constant δ &gt; 0 such that Λ( · , · ) -δ I n ⩾ 0 (respectively, ⩽ 0), where I n denotes the n × n identity matrix. In the following, we denote by λ max (Λ) the largest eigenvalue of the symmetric matrix Λ.

Now we specify the conditions for the well-posedness of Problem (C) κ .

(H1) (i) For each ı ∈ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(H2) (i) For each ı ∈ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (H3) There exist constants κ x , κ xµ ∈ R and κ y , κ yν ∈ R such that, for all ( s, ω 0 , ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × Ω 0 × M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(PD) For all ı ∈ M , the following hold,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For convenience, we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under ( H1 ) and ( H3 )-(i), for any ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 and ✉ · ∈ U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) with κ &lt; κ , SDE (5.6) admits the unique solution X ≡ X ( · ; t, x t , ι, ✉ ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) (see Corollary 3.3). In this case, the pair ( ✉ · , X · ) is referred to as an admissible pair of Problem (C) κ . Moreover, under ( H2 ), the cost functional (5.6) is well-defined for every admissible pair ( ✉ · , X · ). This ensures that Problem (C) κ is well-posed for κ &lt; κ .

We now turn to characterizing the open-loop optimal control of Problem (C) κ .

Lemma 5.1. Suppose ( H1 ) -( H3 ) and ( PD ) hold. For κ ∈ ( κ, κ ) and the initial triple ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 , let ( ✉ ∗ · , X · ) ∈ U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) × L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) be an admissible pair and ( Y , Z , Z 0 , K ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) be the solution of the following BSDE (the adjoint equation of Problem (C) κ )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then ✉ ∗ · is optimal for Problem (C) κ at ( t, x t , ι ) if and only if the following optimality condition holds,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof follows a similar line of argument as in our previous works [31, 30] and is therefore omitted here.

Observe that condition ( PD ) is equivalent to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this case, the optimal control ✉ ∗ · characterized by (5.11) has the following explicit representation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting ✉ ∗ · into the state equation (5.1) and the adjoint equation (5.10), we obtain the following infinite horizon fully coupled McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where, for ( s, x, θ, ν, ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × R n × R × P 2 ( R n × R ) × M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for Φ = B,D,N , resp. System (5.13) is in fact the Hamiltonian system of Problem (C) κ at ( t, x t , ι ). The above analysis shows that the existence and uniqueness of an optimal control of Problem (C) κ is closely related to the unique solvability of the Hamiltonian system (5.13). Therefore, we establish the wellposedness result of (5.13) in the following.

Theorem 5.2. Assume ( H1 ) -( H3 ) , ( PD ) and κ = -κ x 2 + κ y ∈ ( κ, κ ) . Then for every ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 , system (5.13) admits a unique solution ( X , Y , Z , Z 0 , K ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) ×L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) . In this case, the following (5.15)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

lies in U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) and is the unique open-loop optimal control of Problem (C) κ S at ( t, x t , ι ) .

Proof. Observe that (5.13) is a linear form of the general system (4.1). Therefore, it suffices to verify that the assumptions of Theorem 4.3 are satisfied. To this end, for ( s, θ, ¯ θ, ν, ¯ ν ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) ×

R × R × P 2 ( R ) × P 2 ( R ), ( υ, ¯ υ ) ∈ P 2 ( R n ) × P 2 ( R n ) and ı ∈ M , we set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With κ = -κ x 2 + κ y ∈ ( κ, κ ) and ( PD ), it is straightforward to verify that the coefficients b , σ , ˜ σ and f in (5.14) satisfy ( C1 ), ( C2 ) and ( C3 . 1 ). The unique solvability of (5.13) then follows directly from Theorem 4.3. Therefore, we conclude that ✉ ∗ · in (5.12) lies in U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) and is the unique open-loop optimal control of Problem (C) κ at ( t, x t , ι ) . Furthermore, by applying the transformation (5.5), u ∗ · given in (5.15) is consequently the unique open-loop optimal control of Problem (C) κ S at ( t, x t , ι ).

Based on the preceding results, we observe that the presence of S ( · , · ) and ¯ S ( · , · ) indeed influences condition (H3) . When S ( · , · ) = ¯ S ( · , · ) ≡ 0, (H3) simplifies to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and (5.9) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, under ( PD ), when S ( · , · ) = ¯ S ( · , · ) ≡ 0 and κ = -κ 0 x 2 + κ 0 y ∈ ( κ 0 , κ 0 ), Problem (C) κ 0 admits a unique open-loop optimal control u ∗ · ∈ U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) at ( t, x t , ι ), give by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( X , Y , Z , Z 0 , K ) is the solution of the renew version of system (5.13) with S ( · , · ) = ¯ S ( · , · ) ≡ 0.

Remark 5.3. The above analysis reveals that under ( PD ) , the condition S ( · , · ) = ¯ S ( · , · ) ≡ 0 directly affects the space in which the optimal control exists-a phenomenon first noted in [31]. This represents a major difference from the finite-horizon problem. We further observe that if the positive semidefiniteness condition (PD) is strengthened to strict positive definiteness, this distinction may disappear, as illustrated in [17].

## 5.2 Infinite horizon linear quadratic mean field game problems

In this part, we study an infinite horizon linear quadratic mean field game problem. Let a pair of stochastic processes ( X , u ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; R m ) be given. For any initial triple ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 , the state equation is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the cost functional is introduced as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

subject to u · ∈ U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) for some suitable κ ∈ R . The game problem is then formulated as follows.

Problem (G) κ S For any ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 and ( X , u ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; R m ), find an admissible control ¯ u ∈ U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ¯ X ≡ X ( · ; t, x t , ι, ¯ u ) denotes the solution of (5.16) corresponding to ¯ u . Such a control ¯ u · is called a mean field Nash equilibrium for Problem (G) κ S at ( t, x t , ι ). In the special case where S ( · , · ) = ¯ S 1 ( · , · ) = ¯ S 2 ( · , · ) ≡ 0, the problem is referred to as Problem (G) κ 0 .

Indeed, (5.18) defines a mapping T 1 : L 2 ,κ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; R n × R m ) ↦-→ L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ; R n × R m ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, introduce another mapping

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

defined by T 2 ( X,u )( s ) = ( E 0 s [ X s ] , E 0 s [ u s ]), s ∈ [ t, ∞ ). Let T := T 1 ◦ T 2 . From this viewpoint, the objective of Problem (G) κ S is to find a pair ( ¯ X, ¯ u ) satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e., a fixed point of T .

We now decompose Problem (G) κ S into two subproblems: the first is to characterize the pair ( ¯ X, ¯ u ) satisfying (5.18), and the second is to establish the existence and uniqueness of a fixed point of T . Fix ( X , u ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; R m ) be fixed. We begin by addressing the first subproblem.

Problem (G1) κ S For any ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 , find an admissible control u ∗ ∈ U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) with corresponding state process X such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We note that Problem (G1) κ S is in fact a special case of Problem (C) κ S . Specifically, for a given pair ( X , u ), define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the state equation (5.16) and the cost functional (5.17) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

(5.23)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For convenience, we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Based on the above observation, we apply Theorem 5.2 to derive the following result.

Lemma 5.4. Suppose assumptions ( H1 ) -( H3 ) and ( PD ) -(i) hold. If κ = -κ x 2 + κ y ∈ ( k , k ) , and for each ı ∈ M , ¯ S 1 ( · , ı ) , ¯ S 2 ( · , ı ) ∈ L ∞ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; R m × n ) , then for any given pair ( X , u ) ∈ L 2 ,κ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; R n × R m ) and any initial triple ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 , the following Hamiltonian system associated with Problem (G1) κ S , given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

admits a unique solution ( X , Y , Z , Z 0 , K ) ∈ L 2 F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 ,κ F ( t, ∞ ) . In this case, the optimal control of Problem (G1) κ S is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Based on the notation introduced in (5.21), the system (5.25) can be expressed as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the above, when κ = -x + κ y ∈ ( k , k ), the mapping T 1

κ 2 is explicitly given by T 1 ( X , u ) = ( X , u ∗ )

where ( X , u ∗ ) satisfies (5.27) and (5.26), resp.

We now turn to the fixed point of T . Obviously, a pair ( ¯ X, ¯ u ) is a fixed point of T only and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From this observation, the existence and uniqueness of a fixed point of T is equivalent to that of the following system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Indeed, under condition ( PD ), the process ¯ u (5.30)

can be explicitly expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This implies that (5.28) and (5.29) together give rise to the following coupled system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where, for ( s, x, θ, ν, ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × R n × R × P 2 ( R n × R ) × M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We note that (5.31) remains the fully coupled FBSDEs. This naturally leads to the question of whether Theorem 4.3 can be applied to establish the wellposedness of (5.31). The careful analysis shows that Theorem 4.3 is indeed applicable to certain special cases of (5.31). We now examine the following case.

- (S1) (i) For every ı ∈ M , ¯ A ( · , ı ) , ¯ C ( · , ı ) , ¯ M ( · , ı ) ≡ 0.
- (ii) There exists a constant k ⩾ -1 such that for all ı ∈ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (S2) (i) For each ı ∈ M , the processes ¯ S 1 ( · , ı ) and ¯ S 2 ( · , ı ) belongs to L ∞ F 0 ( t, ∞ ; R m × n ).
- (ii) For each ı ∈ M , kS ( · , ı ) + ( k +1) ¯ S 1 ( · , ı ) -¯ S 2 ( · , ı ) = 0, where k is the same constant as k in ( S1 )-(ii).

(S3) There exist constants k x , k xν , k y , k yν ∈ R such that, for all ( s, ω 0 , ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × Ω 0 × M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(PD) G For all ı ∈ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, we put

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 5.5. Assume that ( H1 ) -( H2 ) , ( S1 ) -( S3 ) , and ( PD ) G hold. If k = -k x 2 + k y ∈ ( k , k ) , then for any ( t, x t , ι ) ∈ D 2 , system (5.31) admits a unique solution ( ¯ X, ¯ Y , ¯ Z, ¯ Z 0 , ¯ K ) ∈ L 2 F ( t, ∞ ; R n ) × L 2 , k F ( t, ∞ ) . Moreover, the process ¯ u ( · ) in (5.30) belongs to U k ad [ t, ∞ ) and is the unique mean field Nash equilibrium of Problem (G) k S at ( t, x t , ι ) .

Proof. Observe that (5.31) is a linear case of the general system (4.1). Hence, it suffices to verify that the assumptions of Theorem 4.3 are satisfied. To this end, for ( s, θ, ¯ θ, ν, ¯ ν, ı ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) × R × R × P 2 ( R × R ) × M and υ, ¯ υ ∈ P 2 ( R n ), define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

ρ 1 ( s, θ, ı ) := B ⊤ y + D ⊤ z + N ⊤ z 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now verify that the coefficients b , σ , ˜ σ and f given in (5.32) satisfy ( C3 . 1 ). First, consider (C3)-(ii) for b :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A similar argument applies to σ , ˜ σ and f .

Next, we verify (C3)-(iii)-Case 1. Under (S1), (S2) and (PD) G , we have ˜ A = ˜ C = ˜ M = 0, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A direct computation then shows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, when k = -k x 2 + k y ∈ ( k , k ), the unique solvability of the McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs (5.31)

follows directly from Theorem 4.3. As a consequence, we obtain the unique mean field Nash equilibrium ¯ u · ∈ U κ ad [ t, ∞ ) of Problem (G) κ S at ( t, x t , ι ).

Remark 5.6. It is worth noting that our conditions (S1) and (S2) encompass the case where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each ı ∈ M , a setting previously studied in [1, 14], among others.

## References

- [1] Ahuja, S., Ren, W., Yang, T., Forward-backward stochastic differential equations with monotone functionals and mean field games with common noise. Stoch. Proc. Appl., 129, 3859-3892 (2019).
- [2] Bayraktar, E., Zhang X., Solvability of infinite horizon Mckean-Vlasov FBSDEs in mean-field control problems and games. Appl. Math. Optim., 87: 13, (2023).
- [3] Bensoussan, A., Frehse, J., Yam, P., Mean field games and mean field type control theory. Springer, New York (2013).
- [4] Bensoussan, A., Yam, S., Zhang, Z., Well-posedness of mean field type forward-backward stochastic differential equations. Stoch. Proc. Appl., 125, 3327-3354 (2015).
- [5] Buckdahn, R., Li, J., Peng, S., Rainer, C., Mean-feld stochastic differential equations and associated PDEs. Ann. Probab., 45(2), 824-878 (2017).
- [6] Cardaliaguet, P., Graber, P., Mean field games systems of first order. ESAIM: COCV 21(3), 690-722 (2015).
- [7] Carmona, R., Delarue, F., Mean field forward-backward stochastic differential equations. Electron. Commun. Probab., 18(68), 1 (2013).
- [8] Carmona, R., Delarue, F., Lachapelle, A., Control of McKean-Vlasov dynamics versus mean field games. Math. Financ. Econ., 7(2), 131-166 (2013).
- [9] Carmona, R., Delarue. F., Forward-backward stochastic differential equations and controlled McKean-Vlasov dynamics. Ann. Probab., 43(5), 2647-2700 (2015).
- [10] Carmona, R., Delarue, F., Probabilistic theory of mean field games with applications I: Mean Field FBSDEs, Control, and Games. Probab. Theory Stoch. Model. 83, Springer, Cham, Switzerland, (2018).
- [11] Carmona, R., Delarue, F., Probabilistic theory of mean field games with applications II: Mean Field Games with Common Noise and Master Equations. Probab. Theory Stoch. Model. 84, Springer, Cham, Switzerland, (2018).
- [12] Donnelly, C., Heunis, A., Quadratic risk minimization in a regime-switching model with portfolio constraints. SIAM J. Control Optim., 50(4), 2431-2461 (2012).

- [13] D. Gomes, J. Sa´ ude, Mean field games models-a brief survey, Dynam. Games Appl. (2013) 1-45
- [14] Graber, P., Linear quadratic mean field type control and mean field games with common noise, with application to production of an exhaustible resource. Appl. Math. Optim., 74(3), 459-486 (2016).
- [15] Gu´ eant, O., Lasry, J., Lions, P., Mean field games and applications. In Paris-Princeton Lectures on Mathematical Finance 2010, Lecture Notes in Math. 2003, Springer, Berlin, 205-266 (2011).
- [16] Hu, Y., Peng, S., Solution of forward-backward stochastic differential equations. Probab. Theory Relat. Fields., 103(2), 273-283 (1995).
- [17] Hua, T., Luo, P., Infinite horizon McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs and applications to mean field control problems. arXiv: 2403.14396.
- [18] Huang, J., Li, X., Yong, J., A Linear-quadratic optimal control problem for mean-field stochastic differential equations in infinite horizon. Math. Control Relat. Fields., 5(1), 97-139 (2015).
- [19] Huang, M., Malham´ e, R.P., Caines, P.E., Large population stochastic dynamic games: closedloop McKean-Vlasov systems and the nash certainty equivalence principle. Commun. Inf. Syst. 6(3), 221- 252 (2006).
- [20] Huang, Z.,Tang S., A Mean Field Games with Common Noises and Conditional Distribution Dependent FBSDEs. Chin. Ann. Math. Ser. B, 43(4), 523-548 (2022).
- [21] Lasry, J., Lions, P., Mean field games. Jpn. J. Math. 2(1), 229-260 (2007).
- [22] Mao, X., Yuan, C., Stochastic differential equations with Markovian switching. Imperial College Press, London, (2006).
- [23] Mei, H., Wei, Q., Yong, J., Optimal ergodic control of linear stochastic differential equations with quadratic cost functional having indefinite weights. SIAM J. Control Optim., 59(1), 584613.
- [24] Peng, S., Shi, Y., Infinite horizon forward-backward stochastic differential equations. Stoch. Process. Appl., 85 75-92 (2000).
- [25] Peng, S., Wu, Z., Fully coupled forward-backward stochastic differential equations and applications to optimal control. SIAM J. Control Optim., 37(3), 825-843 (1999).
- [26] Rogers, L., Williams, D., Diffusions, markov processes and martingales Volume 2, 2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, (2006).
- [27] Rol´ on Guti´ errez, E., Nguyen, S., Yin, G., Markovian-switching systems: backward and forwardbackward stochastic differential equations, mean-field interactions, and nonzero-sum differential games. Appl. Math. Optim., 89(2), 33 (2024).
- [28] Shi, Y., Zhao, H., Forward-backward stochastic differential equations on infinite horizon and quasilinear elliptic PDEs. J. Math. Anal. Appl., 485, 123791 (2020).

- [29] Tian R., Yu, Z., Mean-field type FBSDEs under domination-monotonicity conditions and application to LQ problems. SIAM J. Control Optim., 1, 22-46 (2023).
- [30] Wei, Q., Xu, Y., Yu, Z., Infinite horizon mean-field linear quadratic optimal control problems with jumps and the related Hamiltonian systems. Appl. Math. Optim., 90(4) (2024).
- [31] Wei, Q., Yu, Z., Infinite horizon forward-backward SDEs and open-loop optimal controls for stochastic linear-Quadratic problems with random coefficients. SIAM J. Control Optim., 59(4), 2594-2623 (2021).
- [32] Yu, Z., On forward-backward stochastic differential equations in a domination-monotonicity framework. Appl. Math. Optim., 85(5), 1-46 (2022).
- [33] Yong, J., A linear-quadratic optimal control problem for mean-field stochastic differential equations. SIAM J. Control. Optim., 51, 2809-2838 (2013).