## Continuous-time q-learning for Markov regime switching system under Tsallis entropy

Minghui Zhang ∗

Xun Li †

## Abstract

This paper studies the continuous-time q-learning (the continuous time counterpart of Qlearing) for Markov switching system under Tsallis entropy regularization. We address the difficulty in traditional RL algorithms where the Tsallis entropy regularization leads to an optimal policy distribution not necessarily a Gibbs measure, which often complicates algorithm design. Furthermore, to address the limited universality of current continuous time regime-switching RL algorithms (often restricted to the EMV framework), this study focuses on continuous-time q-learning for Markov regime-switching systems based on Tsallis entropy, aiming for a more universally applicable continuous-time RL method. We establish the martingale characterization of the q-function under Tsallis entropy for continuous-time Markov regime-switching systems. Based on this, we design two q-learning algorithms, distinguished by whether the Lagrange multiplier can be explicitly derived. We apply these algorithms to the continuous-time exploratory Mean-Variance (EMV) portfolio optimization problem in a regime-switching market. Numerical experiments demonstrate the satisfactory performance of our q-learning algorithms.

Keywords : Continuous-time reinforcement learning, q-learning, Markov regime switching, Tsallis entropy, Mean-Variance portfolio optimization

## 1 Introduction

In recent years, the theory and application of Reinforcement Learning (RL) have seen significant advancements within continuous-time frameworks. These frameworks have demonstrated particular advantages when addressing complex dynamic systems. As a foundational algorithm in reinforcement learning, Q-learning(see Watkins 1989, Watkins and Dayan 1992) evaluates the long-term value of state-action pairs using a Q-function and improves policies based on this evaluation. Traditionally, Q-learning has been applied to discrete-time Markov decision processes (MDPs). In this context, the algorithm learns a Q-function that maps state-action pairs to their expected returns, allowing for policy updates by selecting actions that maximize future rewards (Sutton 2018). However, applying this traditional approach to continuous-time scenarios presents numerous challenges. The Q-function is essentially a discrete-time concept that collapses into a value function independent of actions in continuous-time settings; thus, it cannot be used for ranking and selecting current actions. Tallec et al. (2019) even argues that 'there is no Q-function in continuous time.'

∗ Email: minghuibest@163.com, School of Mathematics, Southeast University, Nanjing, 211189, China.

† Email: li.xun@polyu.edu.hk, Department of Applied Mathematics, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China

‡ Email: x.zhang.seu@qq.com, School of Mathematics, Southeast University, Nanjing, 211189, China.

Xin Zhang ‡

The common approach is to discretize continuous time to obtain a discretized Q-function, then apply existing Q-learning algorithms to address continuous-time problems. Nevertheless, empirical evidence indicates that this method is highly sensitive to the choice of time discretization and performs poorly with small time steps. Instead of discretizing, Kim et al. (2021) took a different approach by integrating actions as state variables within continuous-time systems. This method ensures that the motion process remains continuously smooth over time with a bounded growth rate. However, they only consider deterministic dynamic systems and discretize the continuoustime problem, requiring actions to be absolutely continuous, which has significant limitations in real-world applications.

To address the limitations of traditional Q-learning in continuous-time settings, the pioneering work of Wang et al. (2020) and Jia and Zhou (2022a,b, 2023) established a theoretical foundation for continuous-time reinforcement learning. Their research introduced a series of important theories for situations with continuous state spaces (diffusion processes) and potentially continuous action spaces. Wang et al. (2020) introduced an exploratory stochastic control framework that incorporates entropy regularization. They achieved this by formulating an entropy-regularized, distribution-valued stochastic control problem for diffusion processes, which enables the control to be chosen strategically rather than in a predetermined or non-adaptive manner. Jia and Zhou (2022a) focuses on the policy evaluation (PE) problem, which involves learning the value function of a given random policy and characterizing it as a martingale problem. Building upon this, Jia and Zhou (2022b) subsequently addressed the policy gradient (PG) problem, which involves computing the gradient of the learned value function with respect to the current policy. They demonstrated that the PG problem is mathematically reducible to a simpler policy evaluation (PE) problem, which can then be solved using the martingale approach developed in Jia and Zhou (2022a). These theoretical contributions have enabled the development of various online and offline Actor-Critic (AC) algorithms for model-free RL under diffusion dynamics. Significantly, many of these derived algorithms provide novel interpretations of, or even recover, well-known algorithms from the discrete-time Markov decision process setting. In a significant advancement, Jia and Zhou (2023) further proposed the continuous-time q-learning method. This approach extends the traditional Q-function and Q-learning algorithms to continuous time. The extension is achieved by utilizing a first-order approximation of the advantage function, which is defined as the temporal difference between the Q-function and the value function. Compared with discrete-time RL algorithms, continuous-time RL methods design policy iteration rules and loss functions for policy evaluation directly within a continuous-time framework, without requiring any prior full discretization. This allows the algorithm to maintain greater stability and robustness during execution, particularly when compared to methods that are sensitive to the chosen discretization step.

The continuous-time RL framework also facilitates the application of advanced mathematical tools and techniques, such as stochastic differential equations (SDEs) and control theory, which are essential for establishing a solid theoretical foundation for the algorithms. In recent years, continuous-time RL theories and algorithms have been extended to address a variety of new problems. For instance, Wang et al. (2023) proposed an entropy-regularized Actor-Critic RL algorithm to address the optimal execution problem within the continuous-time Almgren-Chriss model. Specifically, the study formulated the optimal execution strategy by constructing a relaxed stochastic control problem under an entropy-regularized mean-variance objective. Dai et al. (2023) applied RL to the Merton's utility maximization problem in an incomplete markets, focusing on learning optimal portfolio strategies without requiring knowledge of model parameters. Bo et al. (2023) studied the infinite-horizon optimal tracking portfolio problem with capital injection in an incomplete market. Notably, for the case of unknown parameters, they introduced an entropyregularized exploratory formulation and proposed a continuous-time q-learning algorithm based on a reflected diffusion process to determine the optimal tracking strategy. Han et al. (2023) integrated the Shannon regularization term into continuous-time entropy regularized RL, deriving explicit solutions for optimal strategies within the Linear-Quadratic (LQ) setting. Wei et al. (2024) extended the continuous-time q-learning algorithm to mean-field control problems where the integrated qfunction and the essential q-function together with test policies play crucial roles in their model free algorithm. Giegrich et al. (2024) investigate the global linear convergence of PG methods for exploratory LQ control problems in continuous time. Their work employs geometry-aware gradient descents and proposes a novel algorithm specifically for discrete-time policies.

Within the study of continuous-time Q-learning, entropy regularization is an significant direction, with Shannon entropy being a commonly used entropy regularization method. Moreover, Tsallis (1988) introduced a generalization of the Shannon entropy known as the Tsallis entropy, which offers greater flexibility and robustness to handling learning tasks with diverse policy distributions. Tsallis entropy is particularly advantageous in scenarios involving non-Gaussian, heavy-tailed distributions within a compact support setting. By adjusting the index parameters of Tsallis entropy regularization, it can transform learned optimal policies into various types, providing greater flexibility in handling uncertainty and incentivizing exploration. Notably, Lee et al. (2018, 2019) have extensively studied a class of Markov decision processes (MDPs) with Tsallis entropy maximization. Specifically, Lee et al. (2018) introduced causal sparse Tsallis entropy regularization to propose sparse MDPs. Meanwhile, Lee et al. (2019) developed Tsallis MDPs, which utilize an additional entropy index parameter to provide a unified framework for entropy-regularized RL problems, including the well-known standard Shannon-Gibbs (SG) entropy. By controlling the entropy index, Tsallis MDPs can generate different categories of optimal policies. Besides, Donnelly and Jaimungal (2024) recently investigated the optimal control problems in models with latent factors, where the agent controls the distribution of behavior through Tsallis entropy rewards for exploration in both discrete and continuous time. Therefore, this paper considers the Tsallis entropy to encourage exploration.

In many real-world scenarios, phenomena or systems exhibit properties of state transitions or trend changes. Mathematically, these situations are often modeled using Markov chains. In this context, the state transitions of the Markov chain represent changes in market trends. Consequently, Markov chains can effectively simulate random fluctuations in real-world environments, better capturing sudden shifts and uncertainties within a dynamic setting. Considering this, Zhou and Yin (2003) investigated the continuous-time mean-variance (MV) problem with regimeswitching, although their work did not integrate it with reinforcement learning. More recently, Wang et al. (2020) proposed the exploratory mean-variance (EMV) framework. This approach replaces deterministic strategies with probability distributions and incorporates entropy regularization into the portfolio optimization problem. They solved for the optimal investment strategy, finding it to be a probability distribution over the control space rather than a deterministic control function. Recent research by Wu and Li (2024) considered applying reinforcement learning to the continuous-time mean-variance portfolio problem in a regime-switching market. They formulated the problem as a partially observable Markov decision process (POMDP) with two unobservable market regimes and addressed the partial observability using the Wonham filter. However, their approach relies on several key assumptions: they assume state-independent volatility, and their market parameters must either be known or estimated from data. Specifically, the martingale loss function employed by Wu and Li (2024) requires knowledge of the true market parameters, which is impractical in real-world applications. To address these limitations, Chen et al. (2025) investigated the exploratory mean-variance with regime switching (EMVRS) problem. Their model extends the existing framework by allowing for state-dependent volatility. Crucially, their parameter update scheme utilizes the orthogonality condition loss derived from the optimal EMVRS value function. The advantage of this loss function is that it does not depend on the true market parameters, allowing the RL algorithm to directly learn and identify the latent market parameters from the training data. Simulation studies further confirm that, through this method, the parameters of the proposed RL model converge to their corresponding true values, even when initialized from randomly selected starting points.

Continuous-time Q-learning is still developing, especially concerning entropy regularization. Current RL algorithms predominantly employ Shannon entropy because the resulting regularized and normalized optimal policy is essentially a Gaussian distribution. The ability to explicitly determine its mean and variance greatly simplifies subsequent algorithm design. However, a major challenge with general entropy regularization methods is that the regularized and normalized optimal policy may not be a determined distribution form, which fundamentally constrains the design of policy-based algorithms. To sidestep this issue, some research shifts to value-based algorithms, such as the temporal difference (TD) learning and orthogonality condition (OC) learning (martingale loss learning) explored in Chen et al. (2025). Nonetheless, policy-based algorithms must directly solve the optimal policy characterization problem. Furthermore, studies on continuous-time Q-learning incorporating regime-switching mechanisms remain limited. Therefore, this paper introduces Tsallis entropy to encourage exploration under a regime-switching framework and develops a corresponding continuous-time q-learning method. Our framework extends the work presented in Wei et al. (2024) and Chen et al. (2025). Notably, our model reduces to that of Chen et al. (2025) when the Tsallis entropy order p is set to 1. Furthermore, it is worth emphasizing that our study aims to develop a more general continuous-time reinforcement learning method.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we formulate an entropyregularized, exploratory RL framework in continuous time and space for Markov regime-switching systems under Tsallis entropy, and present some useful preliminary results. In Section 3, we derive the corresponding q-function and establish its fundamental martingale properties, showing that the optimal policy is characterized by the dependence of the q-function on a Lagrange multiplier. In Section 4, we design the corresponding q-learning algorithms for two distinct cases where the Lagrange multiplier is known or unknown. In Section 5, we provide a practical example of the EMVRS problem, including the parametric forms of the optimal value and q-function, and demonstrate satisfactory convergence results through numerical experiments. Finally, Section 6 presents our conclusion. The Appendix contains supplementary materials and detailed proofs for the statements presented in the main text.

## 2 Problem Formulation and Preliminaries

## 2.1 Problem formulation

We consider a fixed time horizon T &gt; 0 . Let (Ω , F , F , P ) be a filtered probability space with the filtration F := {F t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] generated by a standard one-dimensional Brownian motion W = { W } t ∈ [0 ,T ] and a continuous time irreducible Markov chain α = { α ( t ) } t ∈ [0 ,T ] with a finite state space M = { 1 , 2 , . . . , L } such that W ( t ) and α ( t ) are independent of each other. We assume the generator of the Markov chain α is Q = ( q ij ) L × L . Let Φ j ( t ) be the number of jumps into state j up to time t and set ˜ Φ j ( t ) ≜ Φ j ( t ) -∫ t 0 ∑ L i = j q ij 1 { α s -= i } ( s )d s . Then for each j ∈ M , the process ˜ Φ j ( t ) is an ( F , P ) -martingale. For any i, j ∈ M and t ≥ s ≥ 0 , we further let p ij ( t, s ) denote the transition probability P ( α ( t ) = j | α ( s ) = i ) .

̸

Suppose that A ⊂ R m is the action/control space. The classical stochastic control problem is to control the state (or feature) dynamics governed by the following stochastic differential equation (SDE)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a s ∈ A stands for the agent's action at time s , and b : [0 , T ] × R d × M × A ↦→ R d , σ : [0 , T ] × R d × M × A ↦→ R d × n be given functions. For each initial time-state-regime triple ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ) × R d ×M of (2.1), we are interested in the stochastic control problem of maximizing the expected total discounted reward:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r is a reward function at time s , h is the reward function applied at the end of the period T , and β ≥ 0 is a constant discount factor.

We now extend the problem by adopting the exploratory policy formulation of Wang et al. (2020). To facilitate exploration within the control space, we define the exploratory control as a policy distribution, which is a probability distribution over the set of controls.

Fix a stochastic policy π , an initial time-state-regime triple ( t, x, i ) . Consider the following SDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the solution to (2.3), X π = { X π s , t ≤ s ≤ T } , is the sample state process corresponding to a π . Motivated by Wang et al. (2020), which employed the Shannon entropy regularizer to encourage exploration, we introduce Tsallis entropy as the regularizer for the same goal of policy exploration. The problems of interest is to find an optimal policy distribution π ( a | t, X t , α t ) that maximizes the following discounted cost function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where E P is the expectation with respect to both the Brownian motion and the action randomization, γ ≥ 0 stands for the temperature parameter . The function function J ( · , · , · ; π ) is called the value function of the policy π and the Tsallis entropy with order p ≥ 1 is defined by, for z ∈ R + ,

As defined in Eq.(2.5), the Tsallis entropy with order p ≥ 1 generalizes the Shannon entropy (Tsallis 1988). In fact, p is also called the entropy index , and when p = 2 , it becomes the sparse Tsallis entropy (Lee et al. 2018). Furthermore, when p →∞ , it converges to zero.

Assumption 2.1. The following conditions for the state dynamics and reward functions hold true:

- (i) b, σ, r, h are all continuous functions in their respective arguments;
- (ii) b, σ are uniformly Lipschitz continuous in x , i.e., for φ ∈ { b, σ } , there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (iii) b, σ have linear growth in x , i.e., for φ ∈ { b, σ } , there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (iv) r and h have polynomial growth in ( x, i, a ) and x respectively, i.e., there exists constants C &gt; 0 and c ≥ 1 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.2 Exploratory control problem

In the RL setting, the model parameters-specifically the functions b, σ , and h are unknown. Consequently, the optimal controls must be learned through repeated trials and errors (exploration). Inspired by this necessity, Jia and Zhou (2022a,b, 2023) modeled the exploration process by defining a probability distribution of controls, π = ( π ( a | t, X t , α t ) , t ≥ 0) , over the control space A , from which each trial is sampled. Adopting this method, we can define the exploratory state dynamics as, for s ∈ [ t, T ] , X t = x, α t = i ,

d X s = ˜ b ( s, X s , α s , π ( · | s, X s , α s ))d s + ˜ σ ( s, X s , α s , π ( · | s, X s , α s ))d W s , (2.6) where the coefficients ˜ b ( · , · , · , · ) and ˜ σ ( · , · , · , · ) are defined by ˜ b ( s, x, i, π ) := ∫ A b ( s, x, i, a ) π ( a | s, x, i )d a, ˜ σ ( s, x, i, π ) := √∫ A σσ ⊤ ( s, x, i, a ) π ( a | s, x, i )d a for ( t, x, i, π ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M×P ( A ) with P ( A ) be the set of all probability density functions defined on A . The distributional control

π = ( π ( · | t, X t , α t ) , t ≥ 0) is also known as the relaxed control, and a classical control a = ( a t , t ≥ 0) is a special relaxed control when π ( · | t, X t , α t ) is taken as the Dirac mass at a t .

Intuitively, based on the law of large number, the solution of (2.6), denoted by { ˜ X π s , t ⩽ s ⩽ T } , is the limit of the average of the sample trajectories X π over randomization (i.e., copies of π ). Rigorously, it follows from the property of Markovian projection due to Brunick and Shreve (2013) (Theorem 3.6) that X π s and ˜ X π s have the same distribution for each s ∈ [ t, T ] . Hence, the value function (2.4) is identical to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ R ( s, x, i, π ) = ∫ A [ r ( s, x, i, a ) + γl p ( π ( a | s, x, i ))] π ( a | s, x, i )d a .

Remark 2.2. In the RL setting, the agent has partial or complete ignorance of the environment (i.e., the functions b, σ, r, h ). The agent learns through continuous trial-and-error, which involves testing a (continuous-time) action sequence a = { a s , t ≤ s ≤ T } , observing the corresponding state process X a = { X a s , t ≤ s ≤ T } , and iteratively updating and refining its actions based on these observations.

A key challenge lies in strategically generating the sequence of trial-and-error actions. The core idea is randomization: the agent designs and employs a stochastic policy, which is a probability distribution over the action space, to generate actions dependent on the current time-state-regime triplet. Notably, this randomization is independent of the Brownian motion W , which is the stochastic source of the original control problem and represents environmental noise. Specifically, we assume the probability space is sufficiently rich to support a uniform random variable process { Z t , 0 ≤ t ≤ T } independent of W (construction of this process may require extending the probability space; see Sun (2006)). We extend the filtered probability space to (Ω , F , P ; {F s } s ≥ 0 ) , where F s = F s W ∨ σ ( Z t , 0 ≤ t ≤ s ) . The probability measure P , now defined on F T , is an extension of P W (i.e., the measures coincide when restricted to F W T ).

The function J ( · , · , · ; π ) is called the value function of the policy π , and the task of RL is to find the optimal value function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Π stands for the set of admissible (stochastic) policies on A . The following provides the precise definition of admissible (feedback) policies. Although these conditions may not be the weakest, they are necessary to guarantee the theoretical well-posedness of the control problem (2.6)-(2.8).

Definition 2.1. A policy π = π ( · | · , · , · ) is called admissible if

- (i) π ( · | t, x, i ) ∈ P ( A ) , supp π ( · | t, x, i ) = A for every ( t, x, i, a ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d × M × A and π ( a | t, x, i ) : ( t, x, i, a ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M×A↦→ R is measurable;
- (ii) the SDE (2.6) has a unique solution for initial ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M ;
- (iii) π ( a | t, x, i ) is continuous in ( t, x, i ) and uniformly Lipschitz continuous in x in the total variation distance, i.e., for each fixed a, i , ∫ A | π ( a | t, x, i ) -π ( a | t ′ , x ′ , i ) | d a → 0 as ( t ′ , x ′ , i ) → ( t, x, i ) , and there is a constant C &gt; 0 independent of ( t, x, i ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (iv) For any given n &gt; 0 , the entropy of π and its n -moment have polynomial growth in x , i.e., there are constants C = C ( n ) &gt; 0 and c = c ( n ) ≥ 1 such that ∫ A | a | n π ( a | t, x, i ) da &lt; C (1 + | x | c ) , and ∫ A l ( π ( a | t, x, i )) π ( a | t, x, i ) da &lt; C (1 + | x | c ) , ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M .

Based on the above conditions, we have the following result. The proof, being similar to that in Jia and Zhou (2022b), is omitted here.

Lemma 2.3. Let Assumptions 2.1 hold and π be a given admissible policy. Then the SDE (2.6) admits a unique strong solution. Moreover, for any n ≥ 2 , the solution satisfies the growth condition E P W [ max t ≤ s ≤ T | ˜ X π s | n | ˜ X π t = x, α t = i ] ≤ C (1 + | x | n ) for some constant C = C ( n ) and i ∈ M . Finally, the expected payoff (2.7) is finite.

## 2.3 The Exploratory HJB equation

By dynamic programming arguments, the value function in (2.8) satisfies the exploratory HJB equation given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To find the optimal feedback policy, we introduce a scalar Lagrange multiplier ψ ( t, x, i ) : [0 , T ] × R d ×M→ R to enforce the constraint ∫ A π ( a | t, x, i )d a = 1 , and a Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) multiplier ξ ( t, x, i, a ) : [0 , T ] × R d ×M×A→ R + to enforce the constraint π ( a | t, x, i ) ≥ 0 . The corresponding Lagrangian is written by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We next discuss the candidate optimal feedback policy in terms of the entropy index p ≥ 1 by assuming that V is a classical solution to the exploratory HJB equation (2.9):

· The case p &gt; 1 . Using the first-order condition for the Lagrangian π →L ( t, x, i ; π ) , we arrive at, the candidate optimal feedback policy is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, it follows from the constraints on π ( a | t, x, i ) ≥ 0 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( x ) + := max { x, 0 } . Substituting (2.13) into (2.12) yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the Lagrange multiplier ψ ( t, x, i ) , henceforth called the normalizing function, is determined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- The case p = 1 . This scenario reduces to the conventional Shannon entropy case, where the optimal feedback policy π is a Gibbs measure given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or, after normalization,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The next result uses the candidate optimal policy given by (2.14) and (2.16) to establish the policy improvement theorem. Before stating the main result, let us first recall the objective function J ( t, x, i ; π ) with a fixed admissible policy π given by (2.7). Then, if the objective function J ( · , · , i ; π ) ∈ C 1 , 2 ([0 , T ) × R d ) ∩ C ([0 , T ] × R d ) for all i ∈ M , it satisfies the following PDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the terminal condition J ( T, x, i ; π ) = h ( x ) .

Theorem 2.4 (Policy Improvement Iteration) . For any given π ∈ Π , assume that the objective function J ( · , · , i ; π ) ∈ C 1 , 2 ([0 , T ) × R d ) ∩ C ([0 , T ] × R d ) satisfies Eq. (2.18) for all i ∈ M , and for p &gt; 1 , there exists a function ψ ( t, x, i ; π ) : [0 , T ] × R d ×M→ R d satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the Hamiltonian H ( t, x, i, a, J x ( t, x, i ; π ) , J xx ( t, x, i ; π )) is defined in (2.11) . We consider the following mapping I p on Π given by, for π ∈ Π ,

∀ p ≥ 1 , and I 1 ( π ) := lim p ↓ 1 I p ( π ) = exp { 1 γ H ( t,x,i,a,J x ( t,x,i ; π ) ,J xx ( t,x,i ; π )) } ∫ A exp { 1 γ H ( t,x,i,a,J x ( t,x,i ; π ) ,J xx ( t,x,i ; π )) } d a . Denote by π ′ = I p ( π ) for π ∈ Π . If π ′ ∈ Π , then J ( t, x, i ; π ′ ) ≥ J ( t, x, i ; π ) for all ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M . Moreover,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if the mapping I p : Π → Π has a fixed point ̂ π ∈ Π , then ̂ π is the optimal policy that, for all ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M ,

A detailed proof can be found in the Appendix.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

At this point, Theorem 2.4 is a theoretical result that cannot be directly applied to learning procedures, because the Hamiltonian H ( t, x, i, a, J x ( t, x, i ; π ) , J xx ( t, x, i ; π )) relies on the knowledge of the model parameters which we do not have in the RL context. Consequently, we propose a model-free RL algorithm by extending the q-leaning theory of Jia and Zhou (2023) to fit our formulation under Tsallis entropy.

## 3 Continuous-time q-function for Markov regime switching system and Martingale Characterization under Tsallis Entropy

This section provides the theoretical foundation by accurately defining the q-function for Markov regime switching and establishing its martingale characterization under Tsallis entropy in continuous time. We first define a time-discretized Q-function parameterized by ∆ t &gt; 0 , and then introduce the concept of a q-function that is independent of ∆ t . Additionally, we present the martingale characterizations of the q-function.

For any policy π ∈ Π and ( t, x, i, a ) ∈ [0 , T ) × R d ×M×A , we consider a 'perturbed' policy of π , denoted by ˜ π , as follows: It takes the action a ∈ A on [ t, t + ∆ t ) where ∆ t &gt; 0 , and then follows π on [ t +∆ t, T ] . The corresponding state process X ˜ π , given X ˜ π t = x , can be broken into two pieces. On [ t, t +∆ t ) , it is X a which is the solution to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

while on [ t + ∆ t, T ] , it is X ˜ π following (2.6) but with the initial time state pair ( t + ∆ t, X a t +∆ t ) . For a fixed time step ∆ t &gt; 0 , we introduce the ( ∆ t -parameterized) Q-function, Q ∆ t ( t, x, i, a ; π ) , defined as the expected reward derived from the perturbed policy, ˜ π :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following proposition provides an expansion of this Q-function in ∆ t .

## Proposition 3.1. We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Given that the leading term in Q ∆ t ( t, x, a ; π ) equals the value function of π and is therefore insufficient for ranking actions, we utilize the first-order approximation to obtain an infinitesimal state-action-regime value. This insight motivates the following definition of the 'q-function':

Definition 3.1 (q-function) . The q-function of the problem (2.6) -(2.7) associated with a given policy π ∈ Π is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Clearly, this function is the first-order derivative of the Q-function with respect to ∆ t , as an immediate consequence of Proposition 3.1:

Corollary 3.2. We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 3.3. The improved policy π ′ in Theorem 2.4 can be expressed in terms of the q-function as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the Lagrange multiplier ψ ( t, x, i ; π ) : [0 , T ] × R d × M ↦→ R must satisfy the normalization condition:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To address the natural question of whether such a function ψ ( t, x, i ; π ) exists, we consider the map u ↦→ F ( u ) for a given policy π and a fixed triplet ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Provided the q-function satisfies necessary integral conditions for F ( u ) to be well-defined, the mapping u ↦→ F ( u ) is continuous and strictly increasing, with F ( u ) → 0 as u →-∞ and F ( u ) → + ∞ as u → + ∞ . This guarantees the existence and uniqueness of the function ψ ( t, x, i ; π ) satisfying (3.6) .

The following result gives the martingale characterization of the q-function under a given policy π when the value function is given.

Proposition 3.4. Let a policy π ∈ Π , its value function J ( · , · , i ; π ) ∈ C 1 , 2 ([0 , T ) × R d ) ∩ C ([0 , T ] × R d ) for all i ∈ M satisfying (2.18) . Let a continuous function ˆ q : [0 , T ] × R d ×M×A↦→ R be given. Then, we have

- (i) ˆ q ( t, x, i, a ) = q ( t, x, i, a ; π ) for all ( t, x, i, a ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d × M × A if and only if for all ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M , the following process

is an ( F , P ) -martingale, where { X π s , t ≤ s ≤ T } is the solution to (2.3) under π with X π t = x, α t = i .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (ii) If ˆ q ( t, x, i, a ) = q ( t, x, i, a ; π ) for all ( t, x, i, a ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M×A , given any π ′ ∈ Π , for all ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M , the following process

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is an ( F , P ) -martingale. Here, { X π ′ p s , t ≤ s ≤ T } is the solution to (2.3) under π ′ with X π ′ t = x, α t = i .

- (iii) If there exists π ′ ∈ Π such that for all ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d × M , the process (3.8) is an ( F , P ) -martingale with initial condition X π ′ t = x, α t = i , then ˆ q ( t, x, i, a ) = q ( t, x, i, a ; π ) for all ( t, x, i, a ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M×A .

Moreover, in any of the three cases above, the q-function satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to Theorem 2 in Jia and Zhou (2023), we can strengthen Proposition 3.4 and characterize the q-function and the value function associated with a given policy π simultaneously.

Theorem 3.5. For each p ≥ 1 , let a policy π ∈ Π , a function ˆ J ( · , · , i ) ∈ C 1 , 2 ([0 , T ) × R d ) ∩ C ([0 , T ] × R d ) for all i ∈ M and a continuous function ˆ q : [0 , T ] × R d ×M×A↦→ R be given such that, for all ( t, x, i, a ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M×A ,

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (i) ˆ J and ˆ q are respectively the value function satisfying Eq. (2.18) and the q -function associated with π if and only if for all ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M , the following process

is an ( F , P ) -martingale where { X π s , t ≤ s ≤ T } is the solution to (2.3) under π with X π t = x, α t = i .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (ii) If ˆ J and ˆ q are respectively the value function and the q -function associated with π , then for any π ′ ∈ Π and all ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M , the following process

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is an ( F , P ) -martingale where { X π ′ s , t ≤ s ≤ T } is the solution to (2.3) under π ′ with X π ′ t = x, α t = i .

- (iii) If there exists π ′ ∈ Π such that for all ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d × M , the process (3.12) is an ( F , P ) -martingale with initial condition X π ′ t = x, α t = i , then ˆ J and ˆ q are respectively the value function and the q -function associated with π .

Moreover, in any of the three cases above, if it holds further that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the normalizing function ψ ( t, x, i ) satisfying ∫ A ( p -1 pγ ) 1 p -1 (ˆ q ( t, x, i, a ) + ψ ( t, x, i )) 1 p -1 + d a = 1 for all ( t, x, i, a ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M×A , then π for each p ≥ 1 is an optimal policy and ˆ J is the corresponding optimal value function.

## 4 q-Learning Algorithms under Tsallis Entropy

In this section, we present learning algorithms derived from the martingale characterization of the q-function established in the previous section. We distinguish between two cases, based on whether the normalizing function can be explicitly computed and integrated.

## 4.1 q-Learning algorithm when the normalizing function is available

In this subsection, we design q-learning algorithms to simultaneously learn and update the parameterized value function and the policy, utilizing the martingale condition established in Theorem 3.5.

We first consider the case when the normalizing function ψ ( t, x, i ) is known or computable. Given a policy π ∈ Π , we parameterize the value function by a family of functions J θ ( · , · , · ) , where θ ∈ Θ ⊂ R L θ and L θ is the parameter dimension. Similarly, we parameterize the q-function by q ζ ( · , · , · , · ) , where ζ ∈ Ψ ⊂ R L ζ and L ζ is the parameter dimension. Consequently, the normalizing function ψ ζ ( t, x, i ) is derived from the constraint

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, the approximators J θ and q ζ should also satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the policy π ζ is given by, for all ( t, x, i, a ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M×A ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, the learning task is to find the 'optimal' (in some sense) parameters θ and ζ . The key step in the algorithm design is to enforce the martingale condition stipulated in Theorem 2.4. By using martingale orthogonality condition, it is enough to explore the solution ( θ ∗ , ζ ∗ ) of the following martingale orthogonality equation system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the test functions ϱ = ( ϱ t ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] , ς = ( ς t ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] are F -adapted stochastic processes. This can be implemented offline by using stochastic approximation to update parameters as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where η θ and η ζ are learning rates. In this paper, we choose the test functions in the conventional sense by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Based on the above updating rules, we present the pseudo-code of the offline q-learning algorithm in Algorithm 1.

## 4.2 q-Learning algorithm when the normalizing function is unavailable

In this subsection, we address the case when the normalizing function ψ ( t, x, i ) does not admit an explicit form. Consequently, even with the learned q-function, we cannot directly learn the optimal policy due to the unknown term ψ ( t, x, i ) .

## Algorithm 1 Offline q-Learning Algorithm with Regime Switching

Input: Initial state-regime pair ( x, i ) , horizon T , time step ∆ t , number of episodes N , number of mesh grids K , the Markov Chain generator Q and the state space M , initial learning rates η θ ( · ) , η ζ ( · ) (functions of the number of episodes), functional forms of parameterized value function J θ ( · , · , · ) , and q-function q ζ ( · , · , · , · ) satisfying (4.2), and temperature parameter γ .

Required Program: environment simulator ( x ′ , r, j ) = Environment ∆ t ( t, x, i, a, Q ) that takes current time-state-regime-action quadruple ( t, x, i, a ) and the Q matrix as inputs, and generates next state x ′ , instantaneous reward r , and next regime j (driven by the Markov Chain Q ) at time t +∆ t as outputs.

## Learning Procedure:

- 1: Initialize θ, ζ , and n = 1 .
- 2: while n &lt; N do

3: Initialize ȷ = 0 . Observe initial state x , regime i , and store x t 0 ← x, α t 0 ← i .

- 4: while ȷ &lt; K do
- 5: Generate action a t ȷ ∼ π ζ ( · | t ȷ , x t ȷ α t ȷ ) .

t

6:

Apply

a

ȷ

to environment simulator

(

x, r, j

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 9: end while

) =

Environment

∆

t

(

t

ȷ

- 8: Update time index: t ȷ +1 ← t ȷ +∆ t , and step counter: ȷ ← ȷ +1 .

10: For every k = 0 , 1 , ..., K -1 , compute

11: Update θ and ζ by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

, x

, α

, a

- 12: Update n ← n +1 .
- 13: end while

t

ȷ

t

ȷ

t

ȷ

, Q

)

.

We still parameterize the value function by J θ ( · , · , · ) , where θ ∈ Θ ⊂ R L θ (with dimension L θ ), and the q-function by q ζ ( · , · , · , · ) , where ζ ∈ Ψ ⊂ R L ζ (with dimension L ζ ). However, since ψ ( t, x, i ) cannot be derived from (4.1), we instead parameterize the policy by a fimily of functions π χ ( · ) , where χ ∈ Υ ⊂ R L χ (with dimension L χ ). Furthermore, the approximators J θ and π χ must satisfy the terminal condition J θ ( T, x, i ) = h ( x ) . We then define the function F : [0 , T ] × R d ×M×P ( A ) × P ( A ) ↦→ R as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, we can devise an Actor-Critic q-learning algorithm to learn the q-function and the optimal policy alternatively. For the Actor-step (or policy improvement step), we update the policy π χ by maximizing the function F ( t, x, i ; π χ ′ , π χ ) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In fact, we have the next result, which is a direct consequence of Theorem 2.4. Bo et al. (2024) proved such a theorem while studying continuous-time q-learning in jump diffusion models. We then apply this method to the Markov regime switching system.

Lemma 4.1. Given ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d × M and Π , π ′ ∈ Π , if it holds that F ( t, x, i ; π ′ , π ) ≥ F ( t, x, i ; π, π ) , then J ( t, x, i ; π ′ ) ≥ J ( t, x, i ; π ) .

Moreover, while the q-learning method based on Theorem 3.5 requires the policy function π χ to satisfy π χ ∈ P ( A ) and the consistency condition (3.10), we relax these constraints here. Instead, we consider the following maximization problem, for w 1 , w 2 ≥ 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By a direct calculation, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, we can update χ by using the stochastic gradient descent that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where η χ is the learning rate.

Next, for the Critic-step (or the policy evaluation step), we adopt the same parameter updating rules for the value function and q-function as described in (4.3) in the previous algorithm(Subsection 4.1). We present the pseudo-code for the Actor-Critic q-learning algorithm when the normalizing function is unavailable in Algorithm 2.

To overcome the difficulty of an unavailable normalizing constant in soft Q-learning, Haarnoja et al. (2018) also introduced a general method of using a family of stochastic policies whose densities can be easily computed to approximate π ′ . Specifically, denote by { π ϕ ( · | t, x, i ) } ϕ ∈ Φ the family of density functions of some tractable distributions such as Gaussians. The learning procedure starts with a policy π ϕ from this family. When p = 1 , the objective is to project the target policy exp 1 γ q ( t,x,i, · ; π ϕ ) ∫ A exp 1 γ q ( t,x,i,a ; π ϕ )d a by minimizing

where D KL ( f ‖ g ) := ∫ A log f ( a ) g ( a ) f ( a )d a is the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence of two positive functions f, g with the same support on A , where f ∈ P ( A ) is a probability density function on A .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now present a policy improvement theorem, similar to Theorem 10 in Jia and Zhou (2023), which utilizes the KL divergence to optimize the policy without explicitly computing the normalization constant.

Theorem 4.2. Given ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M , if two policies π ∈ Π and π ′ ∈ Π satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then J ( t, x, i ; π ′ ) ≥ J ( t, x, i ; π ) .

## Algorithm 2 Offline q-Learning Algorithm with Regime Switching (Normalizing Function Unavailable)

Input: Initial state-regime pair ( x, i ) , horizon T , time step ∆ t , number of episodes N , number of mesh grids K , the Markov Chain generator Q and the state space M , initial learning rates η θ ( · ) , η ζ ( · ) , η χ ( · ) (functions of the number of episodes), functional forms of parameterized value function J θ ( · , · , · ) , and q-function q ζ ( · , · , · , · ) satisfying (4.2), and temperature parameter γ .

Required Program: environment simulator ( x ′ , r, j ) = Environment ∆ t ( t, x, i, a, Q ) that takes current time-state-regime-action quadruple ( t, x, i, a ) and the Q matrix as inputs, and generates next state x ′ , instantaneous reward r , and next regime j (driven by the Markov Chain Q ) at time t +∆ t as outputs.

## Learning Procedure:

- 1: Initialize θ, ζ, χ , and n = 1 .
- 2: while n &lt; N do
- 3: Initialize ȷ = 0 . Observe initial state x , regime i , and store x t 0 ← x, α t 0 ← i .
- 4: while ȷ &lt; K do

5: Generate action a t ȷ ∼ π χ ( · | t ȷ , x t ȷ α t ȷ ) . Apply a t ȷ to environment simulator ( x, r, j ) =

t

ȷ

+1

t

ȷ

+1

t

ȷ

+1

6:

7:

- 8: end while

Environment ∆ t ( t ȷ , x t ȷ , α t ȷ , a t ȷ , Q ) . Store ← ← Update time index: t ȷ +1 ← t ȷ +∆ t , and step counter: ȷ ← ȷ +1 .

- 9: For every k = 0 , 1 , ..., K -1 , compute

10: For the Critic (policy evaluation) step, update θ and ζ by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

11: For the Actor (policy improvement) step, update χ (using the updated θ and ζ ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 12: Update n ← n +1 .
- 13: end while

x

x

,

α

j

, and

r

←

r

.

Theorem 4.2 presents a general result for comparing any two given policies, regardless of whether they belong to a tractable family of densities.

Therefore, similar to the discussion in Theorem 10 of Jia and Zhou (2023), we can update ϕ incrementally at each step

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where η ϕ is the learning rate. Based on the above updating rules, we present the pseudo-code of the offline q-learning algorithm in Algorithm 3.

This approach is known as variational inference (or optimal Gaussian approximation) (see Murphy 2012). Essentially, it simplifies analysis by approximating complex distributions, functions, or problems with a Gaussian (normal) distribution. However, it should be noted that this approach is not applicable to all policy updates when the normalizing function is unavailable. More specifically, this update method is only suitable for cases where the optimal policy distribution is unimodal. Therefore, we provide this method only as a solution for cases where the optimal policy distribution is unimodal.

Analysis shows that for the order of Tsallis entropy p &gt; 1 , the objective is to project the target policy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define the multivariate normal distribution π ϕ ′ ( · | t, x, i ) = N ( µ ϕ ′ ( t, x, i ) , Σ ϕ ′ ( t, x, i )) , where µ ϕ ′ ( t, x, i ) ∈ R m and Σ ϕ ′ ( t, x, i ) ∈ S m ++ . We now consider utilizing the optimal Gaussian approximation (OGA) to solve the policy update problem min ϕ ′ ∈ Φ D KL ( π ϕ ′ ( a | t, x, i ) ‖ π ϕ ( a | t, x, i )) . The core method involves using a second order Taylor expansion to transform the complex KL divergence minimization into a local quadratic programming problem with a closed form solution. As the minimization of D KL ( π ϕ ′ ( a | t, x, i ) ‖ π ϕ ( a | t, x, i )) is generally intractable analytically, OGA yields an approximate closed form solution via a second order Taylor expansion of the target log density log π ϕ ( a | t, x, i ) near the current mean µ . Minimizing D KL ( π ϕ ′ ( a | t, x, i ) ‖ π ϕ ( a | t, x, i )) is equivalent to finding a Gaussian distribution π ϕ ′ ( a | t, x, i ) such that its log density log π ϕ ′ ( a | t, x, i ) matches the second order Taylor expansion of the target log density log π ϕ ( a | t, x, i ) at the current mean µ .

by minimizing min ϕ ′ ∈ Φ D KL ( π ϕ ′ ( · | t, x, i ) ‖ π ϕ ( a | t, x, i ) , where ψ ( t, x, i ; π ϕ ) satisfying ∫ A π ϕ ( a | t, x, i )d a = 1 . It is worth noting that this is the forward KL divergence (see Murphy 2012), which requires the target policy π ϕ ( a | t, x, i ) to be unimodal or strictly concave. For p = 1 , the target policy exp { 1 γ q ( t,x,i, · ; π ϕ ) } ∫ A exp { 1 γ q ( t,x,i,a ; π ϕ ) } d a is a Gaussian policy, which is clearly unimodal. To ensure the uniqueness (i.e., unimodal) of the optimal policy distribution in most standard optimal control models, the target policy π ϕ ( a | t, x, i ) is generally required to be strictly concave with respect to a . Therefore, we exclusively consider cases where π ϕ ( a | t, x, i ) is strictly concave in a .

## Algorithm 3 Offline q -Learning Algorithm with Regime Switching (Normalizing Function Unavailable)

Input: Initial state-regime pair ( x, i ) , horizon T , time step ∆ t , number of episodes N , number of mesh grids K , the Markov Chain generator Q and the state space M , initial learning rates η θ ( · ) , η ζ ( · ) , η ϕ ( · ) (functions of the number of episodes), functional forms of parameterized value function J θ ( · , · , · ) , and q-function q ζ ( · , · , · , · ) satisfying (4.2), and temperature parameter γ .

Required Program: environment simulator ( x ′ , r, j ) = Environment ∆ t ( t, x, i, a, Q ) that takes current time-state-regime-action quadruple ( t, x, i, a ) and the Q matrix as inputs, and generates next state x ′ , instantaneous reward r , and next regime j (driven by the Markov Chain Q ) at time t +∆ t as outputs.

## Learning Procedure:

- 1: Initialize θ, ζ, ϕ , and n = 1 .
- 2: while n &lt; N do
- 3: Initialize ȷ = 0 . Observe initial state x , regime i , and store x t 0 ← x, α t 0 ← i .
- 4: while ȷ &lt; K do
- 5: Generate action a t ȷ ∼ π ϕ ( · | t ȷ , x t ȷ α t ȷ ) .
- 6: Apply a t ȷ to environment simulator ( x, r, j ) = Environment ∆ t ( t ȷ , x t ȷ , α t ȷ , a t ȷ , Q ) .
- 7: Store x t ȷ +1 ← x , α t ȷ +1 ← j , and r t ȷ +1 ← r .
- 9: end while

8: Update time index: t ȷ +1 ← t ȷ +∆ t , and step counter: ȷ ← ȷ +1 .

10: For every k = 0 , 1 , ..., K -1 , compute

11: For the Critic (policy evaluation) step, update θ and ζ by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 12: For the Actor (policy improvement) step, update ϕ (using the updated θ and ζ ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 13: Update n ← n +1 .
- 14: end while

## 5 Applications and Numerical Examples

Consider an investor who manages a portfolio with an investment horizon T &gt; 0 . For clarity of presentation, the market consists of one risky asset, the stock { S t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] , and one risk-free asset, the bond { B t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] . Let { W t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] represent a one-dimensional Brownian Motion defined on a filtered probability space (Ω , F , F , P ) that satisfies the usual conditions. We further denote α t as the regime of the market at time t ∈ [0 , T ] , considering that the market has two states, 'bull' and 'bear' . For any time t ∈ [0 , T ] , α t takes a value from the set M .

The dynamics of the stock and the bond are driven by two stochastic processes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ ( t, α t ) ∈ R and σ ( t, α t ) ∈ R + are the mean and volatility of the stock return, respectively. And r ( t, α t ) ∈ R + is the risk-free interest rate at time t ∈ [0 , T ] in market regime α t ∈ M . At each time t ∈ [0 , T ] , let X t denote the value of the investor's portfolio. The investor reallocates their portfolio by investing an amount a t in stocks and investing X t -a t in bonds. Under the self-financing assumption, the portfolio value process can be derived as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

given the initial portfolio value X 0 = x &gt; 0 and the initial regime α 0 = i . Here, ρ ( t, α t ) := σ -1 ( t, α t )( µ ( t, α t ) -r ( t, α t )) is the Sharpe ratio, and { X a t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] with a superscript a represents the portfolio value process that follows the control policy a := { a t } t ∈ [0 ,T ] .

The classical continuous-time MV model aims to solve the following constrained optimization problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where { X a t , 0 ≤ t ≤ T } satisfies the dynamics (5.3) under the investment strategy (portfolio) a , and z ∈ R is an investment target set at t = 0 as the desired mean payoff at the end of the investment horizon [0 , T ] . To solve (5.4), one first transforms it into an unconstrained problem by applying a Lagrange multiplier w

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This problem can be solved analytically, whose solution a ∗ = { a ∗ t , 0 ≤ t ≤ T } depends on w . Then the original constraint E [ X a ∗ T ] = z determines the value of w . We refer a detailed derivation to Zhou and Duan (2000).

We now present the equivalent exploratory version of this problem, incorporating an entropy regularization term to encourage exploration. The portfolio value process is derived from Eq.(5.3), with its corresponding exploration version

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M and admissible policy distribution π ∈ A , we define the value function J and the optimal value function V as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Apply Itô's lemma and the dynamic programming principle, we deduce that the optimal value function V ( t, x, i ) satisfies the HJB equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the terminal condition V ( T, x, i ) = ( x -w ) 2 -( w -z ) 2 . Using the same discussion as before, we can solve the (constrained) optimization problem in the HJB equation (5.9) to obtain a feedback (distributional) control whose density function is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ψ ( t, x, i ) is the normalizing function, determined by ∫ A π ∗ p ( a | t, x, i )d a = 1 .

Moreover, we notice that the optimal value function can be written as a quadratic function of x :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( t, i ) &gt; 0 . Then we have, for p &gt; 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ψ ( t, x, i ) determined by the constraint ∫ A π p ( a | t, x, i )d a = 1 , and Moreover, at initialization with t = 0 , the optimal Lagrange multiplier

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Following Definition 3.1, we now provide the definition of the q-function for this problem.

Definition 5.1. The q -function of problem (5.6) -(5.7) associated with a given policy π ∈ Π is defined as, for all ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To solve Eq.(5.9), we need to compute the first and second moments of the policy function. When p = 1 , the policy function simplifies to a Gaussian distribution, making the calculation of its moments relatively straightforward. However, for p &gt; 1 , obtaining an explicit expression for the policy function typically becomes very difficult, primarily because the normalizing function is challenging to determine. Consequently, the calculation of the policy function's moments becomes extremely complex. Given these difficulties, we consider the two distinct cases: p = 1 and p &gt; 1 .

## 5.1 The case of p equals 1

For the case where the Tsallis entropy order is p = 1 , the first and second moments of the Gaussian policy ̂ π 1 ( a | t, x, i ) (defined in (5.10)) are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, the exploratory HJB equation is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Noting that the optimal value function V is expressed by (5.11), substituting its partial deriva- tives into (5.18) yields the following system of differential equations after simplification:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

And the corresponding q-function from (5.15) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the following, we consider a special case where the interest-rate process does not respond to the change in the market mode, namely, r ( t, i ) = r ( t ) for any i = 1 , 2 , and the appreciation-rate and volatility-rate processes are similarly defined. Since i ∈ { 1 , 2 } , the functions A ( t, i ) , B ( t, i ) , C ( t, i ) , and D ( t, i ) can be represented as the following two-dimensional vectors:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let A t ( t ) = ( A t ( t, 1) A t ( t, 2) ) , and similarly for other terms B t ( t ) , C t ( t ) , D t ( t ) . For simple, we define the following diagonal matrices:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we can rewrite (5.19) in vector form:

The solution of (5.21) are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us define some parameters as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and θ = ( θ 1 , θ 2 , θ 3 , θ 4 ) , ζ = ( ζ 1 , ζ 2 , ζ 3 , ζ 4 ) . Since θ and ζ are defined as the same model parameters, we have θ = ζ . The following functions can then be represented using these parameters:

We first present the parameterized vector equations (5.22)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining with (5.23), we can parameterize the value function, the q-function and the policy in the exact form by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ where H ζ A ( t ) = ( 2 r 1 -ζ 2 1 0 0 2 r 2 -ζ 2 2 ) , X = x 1 + w B ζ ( t ) , ζ ρ = ( ζ 1 ζ 2 ) , ζ σ = ( ζ 3 ζ 4 ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We can thereby compute the Lagrange multiplier w via (5.14)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( t 0 ) = ( A ( t 0 , 1) A ( t 0 , 2) ) , B ( t 0 ) = ( B ( t 0 , 1) B ( t 0 , 2) ) , C ( t 0 ) = ( C ( t 0 , 1) C ( t 0 , 2) ) are the solutions of (5.21) when t = t 0 .

To generate sample trajectories, investment actions a t are sampled according to the current policy with density function given by(5.45). Under the market regime α t , the wealth process is iteratively computed using the following Euler discretization scheme:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ W t ∼ N (0 , ∆ t ) represents the increment of a Brownian motion, and V ar ̂ Π ζ 1 = γ 2 ( ζ 2 σ ⊙ A ζ ( t ) ) . The market state α t is updated at each time step according to the transition matrix Q .

In what follows, we apply Algorithm 1 using the parameterized value function (5.24), q-function (5.25) and policy function (5.26) satisfying (5.22). We conduct simulations with the following configurations: We consider a one-year investment horizon ( T = 1) with 25 equal-step-size time points throughout the year for portfolio rebalancing (∆ t = 1 / 25) . The investor starts with x 0 = 1 and sets a target of z = 1 . 4 to be achieved by the end of the year. During the investment period, the investor explores the investment strategies with the exploration weight equal to γ = 0 . 5 . To simulate realistic market dynamics, we model the environment as a two-state continuous time Markov chain representing 'bull' ( i = 1) and 'bear' ( i = 2) market conditions and the initial state is randomly selected. The transitions between these regimes are governed by the generator matrix: Q = ( -1 1 1 -1 ) , where the transition intensities are λ 1 = 1 and λ 2 = 1 . Specifically, 'bull' is characterized by the drift µ 1 = 0 . 2 , volatility σ 1 = 0 . 2 , and the risk-free rate r 1 = 0 . 01 . Conversely, 'bear' reflects a more volatile environment with µ 2 = -0 . 2 , σ 2 = 0 . 3 , and r 2 = 0 . 05 . Accordingly, the ground truth parameters are defined as θ true = ( ρ 1 , true = 0 . 95 , ρ 2 , true = -0 . 833 , σ 1 , true = 0 . 2 , σ 2 , true = 0 . 3) . The initial values for the parameter vector, θ init = ( ρ 1,init , ρ 2,init , σ 1,init , σ 2,init ) , are chosen arbitrarily from the following intervals: ρ 1 , init ∈ [0 . 2 , 0 . 5] , ρ 2 , init ∈ [ -0 . 4 , -0 . 1] , and σ 1 , init , σ 2 , init [0 . 15 , 0 . 3] .

The control policy is constrained within the action space A = [ -5 , 5] . For the training process, we utilize a batch size of N paths = 100 trajectories over M = 6000 iterations. The learning rates are set as follows:

∈

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This study applies an identical learning rate schedule to both the value function parameters θ , the q -function parameters ζ to ensure synchronous convergence within the Actor-Critic framework. Since both parameters share the same financial space, this synchronized approach aligns the scales of Q -function estimation and asset allocation updates. In non-stationary environments with frequent regime switching, this mechanism minimizes training oscillations caused by estimation lag, thereby improving numerical robustness and convergence efficiency under complex market dynamics.

The numerical results for Algorithm 1 are presented in Figures 1, which plots the convergence behavior of the Mean-Variance portfolio optimization problem by the offline learning algorithm within the framework of Tsallis entropy p = 1 . After sufficient iterations, these parameters converge to the true values.

## 5.2 The case of p greater than 1

We now analyze the case where the Tsallis entropy order p &gt; 1 . For clarity, we focus on p = 2 and restrict the Markov chain to two regimes, i.e., L = 2 , where α t ∈ { 1 , 2 } . By substituting (5.12) into

Figure 1: Convergence of Algorithm 1 using a market simulator. The panels show the convergence of parameter iterations for ( ρ 1 , ρ 2 , σ 1 , σ 2 ).

<!-- image -->

(5.9), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where E ̂ π 2 [ a ] = ∫ A a · ̂ π 2 ( a | t, x, i )d a and E ̂ π 2 [ a 2 ] = ∫ A a 2 · ̂ π 2 ( a | t, x, i )d a , and

is the optimal policy satisfying ∫ A ̂ π 2 ( a | t, x, i )d a = 1 . Substituting the partial derivatives of V from (5.11) into (5.28) yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Adding 3 lines helps isolating A ( t, i ) , B ( t, i ) , C ( t, i ) , D ( t, i ) :

Rearranging and grouping gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This leads to the following system of coupled partial differential equations for A ( t, i ) , B ( t, i ) , C ( t, i ) , and D ( t, i ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Additionally, the corresponding q-function from (5.15) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the following, we consider a special case where the interest-rate process does not respond to the change in the market mode, namely, r ( t, i ) = r ( t ) for any i = 1 , 2 , and the appreciation-rate and volatility-rate processes are similarly defined. Then the functions A ( t, i ) , B ( t, i ) , C ( t, i ) , and D ( t, i ) can be represented as the following two-dimensional vectors:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, (5.30) can be written in the following vector form

Let A t ( t ) = ( A t ( t, 1) A t ( t, 2) ) , and similarly for other terms B t ( t ) , C t ( t ) , D t ( t ) . For simple, we define the following diagonal matrices: ρ ( t ) = ( ρ ( t, 1) ρ ( t, 2) ) , σ ( t ) = ( σ ( t, 1) σ ( t, 2) ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where K 1 ( t, x ) = (2 x A ( t ) + w B ( t )) ⊙ ρ ( t ) ⊙ σ ( t ) , K 2 ( t ) = A ( t ) ⊙ σ ( t ) ⊙ 2 , 1 ψ ( t, x ) = ( ψ ( t, x, 1) ψ ( t, x, 2) ) , and ̂ Π 2 ( a | t, x ) satisfying ∫ A Π 2 ( a | t, x ) d a = 1 . Therefore, we have and the first and second moments of Π 2 ( a | t, x ) are

1 ⊙ 2 represents element-wise squaring.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observing (5.32), we find that the core of solving this system of equations lies in determining the normalization constant ψ ( t, x ) within the policy ̂ Π 2 ( a | t, x ) . To address this, we define the integral vector of the n -th power function (with dimension 2 × 1 ) over the interval A = [ a min , a max ] as follows:

where M 0 = a max -a min . Assuming H ( a ) = K 2 ( t ) a 2 + K 1 ( t, x ) a + ψ ( t, x ) &gt; 0 within A (i.e., the positive-part operator is activated across the entire action space), the normalization condition can be expanded as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Solving for ψ ( t, x ) yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, (5.35)-(5.36) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It should be noted that -γ ( 1 -1 /M 0 ) represents the baseline loss under a uniform distribution over the interval, which vanishes when the effective interval length M 0 = 1 . The terms ( E ̂ Π 2 [ a ] -M 1 ⊙ M ⊙-1 0 ) and ( E ̂ Π 2 [ a 2 ] -M 2 ⊙ M ⊙-1 0 ) denote the deviations of the actual expectation and second moment from those of a uniform distribution (the geometric center and its second moment), respectively. These terms characterize the 'certainty gain' resulting from the distribution's deviation from uniformity. Defining the 'moment offset vector' as ∆ E n = E ̂ Π 2 [ a n ] -M n ⊙ M ⊙-1 0 yields the following simplified representation:

Based on (5.37)-(5.39), the solution of (5.32) are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Ω A = ( -2 r 1 +1 -1 -1 -2 r 2 +1 ) , M ( s ) = ( A ( s, 2)( B ( s, 2) -B ( s, 1)) 2 A ( s, 1)( B ( s, 1) -B ( s, 2)) 2 ) , L B ( t ) = 1 w ρ ( t ) ⊙ σ ( t ) ⊙ E ̂ Π 2 [ a ] + N B ( t ) , L D ( t ) = A ( t ) ⊙ σ · 2 ( t ) ⊙ E ̂ Π 2 [ a 2 ] + γ ( 1 -∫ A ̂ Π 2 ( a | t, x ) ⊙ 2 d a ) .

In this section we consider a special case where the interest-rate process does not respond to the change in the market mode, namely, r ( t, i ) = r ( t ) for any i = 1 , 2 , and the appreciation-rate and volatility-rate processes are similarly defined. Use the same method, we can define the parameters as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and θ = ( θ 1 , θ 2 , θ 3 , θ 4 ) , ζ = ( ζ 1 , ζ 2 , ζ 3 , ζ 4 ) , χ = ( χ 1 , χ 2 , χ 3 , χ 4 ) . Since θ , ζ and χ are defined as the same model parameters, we have θ = ζ = χ . The following functions can then be represented using these parameters:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ E θ n = E θ ̂ Π 2 [ a n ] -M n ⊙ M ⊙-1 0 . We now present the parameterized form of the vector equation (5.40):

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, we have the parameterization of the value function and the q-function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

And the parameterized policy can be written as

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To generate sample trajectories, investment actions a t are sampled according to the current policy with density function given by(5.45). Under the market regime α t , the wealth process is iteratively computed using the following Euler discretization scheme:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ W t ∼ N (0 , ∆ t ) represents the increment of a Brownian motion. The market state α t is updated at each time step according to the transition matrix Q .

In what follows, we apply Algorithm 2 using the parameterized value function (5.43), q-function (5.44), policy function (5.45), and the system of equations (5.41). Consistent with Section 5.1, similar market configurations were utilized in the simulation. We conduct simulations with the following configurations: We consider a one-year investment horizon ( T = 1) with 25 equal-stepsize time points throughout the year for portfolio rebalancing (∆ t = 1 / 25) . The investor starts with x 0 = 1 and sets a target of z = 1 . 4 to be achieved by the end of the year. During the investment period, the investor explores the investment strategies with the exploration weight equal to γ = 0 . 5 . To simulate realistic market dynamics, we model the environment as a two-state continuous time Markov chain representing 'bull' ( i = 1) and 'bear' ( i = 2) market conditions and the initial state is randomly selected. The transitions between these regimes are governed by the generator matrix: Q = ( -1 . 8 1 . 8 2 . 0 -2 . 0 ) , where the transition intensities are λ 1 = 1 . 8 and λ 2 = 2 . 0 . Specifically, 'bull' is characterized by the drift µ 1 = 0 . 12 , volatility σ 1 = 0 . 15 , and the risk-free rate r 1 = 0 . 02 . Conversely, 'bear' reflects a more volatile environment with µ 2 = -0 . 10 , σ 2 = 0 . 35 , and r 2 = 0 . 025 . Accordingly, the ground truth parameters are defined as θ true = ( ρ 1,true = 0 . 733 , ρ 2,true = -0 . 428 , σ 1,true = 0 . 15 , σ 2,true = 0 . 35) . The initial values for the parameter vector, θ init = ( ρ 1,init , ρ 2,init , σ 1,init , σ 2,init ) , are chosen arbitrarily from the following intervals: ρ 1 , init ∈ [0 . 1 , 0 . 25] , ρ 2 , init ∈ [ -0 . 05 , 0 . 1] , and σ 1 , init , σ 2 , init ∈ [0 . 2 , 0 . 3] .

The control policy is constrained within the action space A = [ -5 , 5] . For the training process, we utilize a batch size of N paths = 50 trajectories over M = 5000 iterations. The actor penalty weights set to w 1 = 0 . 1 and w 2 = 0 . 5 .

The learning rates and optimization settings are specified as follows: Parameter updates are performed using the Adam optimizer with hyperparameters β 1 = 0 . 9 , β 2 = 0 . 999 , and numerical stability term ϵ = 10 -8 . For the Critic network parameters θ = ( ρ 1 , ρ 2 , σ 1 , σ 2 ) , we assign initial learning rates of different magnitudes to accommodate the varying sensitivities of each component. The learning rates are set as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where η is the base learning rate. Following the discussion in Section 5.1, this study applies an identical learning rate schedule to the value function parameters θ , the q -function parameters ζ , and the policy function parameters χ . This approach ensures synchronous convergence within the Actor-Critic framework.

The numerical results for Algorithm 2 are presented in Figures 2, which plots the convergence behavior of the Mean-Variance portfolio optimization problem by the offline learning algorithm within the framework of Tsallis entropy p = 2 . After sufficient iterations, these parameters converge to the true values.

Figure 2: Convergence of Algorithm 2 using a market simulator. The panels show the convergence of parameter iterations for ( ρ 1 , ρ 2 , σ 1 , σ 2 ).

<!-- image -->

As previously discussed, Eq. (5.32) indicates that the key to solving the system lies in determining the normalization constant ψ ( t, x ) within the policy ̂ Π 2 ( a | t, x ) . Below, we present an alternative approach for addressing similar issues. However, since our problem requires K 2 ( t ) &gt; 0 , this method is provided solely as a solution for cases where the normalizing function is unavailable.

Remark 5.1. Observing (5.32) , we find that the core of solving this system of equations lies in determining the normalization constant ψ ( t, x ) within the policy ̂ Π 2 ( a | t, x ) . To address this, and to handle the non-differentiable ( · ) + operator for gradient-based optimization, we employ the Gibbs policy (Softmax policy) to approximate (5.33) : 2

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Z ( t, x ) = ∫ A exp ( 1 2 γ ( K 1 ( t, x ) a + K 2 ( t ) a 2 ) ) d a . This approach subsumes the influence of unknown terms within the normalization constant, thereby eliminating interference while preserving the normalization of the probability density. Furthermore, the first and second moments of the policy ̂ Π 2 ( a | t, x ) can be derived using the policy (5.46) , provided that K 2 ( t ) &lt; 0 .

## 6 Conclusion

Inspired by prior work on regime switching and recent advancements in stochastic control Reinforcement Learning (RL), this paper extends continuous-time q-learning theory by introducing the more general Tsallis entropy as the entropy regularizer.

Traditional RL algorithms typically favor Shannon entropy over more general entropic regularizers, such as Tsallis entropy. The primary difficulty is that the latter often yields an optimal policy distribution that is not in a standard probabilistic form, thereby limiting subsequent algorithm design; we overcome this challenge. Additionally, most current continuous-time regime-switching RL algorithms are considered within the EMV problem framework, rather than the more general stochastic control framework. This constraint restricts their applicability to other problem frameworks (e.g., LQ problems), thereby limiting the breadth of algorithm application. Given the significance of entropic regularization in continuous-time q-learning, and the need to effectively model sudden shifts and uncertainty in real environments, this work focuses on continuous-time q-learning for Markov regime-switching systems based on Tsallis entropy, aiming to provide a more universally applicable continuous-time RL algorithm.

Specifically, we establish the martingale characterization of the q-function under Tsallis entropy for continuous-time systems with regime-switching. Based on this, we design two q-learning algorithms, classifying them by whether the Lagrange multiplier can be explicitly derived. When the Lagrange multiplier is intractable, we provide two distinct policy update methods: the update rule based on (4.5) (Algorithm 2) and the update rule based on KL divergence (4.6)(Algorithm 3).

We apply these algorithms to the continuous-time exploratory Mean-Variance portfolio optimization problem in a regime-switching market, and observe the performance of Algorithms 2 when the normalizing function is unavailable. Notably, we find that for the Tsallis entropy parameter p = 1 , the optimal policy is explicitly characterized (Algorithm 1); however, for p &gt; 1 , explicit characterization is difficult, prompting the use of Algorithm 2. Furthermore, as the coupled system of equations satisfied by the optimal value function coefficients is analytically intractable, we characterize and solve it numerically using a system of matrix equations.

2 To resolve the discontinuity in ̂ Π χ 2 ( a | t, x ) , we employ a Softmax-like normalization to approximate the policy function as an exponential distribution, consistent with standard practices in reinforcement learning. For detail, see Sutton (2018), Chapter 13; and Murphy (2012), Chapter 35.1.5.

## References

- Bo L, Huang Y, Yu X (2023) On optimal tracking portfolio in incomplete markets: The classical control and the reinforcement learning approaches. Preprint, available at arXiv:2311.14318.
- Bo L, Huang Y, Yu X, Zhang T (2024) Continuous-time q-learning for jump-diffusion models under tsallis entropy. Preprint, available at arXiv:2407.03888.
- Boyd S, Vandenberghe L (2004) Convex Optimization (Cambridge University Press).
- Brunick G, Shreve S (2013) Mimicking an itô process by a solution of a stochastic differential equation. The Annals of Applied Probability, 23(4):1584-1628.
- Chen YM, Li B, Saunders D (2025) Exploratory mean-variance portfolio optimization with regime-switching market dynamics. Preprint, available at arXiv:2311.14318.
- Dai M, Dong Y, Jia Y, Zhou XY (2023) Learning merton's strategies in an incomplete market: Recursive entropy regularization and biased gaussian exploration. Preprint, available at arXiv:2312.11797.
- Donnelly R, Jaimungal S (2024) Exploratory control with tsallis entropy for latent factor models. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 15(1):26-53.
- Giegrich M, Reisinger C, Zhang Y (2024) Convergence of policy gradient methods for finite-horizon exploratory linear-quadratic control problems. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 62(2):10601092.
- Haarnoja T, Zhou A, Hartikainen K, Tucker G, Ha S, Tan J, Kumar V, Zhu H, Gupta A, Abbeel P (2018) Soft actor-critic algorithms and applications. Preprint, available at arXiv:10.48550/arXiv.1812.05905.
- Han X, Wang R, Zhou XY (2023) Choquet regularization for continuous-time reinforcement learning. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 61(5):2777-2801.
- Jia Y, Zhou XY (2022a) Policy evaluation and temporal-difference learning in continuous time and space: A martingale approach. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(154):1-55.
- Jia Y, Zhou XY (2022b) Policy gradient and actor-critic learning in continuous time and space: Theory and algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 23(275):1-50.
- Jia Y, Zhou XY (2023) q-learning in continuous time. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 24(161):1-61.
- Karatzas I, Shreve SE (1991) Brownian Motion and Stochastic Calculus(Second Edition) (Springer).
- Kim J, Shin J, Yang I (2021) Hamilton-jacobi deep q-learning for deterministic continuous-time systems with lipschitz continuous controls. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22:1-34.
- Lee K, Choi S, Oh S (2018) Sparse markov decision processes with causal sparse tsallis entropy regularization for reinforcement learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 3(3):1466-1473.
- Lee K, Kim S, Lim S, Choi S, Oh S (2019) Tsallis reinforcement learning: A unified framework for maximum entropy reinforcement learning. Preprint, available at arXiv:1902.00137.
- Murphy KP (2012) Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective (MIT Press).
- Sun Y (2006) The exact law of large numbers via fubini extension and characterization of insurable risks. Journal of Economic Theory, 126(1):31-69.
- Sutton RS (2018) Reinforcement learning: An introduction (MIT press).

- Tallec C, Blier L, Ollivier Y (2019) Making deep q-learning methods robust to time discretization. International Conference on Machine Learning, , 6096-6104 (PMLR).
- Tsallis C (1988) Possible generalization of Boltzmann-Gibbs statistics. Journal of Statistical Physics, 52:479487.
- Wang B, Gao X, Li L (2023) Reinforcement learning for continuous-time optimal execution: actor-critic algorithm and error analysis. Preprint, available at SSRN 4378950.
- Wang H, Zariphopoulou T, Zhou XY (2020) Reinforcement learning in continuous time and space: A stochastic control approach. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 21(198):1-34.
- Watkins CJ, Dayan P (1992) Q-learning. Machine learning, 8:279-292.
- Watkins CJCH (1989) Learning from delayed rewards . Ph.D. thesis, King's College, Cambridge United Kingdom.
- Wei X, Yu X, Yuan F (2024) Unified continuous-time q-learning for mean-field game and mean-field control problems. Preprint, available at arXiv:2407.04521v2.
- Wu B, Li L (2024) Reinforcement learning for continuous-time mean-variance portfolio selection in a regimeswitching market. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 158.
- Zhou XY, Duan LP (2000) Continuous-time mean-variance portfolio selection: A stochastic lq framework. Applied Mathematics and Optimization 42(1):19-33.
- Zhou XY, Yin G (2003) Markowitz's mean-variance portfolio selection with regime switching: A continuoustime model. SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization, 42(4):1466-1482.

## Appendix A. Proofs of Statements

## Appendix A1. The proof of Theorem 2.4.

To prove Theorem 2.4, we need the following auxiliary result.

Lemma 6.1. Let γ &gt; 0 and p ≥ 1 . For a given function q ( a ) : A ↦→ R , assume that there exists a constant ψ ∈ R such that

Then, π ∗ ( a ) = ( p -1 pγ ) 1 p -1 ( q ( a ) + ψ ) 1 p -1 + d a is a probability measure on A , and it is the unique maximizer of the optimization problem:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Under the assumptions, the following optimization problem is considered

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the set of P ( A ) is constrained by π ( a ) ≥ 0 and the normalization condition ∫ A π ( a )d a = 1 . As the optimal policy π ∗ ( a ) must satisfy the KKT conditions (Boyd and Vandenberghe 2004), we prove the optimization problem by considering the following steps:

We begin by constructing the Lagrangian function and deriving its first-order necessary conditions. The Lagrangian L is formed by introducing the multiplier ψ ∈ R for the normalization constraint and the multiplier ξ ( a ) ≥ 0 for the non-negativity constraint π ( a ) ≥ 0 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

According to the first-order necessary condition of the KKT conditions, taking the variational derivative (or formal partial derivative) of L with respect to π ( a ) and setting it to zero yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, the candidate optimal policy π ( a ) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, the optimal solution must satisfy the KKT complementary slackness condition: ξ ( a ) π ( a ) = 0 . Specifically, we analyze two cases:

- (1) If π ( a ) &gt; 0 , the complementary slackness requires ξ ( a ) = 0 . Furthermore, the first-order condition ∂ L ∂π must be positive (or zero, depending on the full constraints). Given the constraint π ( a ) ≥ 0 , we require the partial derivative expression q ( a ) + γ p -1 -ψ + ξ ( a ) &gt; 0 .
- (2) π ( a ) = 0 , the first-order necessary condition ∂ L ∂π = 0 must hold, which implies q ( a ) + γ p -1 -ψ + ξ ( a ) = 0 . Since the non-negativity constraint requires ξ ( a ) ≥ 0 , this leads to ξ ( a ) = -( q ( a ) + γ p -1 -ψ ) ≥ 0 .

Combining these conditions, the non-negativity constraint on ξ ( a ) is characterized by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting (6.4) back into (6.3) yields the unified form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the lemma already assumes the existence of a constant ψ satisfying the normalization condition (6.1), and because the derived form of π ( a ) matches the policy assumed in the lemma, we have proven that the optimal policy satisfying the KKT conditions is identical to the policy defined in the lemma.

For the optimization problem (6.1), we must check the convexity of its objective function. Let f ( π ) = -[ q ( a ) π ( a ) + γ p -1 π ( a ) -γ p -1 π p ( a )] . We examine its second derivative with respect to π ( a ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since γ &gt; 0 and p &gt; 1 , we have ∂ 2 f ∂π 2 &gt; 0 for all π ( a ) &gt; 0 . Therefore, the objective function ∫ A [ q ( a ) π ( a ) + γ p -1 ( π ( a ) -π p ( a ))]d a is strictly concave with respect to π . Combining this with the convexity of the set P ( A ) , we proved that the solution π ( a ) satisfying the KKT conditions is the unique maximizer.

Now we are ready to prove Theorem 2.4. Throughout the proofs, we use the generic notation C to denote constants that are independent of variables like t, x, a . Note that the same notation may represent different values across different occurrences.

Proof. For two given admissible policies π and π ′ , and any 0 ≤ t ≤ T , apply Itô's lemma to the process e -βs J ( s, ˜ X π ′ s , α s ; π ) , which is the value function under π but over the state process under π ′ :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where q ( t, x, i, a ; π ) is defined to be

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as in (3.4) with the Hamiltonian function H are defined in (2.11).

Because π ′ = I p ( π ) , it follows from Lemma 6.1 that for any ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the equality is due to (3.10) in Theorem 3.5. Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The above argument and the resulting inequalities are also valid when T is replaced by T ∧ u n , where u n = inf { s ≥ t : | ˜ X π ′ s | ≥ n } is a sequence of stopping times. Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from Assumption 2.1-(iv), Definition 2.1-(iii) and the moment estimate in Lemma 2.3 that there exist constants µ ′ , C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the dominated convergence theorem, we have as n →∞ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds.

Based on the moment estimate provided in Lemma 2.3, we establish the existence of constants µ ′ , C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Again, by the dominated convergence theorem, we have as n →∞ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds.

Hence, sending n → ∞ , we conclude from (6.7) that J ( t, x, i ; π ) ≤ J ( t, x, i ; π ′ ) . This proves that π ′ = I p ( π ) improves upon π . Moreover, if I p ( π ) ≡ π ′ = π , then J ( t, x, i ; π ) ≡ J ( t, x, i ; π ′ ) =: V ( t, x, i ) , which satisfies the PDE (2.18). However, Lemma 6.1 shows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This means that V also satisfies the HJB equation (2.18), implying that V is the optimal value function and hence π is the optimal policy.

## Appendix A2. The proof of Proposition 3.1

Proof. Apply Itô's lemma, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we break the time period [ t, T ] into [ t, t +∆ t ) and [ t +∆ t, T ] , and conditioning on the state at t + ∆ t for [ t + ∆ t, T ] . For ∆ t &gt; 0 , we consider the conventional Q-function with time interval ∆ t that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last equality and the error order are due to the approximation of the integral involved.

## Appendix A3. The proof of Proposition 3.4.

Proof. First, (3.6) follows readily from its definition in Definition 3.1, the Feynman-Kac formula (2.18), and the fact that J t ( t, x, i ; π ) and βJ ( t, x, i ; π ) both do not depend on action a .

- (i) We now focus on (3.7). Applying Itô's lemma to the process e -βs J ( s, X π s , α s ; π ) , we obtain for 0 ≤ t &lt; s ≤ T :

Recall that { a π s , t ≤ s ≤ T } is F -progressively measurable. So, if ˆ q ≡ q ( · , · , · , · ; π ) , then from the above process, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, (3.7) is an ( F , P ) -martingale on [ t, T ] .

Conversely, if the right hand side of the above is a martingale, then, because its second term is a local martingale, we have that ∫ s t e -βu [ q ( u, X π u , α u , a π u ; π ) -ˆ q ( u, X π u , α u , a π u )]d u is a continuous local martingale with finite variation and hence zero quadratic variation. Therefore, P -almost surely, ∫ s t e -βu [ q ( u, X π u , α u , a π u ; π ) -ˆ q ( u, X π u , α u , a π u )]d u = 0 for all s ∈ [ t, T ] ; see, e.g., (Karatzas and Shreve (1991), Chapter 1, Exercise 5.21)

Denote f ( t, x, i, a ) = q ( t, x, i, a ; π ) -ˆ q ( t, x, i, a ) . Then f is a continuous function that maps [0 , T ] × R d × M × A to R . Suppose the desired conclusion is not true, then there exists a quadruple ( t ∗ , x ∗ , i ∗ , a ∗ ) and ϵ &gt; 0 such that f ( t ∗ , x ∗ , i ∗ , a ∗ ) &gt; ϵ . Because f is continuous, there exists δ &gt; 0 such that f ( u, x ′ , i ∗ , a ′ ) &gt; ϵ/ 2 for all ( u, x ′ , i ∗ , a ′ ) with | u -t ∗ | ∨ | x ′ -x ∗ | ∨ | a ′ -a ∗ | &lt; δ . Here ' ∨ ' means taking the larger one, i.e., u ∨ v = max { u, v } .

Now consider the state process, still denoted by X π , starting from ( t ∗ , x ∗ , i ∗ , a ∗ ) , namely, { X π s , t ∗ ≤ s ≤ T } follows (2.3) with X π t ∗ = x ∗ , α t ∗ = i ∗ and a π t ∗ = a ∗ . Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

The continuity of X π implies that u &gt; t ∗ , P -almost surely. Here ' ∧ ' means taking the smaller one, i.e., u ∧ v = min { u, v } .

We have already proved that there exists Ω 0 ∈ F with P (Ω 0 ) = 0 such that for all ω ∈ Ω \ Ω 0 , ∫ s t ∗ e -βu f ( u, X π u ( ω ) , α u ( ω ) , a π u ( ω ))d u = 0 for all s ∈ [ t ∗ , T ] . It follows from Lebesgue's differentiation theorem that for any ω ∈ Ω \ Ω 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider the set Z ( ω ) = { s ∈ [ t ∗ , τ ( ω )] : a π s ( ω ) ∈ B δ ( a ∗ ) } ⊂ [ t ∗ , τ ( ω )] , where B δ ( a ∗ ) = { a ′ ∈ A : | a ′ -a ∗ | &gt; δ } is the neighborhood of a ∗ . Because f ( s, X π s ( ω ) , α s ( ω ) , a π s ( ω )) &gt; ϵ 2 when s ∈ Z ( ω ) , we conclude that Z ( ω ) has Lebesgue measure zero for any ω ∈ Ω \ Ω 0 . That is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Integrating ω with respect to P and applying Fubini's theorem, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since τ &gt; t ∗ , P -almost surely, the above implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

However, this contradicts Definition 2.1 about an admissible policy. Indeed, Definition 2.1(i) stipulates supp π ( · | t, x, i ) = A for any ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d × M ; hence ∫ B δ ( a ∗ ) π ( a | t, x, i )d a &gt; 0 . Then the continuity in Definition 2.1-(iii) yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a contradiction. Hence we conclude q ( t, x, a, i ; π ) = ˆ q ( t, x, a, i ) for every ( t, x, a, i ) .

- (ii) Applying Itô's lemma to e -βs J ( s, X π ′ s , α s ; π ) , we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So, when ˆ q ≡ q ( · , · , · , · ; π ) , the process (3.8) is an ( F , P ) -martingale on [ t, T ] .

- (iii) Let π ′ ∈ Π be given satisfying the assumption in this part. It then follows from (ii) that ∫ s t e -βu [ˆ q ( u, X π ′ u , α u , a π ′ u ) -q ( u, X π ′ u , α u , a π ′ u ; π )]d u is an ( F , P ) -martingale. If the desired conclusion is not true, then the same argument in (i) still applies to conclude that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is a contradiction because π ′ is admissible.

## Appendix A4. The proof of Theorem 3.5.

- Proof. (i) First, we prove (3.11) is an ( F , P ) -martingale. Applying Itô's lemma, we obtain, for 0 ≤ t &lt; s ≤ T :

Hence, (3.11) is an ( F , P ) -martingale.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now prove the other side. Assume that e -βs ˆ J ( s, X π s , α s ; π ) + ∫ s t e -βu ( r ( u, X π u , α u , a π u ) -ˆ q ( u, X π u , α u , a π u ))d u is a ( F , P ) -martingale. Hence, for any initial state ( t, x, i ) , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We integrate over the action randomization with respect to the policy π , and then obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This, together with the terminal condition ˆ J ( T, x, i ) = h ( x ) , and constraint (3.10) yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence ˆ J ( t, x, i ) = J ( t, x, i ; π ) for all ( t, x, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d × M . Furthermore, based on Proposition 3.4, the martingale condition implies that ˆ q ( t, x, i, a ) = q ( t, x, i, a ; π ) for all ( t, x, i, a ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d ×M×A .

- (ii) This follows immediately from Proposition 3.4-(ii).
- (iii) Let π ′ ∈ Π be given satisfying the assumption in this part. Applying Itô's lemma to e -βs ˆ J ( s, X π ′ s , α s ; π ) , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then e -βs ˆ J ( s, X π ′ s , α s ; π ) -∫ s t e -βu ˆ r ( u, X π ′ u , α u , a π ′ u )d u is an ( F , P ) -martingale. As a result, ∫ s t e -βu [ r ( u, X π ′ u , α u , a π ′ u ) -ˆ q ( u, X π ′ u , α u , a π ′ u ) + ˆ r ( u, X π ′ u , α u , a π ′ u )]d u is an ( F , P ) -martingale. Applying the same argument as in the proof of Proposition (3.4), we conclude that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every ( t, x, i, a ) . Consequently, the constraint of (3.10) is expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all ( t, x, i ) , combined with the terminal condition ˆ J ( T, x, i ) = h ( x ) , is the Feynman-Kac PDE (2.18) for ˆ J . Therefore, the uniqueness of the solution to (2.18) implies ˆ J ≡ J ( · , · , · ; π ) . Moreover, it follows from Proposition 3.4-(iii) that ˆ q ≡ q ( · , · , · , · ; π ) . Finally, if it holds further that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the normalizing function ψ ( t, x, i ) satisfying ∫ A ( p -1 pγ ) 1 p -1 (ˆ q ( t, x, i, a )+ ψ ( t, x, i )) 1 p -1 + d a = 1 for all ( t, x, i, a ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R d × M × A , then π = I p π where I p is the map defined in Theorem 2.4. This in turn implies π ( a | t, x, i ) for each p ≥ 1 is an optimal policy and ˆ J is the corresponding optimal value function.