## Stochastic Linear-Quadratic Optimal Control Problems with Markovian Regime Switching and H вҲһ Constraint under Partial Information вҲ—

Na Xiang вҖ  , Jingtao Shi вҖЎ

January 9, 2026

Abstract: This paper is concerned with a stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problem of Markovian regime switching system with model uncertainty and partial information, where the information available to the control is based on a subПғ -algebra of the filtration generated by the underlying Brownian motion and the Markov chain. Based on H вҲһ control theory, we turn to deal with a soft-constrained zero-sum linear-quadratic stochastic differential game with Markov chain and partial information. By virtue of the filtering technique, the Riccati equation approach, the method of orthogonal decomposition, and the completion-of-squares method, we obtain the closed-loop saddle point of the zero-sum game via the optimal feedback control-strategy pair. Subsequently, we prove that the corresponding outcome of the closed-loop saddle point satisfies the H вҲһ performance criterion. Finally, the obtained theoretical results are applied to a stock market investment problem to further illustrate the practical significance and effectiveness.

Keywords: Stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control, stochastic differential game, partial information, Markovian regime switching, H вҲһ control, Riccati equation

Mathematics Subject Classification: 93E20, 49N10, 60H10, 93B36, 93C41, 60J28, 91A15

## 1 Introduction

The stochastic linear-quadratic (SLQ) optimal control problems constitute a class of extremely important optimal control problems in stochastic optimization theory, since they can model many problems in applications, and more importantly, many nonlinear control problems can be reasonably approximated by the SLQ problems. On the other hand, solutions of SLQ problems exhibit elegant properties due to their simple and nice structures. The study of SLQ optimal control problems originated from the works of Kushner [10] and Wonham [42] in the 1960s. Bismut [1] studied SLQ optimal control problems with random coefficients using functional analysis techniques and obtained the optimal control in a random feedback form. Chen et al. [4] pioneered the investigation of SLQ optimal control problems with indefinite control weight costs, which presented new stochastic Riccati equations involving complicated nonlinear terms. The monograph by Yong and Zhou [49] studied the SLQ optimal control problems via stochastic Riccati equations and presented a comprehensive survey on the SLQ optimal control theory. Tang [33] discussed the existence and uniqueness of the associated stochastic Riccati equation for general SLQ optimal control problems with random coefficients and state control dependent noise via the stochastic flows, which solved Bismut and Peng's long-standing open problem. There has been extensive research on SLQ optimal control problems, and significant extensions have been developed based on it, such as open-loop and closed-loop solvabilities, mean-field type, risk-sensitive, time-inconsistent, and jump-diffusion models, etc. For more recent developments on SLQ optimal control problems, readers may refer to [14, 15, 16, 23, 28, 31, 32, 34, 47].

вҲ— This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundations of China (12471419, 12271304), and Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (ZR2024ZD35).

вҖ  School of Mathematics, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, P.R. China, E-mail: 202211967@mail.sdu.edu.cn

вҖЎ School of Mathematics, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, P.R. China, E-mail: shijingtao@sdu.edu.cn

In practice, model uncertainty is widespread in the control systems. One extension of the SLQ optimal control problem involves the presence of external unknown disturbances in the state equation. Along this line, the stochatic H 2 /H вҲһ control problem has been extensively studied via various approaches, including the linear matrix inequality (LMI) technique, convex optimization approach, the Nash game approach. Among these different methods to this class of worst-case design problems, the one that uses the framework of dynamic differential game theory seems to be the most natural. The Nash game approach is a classical technique to deal with the H 2 /H вҲһ control problem. By constructing two performances associated with H вҲһ robustness and H 2 optimization, respectively, the H 2 /H вҲһ control can be converted into finding the Nash equilibrium point. Limebeer et al. [12] was the first pioneering work to solve the deterministic mix H 2 /H вҲһ control problem by means of the theory of nonzero-sum games. The resulting H 2 /H вҲһ controller admits a linear state feedback representation characterized by the solution to a pair of cross-coupled Riccati equations. Chen and Zhang [3] generalized the work of [12] to the stochastic scenario with state-dependent noise, including both finite and infinite horizon cases and shown that finite (infinite) horizon stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control has close relation to a pair of coupled differential Riccati equations (a pair of coupled algebraic Riccati equations, correspondingly). Zhang et al. [55] extended the result of [3] to the system with all state, control and external disturbance dependent noise, where four cross-coupled matrixvalued differential and algebraic equations were introduced to express the finite and infinite horizon stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control. Then, Zhang et al. [56] considered a general finite horizon nonlinear stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control with state, control and external disturbance dependent noise, and proved that the mixed H 2 /H вҲһ control is associated with the four cross-coupled Hamilton-Jacobi equations. Subsequently, the stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control theory has experienced rapid development. For more details on the stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control problem, readers may refer to [38, 39, 44, 51, 54]. On the other hand, H вҲһ optimal control problem has also been extensively investigated. In fact, H вҲһ optimal control problem is a minimax optimization problem, and hence a zero-sum game, where the controller can be viewed as the minimizing player and disturbance as the maximizing player. It is closely associated with the zero-sum game, and compared with the H 2 /H вҲһ control problem, it can avoid solving the cross-coupled Riccati equations. The monograph by BaВё sar and Bernhard [2] systematically elaborates on the well-known relationship between H вҲһ optimization and LQ zero-sum differential games. Pan and BaВё sar [24] studied the H вҲһ optimal control problem with a Markov chain in both finite and infinite horizon cases, where the controller has access to perfect or imperfect continuous state measurements. Ugrinovskii [35] considered the stochastic H вҲһ control problem with state-dependent noise and obtained the state feedback controller that guarantees a prescribed level of disturbance attenuation for all admissible stochastic uncertainties. Hinrichsen and Pritchard [7] investigated the stochastic H вҲһ control problem with state- and control-dependent noise and proved a bounded real lemma for stochastic systems with deterministic and stochastic perturbations. van den Broek et al. [36] studied the existence of Nash equilibria in LQ differential games on an infinite planning horizon, where the system is disturbed by deterministic noise and the strategy spaces are of the static linear feedback type and considered the soft-constrained and hard-bounded cases. Zhang and Chen [53] discussed the stochastic H вҲһ control for nonlinear systems with both state- and disturbance-dependent noise, including finite and infinite horizon cases. By means of two kinds of Hamilton-Jacobi equations, both infinite and finite horizon nonlinear stochastic H вҲһ control designs were developed. There are various works on the stochastic H вҲһ control problem, one can refer to [8, 11, 22, 45] and the references cited therein.

Markov regime switching models have been widely used in stochastic optimal control problems in recent years. In financial engineering, bank interest rates, stock appreciation and volatility are modulated by Markov processes (e.g., bear market and bull market), which can more directly characterize the factors and events that do not change frequently but exert a significant impact on the long-term trends of the system. There is a vast literature on SLQ optimal control problems involving Markov chains, see, for examples, [5, 17, 18, 41, 43, 58]. For the H 2 /H вҲһ control problems with regime switching jumps, one can refer to [25, 38, 52]. For the H вҲһ control problems with regime switching jumps, one can refer to [19, 24, 40]. In addition, regime switching model has also been widely applied in finance, such as the mean-variance portfolio selection and investment-consumption problem, see, for examples, [48, 57, 60].

We note that in the vast majority of the aforementioned literature, player can only make decisions with complete information. However, in practical problems, we often lack complete information and have to make decisions based on partial information. For a stochastic control problem, if the available information comes from an observation equation, the corresponding control problem is referred to as a partially observed optimal control problem, see, for examples,

[13, 23, 27, 29, 37]. On the other hand, if the available information is directly given by an abstract sub-filtration that does not depend on the control, the corresponding control problem is termed a stochastic optimal control problem with partial information, see [9, 16, 21, 26, 59].

Motivated by the aforementioned literature, we consider an SLQ optimal control problem with Markovian regime switching and model uncertainty under partial information, where both the drift and diffusion terms of the state equation and the cost functional contain the control and the external unknown disturbance. It is required that the information available to the control is based on a subПғ -algebra of the filtration generated by the underlying Brownian motion and the Markov chain. Based on H вҲһ control theory and by virtue of the close relationship between H вҲһ control problems and LQ zero-sum stochastic differential games, we transform this problem into a soft-constrained zero-sum LQ stochastic differential game with Markov chain and partial information, where the control can be viewed as the minimizing player with partial information G and the disturbance as the maximizing player with complete information F . As with other existing literature, we present the definition of the closed-loop saddle point of the LQ zero-sum game with Markov chain and partial information (see Definition 2.2). To preliminarily guarantee the existence of the H вҲһ optimal control, we analyze the disturbance attenuation parameter Оі , discuss the properties of the corresponding open-loop upper value V 0 Оі (0 , 0 , i ) with respect to the disturbance attenuation parameter Оі (see Proposition 3.1 and Corollary 3.1), and derive a threshold level Оі вҲ— for the H вҲһ control problem (see Proposition 3.2). Inspired by the work of Yu [50], we formulate two auxiliary problems to obtain the closed-loop saddle point of the zerosum game by seeking the optimal feedback control-strategy pair in a closed-loop form. Firstly, using the filtering technique, we obtain the corresponding filtering equation and the equation that the difference satisfies. Further, by means of Riccati equation approach and orthogonal decomposition of the state process and the disturbance, the soft-constrained cost functional is expressed as the sum of two parts: one part is a functional of the control u , the filtering state and disturbance processes (i.e., ЛҶ x and ЛҶ v ), which lies in the common information G , and the other part is independent of the choice of the control and only related to the differences of the state process and the disturbance (i.e., Лң x and Лң v ), which lies in the private information of the disturbance Лң G := F \ G . Due to the two equivalent forms of the Riccati equation (see Lemma 4.2), we perform the completion-of-squares method for the two cost functionals separately, derive the feedback form of ( u вҲ— , ЛҶ Оұ вҲ— 2 ( u )) and ( Оұ вҲ— 1 (ЛҶ v ) , ЛҶ v вҲ— ) with respect to ЛҶ x and the feedback form of Лң v вҲ— with respect to Лң x (see Lemma 4.3, Theorem 4.1, and Theorem 4.2). Then, by proving the equivalence of the two backward ordinary differential equations (BODEs) and introducing an algebraic equations system, we give the conditions of the existence of the optimal control-strategy pair ( u вҲ— , v вҲ— ) (see Proposition 4.1 and Theorem 4.3). We then verify that the optimal control-strategy pair is the outcome of the closed-loop saddle point to the zero-sum game (see Theorem 4.4), and prove that it satisfies the H вҲһ performance criterion (see Theorem 4.5). To conclude, the effectiveness of the theoretical results is confirmed via numerical simulations.

The main contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows.

(1) Firstly, we study a class of SLQ optimal control problems with Markovian regime switching and model uncertainty under partial information, where the control variable and the external unknown disturbance enter the drift term and diffusion terms of the state equation, respectively, and the information available to the control is based on a subПғ -algebra of the filtration generated by the underlying Brownian motion and the Markov chain.

(2) Secondly, we discuss the properties of the open-loop upper value for the homogeneous system with zero initial time and zero initial state with respect to the disturbance attenuation level Оі , and further derive the threshold level for the H вҲһ control problem from two distinct aspects to preliminarily guarantee the existence of the robust H вҲһ optimal control.

(3) Thirdly, by virtue of H вҲһ control theory, the closed-loop solvability of a soft-constrained zero-sum LQ stochastic differential game with Markov chain and partial information is investigated. We present two equivalent forms of the Riccati equation. With the help of the filtering technique, the method of orthogonal decomposition, and the completion-of-squares method, we obtain two optimal control-strategy pairs for the control and the disturbance. By proving the equivalence of the two BODEs and introducing an algebraic equations system, we obtain an optimal feedback control-strategy pair for the zero-sum game in a closed-loop form, and then derive the desired closed-loop saddle point of the zero-sum game. Subsequently, we prove that the corresponding outcome of the closed-loop saddle point satisfies the H вҲһ -performance.

(4) Finally, to further demonstrate the effectiveness and practical applicability of the theoretical results, we solve a stock market investment problem, characterize the bear and bull market states in the stock market by a two-state Markov chain, consider the impacts of bear and bull markets in the stock market on the investment strategies of individual investor and the worst-case disturbance, and then conduct a sensitivity analysis with respect to the disturbance attenuation level.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce some preliminary notations and formulate the soft-constrained zero-sum LQ stochastic differential game with Markov chain and partial information. Section 3 discusses the disturbance attenuation parameter. The robust H вҲһ optimal control and the worst-case disturbance of Problem (R-SCG) are obtained in Section 4. A numerical example is given in Section 5. Section 6 concludes this paper.

## 2 Preliminaries and problem formulation

Let T вҲҲ (0 , вҲһ ) be a fixed and deterministic time horizon. Let (в„Ұ , F , F , P ) be a complete filtered probability space on which two independent standard one-dimensional Brownian motions W , W and a continuous-time finite state space Markov chain Оұ вүЎ { Оұ ( t ); 0 вүӨ t &lt; вҲһ} are defined. We assume that Brownian motion ( W,W ) and Markov chain Оұ are mutually independent. The filtration F вүЎ {F t } t вүҘ 0 is generated jointly by the Brownian motion ( W,W ) and the Markov chain Оұ as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

where N ( P ) denotes the collection of all P -null sets in F . Let G вүЎ {G t } t вүҘ 0 be the natural filtration of W and Оұ augmented by all P -null sets in G . We assume that the Markov chain Оұ takes values in a finite state space S вүЎ { 1 , 2 , . . . , D } with some positive integer D , which is also homogeneous and irreducible. The generator of Оұ is a D Г— D matrix Оӣ := ( О» ij ) D i,j =1 . For each i, j вҲҲ S , О» ij is the constant transition intensity of the chain from state i to state j at time t . Note that О» ij вүҘ 0 for i = j and вҲ‘ D j =1 О» ij = 0, so О» ii вүӨ 0. In what follows, for each i, j вҲҲ S with i = j , we further suppose that О» ij &gt; 0, so О» ii &lt; 0. Set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

the counting process N ij ( t ) counts the number of jumps from state i to state j up to time t . The process

is a purely discontinuous, square-integrable martingale (compensated measure).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Throughout the paper, let R n denote the n -dimensional Euclidean space with standard Euclidean norm | В· | and standard Euclidean inner product гҖҲВ· , В·гҖү . The transpose of a vector (or matrix) x is denoted by x вҠӨ . Tr( A ) denotes the trace of a square matrix A . Let R n Г— m be the Hilbert space consisting of all n Г— m -matrices with the inner product гҖҲ A,B гҖү := Tr( AB вҠӨ ) and the Frobenius norm | A | := гҖҲ A,A гҖү 1 2 . Denote the set of symmetric n Г— n matrices with real elements by S n . If M вҲҲ S n is positive (semi-) definite, we write M &gt; ( вүҘ )0. If there exists a constant Оҙ &gt; 0 such that M вүҘ ОҙI , we write M вү« 0. For a given Hilbert space H , if Оҫ : в„Ұ вҶ’ H is an F T -measurable, square-integrable random variable, we denote Оҫ вҲҲ L 2 F T (в„Ұ; H ); if ПҶ : [ t, T ] Г— в„Ұ вҶ’ H is F -progressively measurable s.t. E вҲ« T t | ПҶ ( s ) | 2 ds &lt; вҲһ , we denote ПҶ вҲҲ L 2 F ( t, T ; H ); if ПҶ : [ t, T ] Г— в„Ұ вҶ’ H is F -adapted, continuous s.t. E [ sup s вҲҲ [ t,T ] | ПҶ ( s ) | 2 ] &lt; вҲһ , we denote ПҶ вҲҲ L 2 F (в„Ұ; C ([ t, T ]; H )).

For t вҲҲ [0 , T ), we consider the following controlled Markovian regime switching linear stochastic differential equation (SDE) on the finite horizon [ t, T ]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Оҫ вҲҲ L 2 F t (в„Ұ; R n ) and the coefficients A ( В· , j ), B 1 ( В· , j ), B 2 ( В· , j ), C ( В· , j ), D 1 ( В· , j ), D 2 ( В· , j ), ВҜ C ( В· , j ), ВҜ D 1 ( В· , j ), ВҜ D 2 ( В· , j ) are given deterministic matrix-valued functions of proper dimensions, and b ( В· , j ), Пғ ( В· , j ), ВҜ Пғ ( В· , j ) are deterministic R n -valued functions, j вҲҲ S . Moreover, x ( В· ) вҲҲ R n is the state process, u ( В· ) вҲҲ R m is the control process, and v ( В· ) вҲҲ R n v is the external unknown disturbance to characterize the model uncertainty and represents the influence of the external environment on the decision-maker.

Moreover, we consider the cost functional:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where G ( T, j ) вҲҲ S n , g ( T, j ) вҲҲ R n , and the coefficients Q ( В· , j ), R 1 ( В· , j ), R 2 ( В· , j ), S 1 ( В· , j ), S 2 ( В· , j ) are given deterministic matrix-valued functions of proper dimensions, and q ( В· , j ), ПҒ 1 ( В· , j ), ПҒ 2 ( В· , j ) are deterministic vector-valued functions of proper dimensions, j вҲҲ S .

According to H вҲһ control theory, we introduce the parameterized (in the disturbance attenuation level Оі &gt; 0) family of cost functionals:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is a so-called parameterized soft-constrained cost functional associated with H вҲһ optimal control problem (see [2]), with the scalar parameter Оі standing for 'level of disturbance attenuation'. Note that the functional J of (2.2) is in fact J Оі of (2.3) evaluated at Оі = 0. For notational simplicity, we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With the above notations, some assumptions will be in force throughout this paper.

(H1) The coefficients of the state equation satisfy the following: for each j вҲҲ S ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(H2) The weighting coefficients in the cost functional satisfy the following: for each j вҲҲ S ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(H3) The following standard conditions hold:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under (H1), for any initial pair ( t, Оҫ, i ) вҲҲ [0 , T ) Г— L 2 F t (в„Ұ; R n ) Г—S , u ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) and v ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ), the state equation (2.1) admits a unique strong solution (Mao [20])

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

u ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) is called an admissible control and x ( В· ) is called the corresponding admissible state process. Therefore, under (H1)-(H2), the quadratic performance functionals J ( t, Оҫ, i ; u, v ) and J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; u, v ) are well-defined for all ( t, Оҫ, i ) вҲҲ [0 , T ) Г— L 2 F t (в„Ұ; R n ) Г— S and ( u ( В· ) , v ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) Г— L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ). If b ( В· , В· ) = Пғ ( В· , В· ) = ВҜ Пғ ( В· , В· ) = q ( В· , В· ) = ПҒ 1 ( В· , В· ) = ПҒ 2 ( В· , В· ) = g ( T, В· ) = 0, the solution of system (2.1) is denoted by x 0 ( В· ) and the corresponding cost functionals are denoted by J 0 ( t, Оҫ, i ; u ( В· ) , v ( В· )) and J 0 Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; u ( В· ) , v ( В· )).

For any t вҲҲ [0 , T ), we define the closed-loop admissible strategy sets of u ( В· ) and v ( В· ):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ЛҶ x ( r ) is the optimal filtering estimate of x ( r ) with respect to G r in sense of Xiong [46], and the equation it satisfies is given in Section 4.

Due to the existence of the external unknown disturbance v ( В· ) in the system (2.1), the decision-maker is required to take into account the H вҲһ performance to guarantee robust stability in this case, that is the H вҲһ norm is less than a fixed level Оі . This paper will consider the synthesis of a closed-loop control strategy for a finite-horizon stochastic H вҲһ control problem with Markovian regime switching under partial information. We next give the definition about the finite-horizon stochastic robust H вҲһ closed-loop control with Markov chain and partial information.

Definition 2.1 (finite-horizon stochastic H вҲһ closed-loop optimal control) . Given a disturbance attenuation level Оі &gt; 0 , find an H вҲһ state feedback control strategy u вҲ— ( В· ) вүЎ u вҲ— ( В· ; ЛҶ x ( В· ) , Оұ ( В· )) вҲҲ U [ t, T ] such that the homogeneous closed-loop system corresponding to the control u вҲ— ( В· ) satisfies a prescribed H вҲһ -performance

Мё

Remark 2.1. (i) If such a u вҲ— ( В· ) вҲҲ U [ t, T ] exists, the finite-horizon stochastic H вҲһ control problem with Markovian regime switching under partial information is said to admit a solution, and the corresponding u вҲ— ( В· ) is referred to as the robust H вҲһ (closed-loop optimal) control.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(ii) Under (H3), for any initial pair and u ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) and v ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ) , the cost functional J 0 ( t, Оҫ, i ; u ( В· ) , v ( В· )) is non-negative, which can be viewed as a norm on the output of the system. The effect of the disturbance on the cost functional of system (2.1)-(2.2) is described by the perturbation operator L u , which (for zero initial time and state) maps finite energy disturbance signals v ( В· ) into the corresponding finite energy output signals J 0 (0 , 0 , i ; u ( В· ) , v ( В· )) of the homogeneous closed-loop system. The magnitude of this linear operator is measured by the induced norm ( H вҲһ norm). The larger that this norm is, the larger is the effect of the unknown disturbance v ( В· ) on the cost functional J 0 (0 , 0 , i ; u ( В· ) , v ( В· )) in the worst case.

Since the H вҲһ control problem can be solved by reformulating it into the corresponding zerosum game model, we consider the associated soft-constrained zero-sum LQ stochastic differential game with Markov chain and partial information, whose quadratic cost functional is given by J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; u ( В· ) , v ( В· )) and denote it as Problem (SCG) . In this game, the decision-maker u ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ), which acts as the minimizing player (henceforth called Player 1), can only access partial information, while the disturbance v ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ) is the maximizing player (called Player 2). When the non-homogeneous terms in (2.1) and (2.3) are zero, we denote it as Problem (SCG) 0 . We now introduce the following definition of the closed-loop saddle point for Problem (SCG).

Definition 2.2. For any given t вҲҲ [0 , T ) , let ЛҶ Оҳ( В· , В· ) , Лң Оҳ( В· , В· ) : [ t, T ] Г— S вҶ’ R ( m + n v ) Г— n be the deterministic functions and ВҜ v ( В· ) : [ t, T ] Г— в„Ұ вҶ’ R m + n v be an F -progressively measurable process with ЛҶ Оҳ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) вүЎ ( ЛҶ Оҳ 1 ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) вҠӨ , ЛҶ Оҳ 2 ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) вҠӨ ) вҠӨ , Лң Оҳ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) вүЎ (0 , Лң Оҳ 2 ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) вҠӨ ) вҠӨ and ВҜ v ( В· ) вүЎ ( v 1 ( В· ) вҠӨ , v 2 ( В· ) вҠӨ ) вҠӨ , satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with v 1 ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) , and v 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ) . The set of all closed-loop strategy pairs on [ t, T ] is denoted by Q [ t, T ] . A 3-tuple ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , ВҜ v вҲ— ( В· )) вҲҲ Q [ t, T ] is called a closed-loop saddle point of Problem (SCG) on [ t, T ] if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ЛҶ x вҲ— ( В· ) and Лң x вҲ— ( В· ) denote, respectively, the filtering state process and the corresponding difference of the closed-loop system under ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , ВҜ v вҲ— ( В· )) .

Remark 2.2. Using the similar method of Propositin 3.3 in Sun and Yong [30], we can prove that the inequality (2.5) in Definition 2.2 is equivalent to the following inequality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which will be used in subsequent discussions.

If the closed-loop saddle point of Problem (SCG) satisfies the H вҲһ -performance specified by (2.4), then the corresponding outcome of the closed-loop saddle point is the desired robust H вҲһ optimal control and the worst-case disturbance, which we state as Problem (R-SCG) below, where the letter 'R' represents H вҲһ robustness.

Problem (R-SCG). For any given t вҲҲ [0 , T ) and the disturbance attenuation level Оі &gt; 0, find a closed-loop saddle point ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , ВҜ v вҲ— ( В· )) вҲҲ Q [ t, T ] of Problem (SCG), and the corresponding outcome of the closed-loop saddle point u вҲ— ( В· ) := ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 ( В· , Оұ ( В· ))ЛҶ x ( В· ) + v вҲ— 1 ( В· ) вҲҲ U [ t, T ] ensures that the H вҲһ -performance holds, i.e., вҖ–L u вҲ— вҖ– &lt; Оі .

If the closed-loop saddle point ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , ВҜ v вҲ— ( В· )) вҲҲ Q [ t, T ] mentioned above exists, and the corresponding outcome ( u вҲ— ( В· ) , v вҲ— ( В· )) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then the finite-horizon stochastic H вҲһ control of Markovian regime switching system with partial information is said to admit a pair of solution ( u вҲ— ( В· ) , v вҲ— ( В· )), where u вҲ— ( В· ) вҲҲ U [ t, T ] is robust H вҲһ closed-loop optimal control for the system and v вҲ— ( В· ) вҲҲ V [ t, T ] is the corresponding worst-case disturbance.

## 3 The disturbance attenuation parameter

Since the H вҲһ optimal control depends on the disturbance attenuation level Оі , the smaller this level is, the lower the influence of the external disturbance on the system output that the decision-maker can tolerate. However, the selection of the disturbance attenuation level is not arbitrary. If the pre-specified disturbance attenuation level is too small, the corresponding H вҲһ optimal control may not exist. Therefore, in this section, we aim to determine a lower bound for the disturbance attenuation parameter, which also serves as the foundation for all subsequent derivations and discussions.

For any disturbance attenuation level Оі &gt; 0 and initial pair ( t, Оҫ, i ) вҲҲ [0 , T ) Г— L 2 F t (в„Ұ; R n ) Г—S , the open-loop upper value V 0 Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ) and the open-loop lower value V 0 Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ) of Problem (SCG) 0 are determined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which automatically satisfying the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the case that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we say that Problem (SCG) 0 admits an open-loop value V 0 Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ) at ( t, Оҫ, i ) with respect to Оі &gt; 0. The maps ( t, Оҫ, i ) вҶҰвҶ’ V 0 Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ), ( t, Оҫ, i ) вҶҰвҶ’ V 0 Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ), and ( t, Оҫ, i ) вҶҰвҶ’ V 0 Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ) are called the open-loop upper value function, open-loop lower value function, and open-loop value function with respect to Оі , respectively.

It should be noted that the open-loop upper value V 0 Оі (0 , 0 , i ) is bounded below by 0, which can be ensured for Player 2 by choosing v ( В· ) to be zero. If H вҲһ -performance holds, then we have V 0 Оі (0 , 0 , i ) вүӨ 0. Hence, the disturbance attenuation level Оі must satisfy V 0 Оі (0 , 0 , i ) = 0. In view of this, let us introduce a set ВҜ О“:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

According to the definition of the above open-loop upper value, we can draw the following result, which indicates that the open-loop upper value V 0 Оі (0 , 0 , i ) at (0 , 0 , i ) is monotonically decreasing with respect to the parameter Оі .

and a threshold ВҜ Оі :

Proposition 3.1. Let (H1)-(H3) hold, if 0 &lt; Оі 1 вүӨ Оі 2 , then V 0 Оі 2 (0 , 0 , i ) вүӨ V 0 Оі 1 (0 , 0 , i ) .

Proof. Since 0 &lt; Оі 1 вүӨ Оі 2 , for any u ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) and v ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By taking the supremum on both sides of the inequality, it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore,

We complete the proof.

Corollary 3.1. Let (H1)-(H3) hold, if Оі &gt; 0 satisfies V 0 Оі (0 , 0 , i ) = 0 , then Оі вүҘ ВҜ Оі .

Proof. By Proposition 3.1, we obtain that for any Оі вҖІ &gt; Оі ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies Оі вҲҲ ВҜ О“. This completes the proof.

Moreover, set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

which is the optimal (minimax) disturbance attenuation level. The outer minimization problem in (3.3) is often referred to as the finite-horizon disturbance attenuation problem (see [2]). If there exists a control u ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) satisfying the minimax disturbance attenuation bound Оі вҲ— in (3.3). Then (3.3) becomes equivalent to: (i)

(ii) There is no other ЛҶ u ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) and a corresponding ЛҶ Оі &lt; Оі вҲ— , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proposition 3.2. Let (H1)-(H3) hold, then Оі вҲ— = ВҜ Оі .

Proof. It is first proven that ВҜ Оі вүӨ Оі вҲ— holds. From (3.3), we have for any З« &gt; 0, there exists some u 0 ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) such that

Мё

By the arbitrariness of З« , for any v ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ), v = 0, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence,

Since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we obtain that for any Оі &gt; Оі вҲ— ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, Оі вҲ— вҲҲ ВҜ О“, which implies ВҜ Оі вүӨ Оі вҲ— .

On the other hand, by the definition of ВҜ Оі , it follows that for sufficiently large positive integer k , there exists a monotonic non-increasing sequence { Оі k } k вүҘ 0 вҠҶ ВҜ О“ such that Оі k вҶ“ ВҜ Оі as k tends to infinity. Furthermore, by the definition of the set ВҜ О“, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, for any З« &gt; 0, there exists u k ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There exists a common convergent subsequence and a ВҜ u ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the arbitrariness of З« and the second item (3.5) of the equivalent definition of (3.3), we can obtain ВҜ Оі вүҘ Оі вҲ— , which is the desired result.

Remark 3.1. Since the disturbance attenuation level Оі should satisfy V 0 Оі (0 , 0 , i ) = 0 , it follows from Corollary 3.1 and Proposition 3.2 that Оі вүҘ Оі вҲ— . Furthermore, according to Problem (RSCG), H вҲһ -performance holds only if Оі &gt; Оі вҲ— , and we take Оі &gt; Оі вҲ— throughout the subsequent discussions.

## 4 Robust H вҲһ control of Problem (R-SCG)

For the purpose of deriving the robust H вҲһ optimal control of the stochastic H вҲһ control problem with Markovian regime switching under partial information, we reformulate this problem as an equivalent Problem (R-SCG) to obtain the robust H вҲһ optimal control and the worst-case disturbance. To this end, in this section, we first consider the soft-constrained zero-sum LQ stochastic differential game with Markov chain and partial information (Problem (SCG)) and present the sufficient conditions for the existence of the closed-loop saddle point, and then verify that the associated outcome of the closed-loop saddle point fulfills the H вҲһ performance criterion.

We define the filtering state and disturbance processes as follows: for t вҲҲ [0 , T ) , s вҲҲ [ t, T ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the differences

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Based on the above notations, we present the following lemma, which will be frequently used in subsequent discussions.

Lemma 4.1. If X ( В· ) , Y ( В· ) are square-integrable, F -adapted stochastic processes, for each s вҲҲ [ t, T ] and Z ( В· ) = X ( В· ) , Y ( В· ) , ЛҶ Z ( s ) := E [ Z ( s ) |G s ] is the orthogonal projection of Z ( s ) onto L 2 G s (в„Ұ; R n Z ) , then the difference Лң Z ( s ) := Z ( s ) -ЛҶ Z ( s ) is independent of G s and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where H ( В· , j ) , I ( В· , j ) and h ( В· , j ) , j вҲҲ S are deterministic matrix (vector)-valued functions of proper dimensions, respectively.

Proof. Firstly,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

which implies the third equation. And

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, we can get

Using Z ( В· ) = ЛҶ Z ( В· ) + Лң Z ( В·

By notations (4.1), (4.2) and Lemma 4.1, the filtering process ЛҶ x ( В· ) evolves according to the following SDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, the soft-constrained cost functional J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; u ( В· ) , v ( В· )) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To obtain the closed-loop saddle point of Problem (SCG), inspired by the work of Yu [50] on a zero-sum LQ stochastic differential game with complete information, we employ the technique of completion-of-squares to obtain the optimal feedback control-strategy pair in a closed-loop form based on the solution of Riccati equations, and then prove that the optimal feedback control-strategy pair is an outcome of the closed-loop saddle point of Problem (SCG). To this end, we first introduce the notion of Elliott-Kalton strategies (or nonanticipative strategies) for two-person zero-sum games (see [6, 50, 21]).

Definition 4.1. A nonanticipative strategy for Player 1 is a mapping Оұ 1 : L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ) вҶ’ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) such that for any F -stopping time П„ : в„Ұ вҶ’ [ t, T ] and any v вҖІ ( В· ) , v вҖІвҖІ ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ) , with v вҖІ вүЎ v вҖІвҖІ on [ t, П„ ] , it holds that Оұ 1 ( v вҖІ ) вүЎ Оұ 1 ( v вҖІвҖІ ) on [ t, П„ ] . The nonanticipative strategy Оұ 2 : L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) вҶ’ L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ) for Player 2 are defined in a similar way. The collection of all admissible nonanticipative strategies for Player 1 (resp., Player 2) over [ t, T ] is denoted by A 1 [ t, T ] (resp., A 2 [ t, T ] ).

In light of Definition 4.1, we formulate the following two auxiliary problems.

Problem (SCG-1). For any t вҲҲ [0 , T ) and the disturbance attenuation level Оі &gt; 0, find an admissible control u вҲ— ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) and an admissible nonanticipative strategy Оұ вҲ— 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ A 2 [ t, T ] such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If there exist an admissible control u вҲ— ( В· ) and admissible nonanticipative strategy Оұ вҲ— 2 ( В· ) satisfying (4.6), then we call ( u вҲ— ( В· ) , Оұ вҲ— 2 ( В· )) an optimal control-strategy pair of Player 1's value J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; u вҲ— ( В· ) , Оұ вҲ— 2 ( u вҲ— )( В· )).

Problem (SCG-2). For any t вҲҲ [0 , T ) and the disturbance attenuation level Оі &gt; 0, find an admissible control v вҲ— ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ) and an admissible nonanticipative strategy Оұ вҲ— 1 ( В· ) вҲҲ A 1 [ t, T ] such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If there exist an admissible control v вҲ— ( В· ) and admissible nonanticipative strategy Оұ вҲ— 1 ( В· ) satisfying (4.7), then we call ( Оұ вҲ— 1 ( В· ) , v вҲ— ( В· )) an optimal control-strategy pair of Player 2's value J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; Оұ вҲ— 1 ( v вҲ— )( В· ) , v вҲ— ( В· )).

In the following, we first introduce the following two sets of coupled backward generalized Riccati equations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We next present the following lemma, which essentially shows two equivalent forms of the Riccati equation (4.9), and it plays an important role in using the completion-of-squares method to find the optimal feedback control-strategy pairs for two players in the subsequent analysis.

Lemma 4.2. For any ( s, i ) вҲҲ [ t, T ] Г—S and (О  , P ) вҲҲ S n Г— S n , (i) If the matrices ЛҶ R 22 ( s, i ) and ЛҶ R 11 ( s, i ) -ЛҶ R 12 ( s, i ) ЛҶ R 22 ( s, i ) -1 ЛҶ R 12 ( s, i ) вҠӨ are invertible, then ЛҶ R ( s, i ) is also invertible, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(ii) If the matrices ЛҶ R 11 ( s, i ) and ЛҶ R 22 ( s, i ) -ЛҶ R 12 ( s, i ) вҠӨ ЛҶ R 11 ( s, i ) -1 ЛҶ R 12 ( s, i ) are invertible, then ЛҶ R ( s, i ) is also invertible, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We only prove (i), the proof of (ii) follows the same technique. Firstly, the invertibility of ЛҶ R ( s, i ) comes from the following relation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, the inverse of ЛҶ R ( s, i ) can be written by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, substituting the above equation into ЛҶ S вҠӨ ЛҶ R -1 ЛҶ S and simplifying it, we can obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This completes the proof.

Based on the above lemma, we introduce the following conditions for further derivation. Condition (I).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Condition (II).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Condition (I&amp;II).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 4.1. It is obvious that both Condition (I) and Condition (II) hold true if and only if Condition (I &amp; II) holds.

Lemma 4.3. Let (H1)-(H3) hold and (О ( В· , В· ) , P ( В· , В· )) вҲҲ C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; S n ) Г— C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; S n ) be the solution of the Riccati equations (4.8)-(4.9) satisfying Condition (I). Then the admissible feedback control-strategy pair ( u вҲ— ( В· ) , Оұ вҲ— 2 ( В· )) of Player 1 is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where О· ( В· , В· ) вҲҲ C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; R n ) is the solution of the following BODE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we have the following:

(i) J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; u ( В· ) , Оұ 2 ( u )( В· )) вүӨ J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; u ( В· ) , Оұ вҲ— 2 ( u )( В· )) for any u ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) and Оұ 2 ( В· ) вҲҲ A 2 [ t, T ] . The equation holds if and only if Оұ 2 ( u )( В· ) = Оұ вҲ— 2 ( u )( В· ) .

(ii) J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; u вҲ— ( В· ) , Оұ вҲ— 2 ( u вҲ— )( В· )) вүӨ J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; u ( В· ) , Оұ вҲ— 2 ( u )( В· )) for any u ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) . The equation holds if and only if u ( В· ) = u вҲ— ( В· ) .

Proof. Applying ItЛҶ o's formula ([20]) to s вҶҰвҶ’ гҖҲ О ( s, Оұ ( s ))Лң x ( s ) , Лң x ( s ) гҖү and s вҶҰвҶ’ гҖҲ P ( s, Оұ ( s ))ЛҶ x ( s ) + 2 О· ( s, Оұ ( s )) , ЛҶ x ( s ) гҖү , respectively, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Integrating from t to T , taking expectation, and substituting them into the cost functional J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; u ( В· ) , v ( В· )), by simplification, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using completion-of-squares for Лң v ( В· ) in the functional Лң J Оі ( t, Лң Оҫ, i ; Лң v ( В· )), we get (the argument ( s, Оұ ( s )) is suppressed for simplicity)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For ЛҶ J Оі ( t, ЛҶ Оҫ, i ; u ( В· ) , ЛҶ v ( В· )), using completion-of-squares for ЛҶ v ( В· ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, with the help of Lemma 4.2 (i), substituting (4.10) into the above equation, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Continue completing the square for ЛҶ v ( В· ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, the two-step complication-of-squares procedure for u ( В· ) is implemented,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, adding equation (4.15) and equation (4.16) together, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Condition (I) and the uniform negative definiteness of matrix ВҜ R 2 ( s, i ), for any u ( В· ) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) and Оұ 2 ( u )( В· ) = ЛҶ Оұ 2 ( u )( В· ) + Лң v ( В· ) вҲҲ A 2 [ t, T ], we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The equality in the above inequality holds if and only if ЛҶ Оұ 2 ( u )( В· ) = ЛҶ Оұ вҲ— 2 ( u )( В· ) and Лң v ( В· ) = Лң v вҲ— ( В· ), i.e., Оұ 2 ( u )( В· ) = Оұ вҲ— 2 ( u )( В· ), which is the first assertion of the lemma. Similarly, by virtue of the uniform positive definiteness of matrix ЛҶ R 11 -ЛҶ R 12 ЛҶ R -1 22 ЛҶ R вҠӨ 12 , we obtain the second assertion of the lemma and finish the proof.

Theorem 4.1. Let (H1)-(H3) hold, for any disturbance attenuation level Оі &gt; Оі вҲ— , assume the Riccati equations (4.8)-(4.9) admit a solution (О ( В· , В· ) , P ( В· , В· )) вҲҲ C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; S n ) Г— C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; S n ) satisfying Condition (I). Then, for any ( Оҫ, i ) вҲҲ L 2 F t (в„Ұ; R n ) Г— S , Problem (SCG-1) admits an optimal control-strategy pair ( u вҲ— ( В· ) , Оұ вҲ— 2 ( В· )) вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) Г—A 2 [ t, T ] for Player 1's value, which is in a feedback form and defined by (4.12). Moreover, Player 1's value is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We shall show that the control-strategy pair ( u вҲ— ( В· ) , Оұ вҲ— 2 ( В· )) is optimal, i.e., we shall verify (4.6) holds true. By Lemma 4.3 (ii),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

thus we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, by Lemma 4.3 (i),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From (4.19) and (4.20), we obtain the desired conclusion that ( u вҲ— ( В· ) , Оұ вҲ— 2 ( В· )) is an optimal controlstrategy pair of Player 1's value J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; u вҲ— ( В· ) , Оұ вҲ— 2 ( u вҲ— )( В· )), which comes from the result of the five-step complication-of-squares procedure (see the proof of Lemma 4.3).

A similar analysis as above can be applied to Player 2's value, which leads to the following.

Theorem 4.2. Let (H1)-(H3) hold, for any given disturbance attenuation level Оі &gt; Оі вҲ— , assume the Riccati equations (4.8) and (4.9) admit a solution (О ( В· , В· ) , P ( В· , В· )) вҲҲ C ([ t, T ] Г— S ; S n ) Г— C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; S n ) satisfying Condition (II). Then, for any ( Оҫ, i ) вҲҲ L 2 F t (в„Ұ; R n ) Г—S , Problem (SCG2) admits an optimal control-strategy pair ( Оұ вҲ— 1 ( В· ) , v вҲ— ( В· )) вҲҲ A 1 [ t, T ] Г— L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ) for Player 2's value, which is in a feedback form and defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ВҜ О· ( В· , В· ) вҲҲ C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; R n ) is the solution of the following BODE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, Player 2's value is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, to prove that the optimal control-strategy pair of Player 1 is consistent with that of Player 2, we first need to present the following result, which demonstrates the equivalence of the two BODEs given earlier.

Proposition 4.1. If the solutions О· ( В· , В· ) and ВҜ О· ( В· , В· ) exist for the BODEs (4.13) and (4.22), respectively, then the solutions are equal.

Proof. It can be seen from two BODEs (4.13) and (4.22) that, to prove the equality of the solutions О· ( В· , В· ) and ВҜ О· ( В· , В· ), it suffices to show that the corresponding coefficients in -ЛҶ S вҠӨ 2 ЛҶ R -1 22 ПҲ -( ЛҶ S 1 -ЛҶ R 12 ЛҶ R -1 22 ЛҶ S 2 ) вҠӨ ( ЛҶ R 11 -ЛҶ R 12 ЛҶ R -1 22 ЛҶ R вҠӨ 12 ) -1 П• , -ЛҶ S вҠӨ 1 ЛҶ R -1 11 ВҜ ПҲ -( ЛҶ S 2 -ЛҶ R вҠӨ 12 ЛҶ R -1 11 ЛҶ S 1 ) вҠӨ ( ЛҶ R 22 -ЛҶ R вҠӨ 12 ЛҶ R -1 11 ЛҶ R 12 ) -1 ВҜ П• are equal correspondingly.

By simplification and combining like terms, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In fact, it suffices to verify that the corresponding coefficients pertaining to B вҠӨ 2 О· + D вҠӨ 2 PПғ + ВҜ D вҠӨ 2 О ВҜ Пғ + ПҒ 2 and B вҠӨ 2 ВҜ О· + D вҠӨ 2 PПғ + ВҜ D вҠӨ 2 О ВҜ Пғ + ПҒ 2 as well as B вҠӨ 1 О· + D вҠӨ 1 PПғ + ВҜ D вҠӨ 1 О ВҜ Пғ + ПҒ 1 and B вҠӨ 1 ВҜ О· + D вҠӨ 1 PПғ + ВҜ D вҠӨ 1 О ВҜ Пғ + ПҒ 1 are equal to complete the proof.

Next, we verify only the first one, the second one can be proved using a similar technique. For the sake of computational convenience, we assume that the matrix ЛҶ R 12 is invertible (otherwise, use the (Moore-Penrose) pseudoinverse of ЛҶ R 12 ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Based on the above analysis and derivation, subtracting the two BODEs yields О· ( В· , В· ) = ВҜ О· ( В· , В· ). The proof is completed.

Theorem 4.3. Let (H1)-(H3) hold, for any given disturbance attenuation level Оі &gt; Оі вҲ— , assume the Riccati equations (4.8) and (4.9) admit a solution (О ( В· , В· ) , P ( В· , В· )) вҲҲ C ([ t, T ] Г— S ; S n ) Г— C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; S n ) satisfying Condition (I &amp; II). Then, for any ( Оҫ, i ) вҲҲ L 2 F t (в„Ұ; R n ) Г—S , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where u вҲ— ( В· ) , ЛҶ Оұ вҲ— 2 ( В· ) , Лң v вҲ— ( В· ) , Оұ вҲ— 2 ( В· ) and Оұ вҲ— 1 ( В· ) , ЛҶ v вҲ— ( В· ) , v вҲ— ( В· ) are defined by (4.12) and (4.21) with ВҜ О· ( В· , В· ) replaced by О· ( В· , В· ) , respectively. Moreover, the value of Problem (SCG) exists, which is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and О· ( В· , В· ) вҲҲ C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; R n ) satisfies the following BODE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Recall that under Condition (I&amp;II), both ( u вҲ— , ЛҶ Оұ вҲ— 2 ( u вҲ— )) and ( Оұ вҲ— 1 (ЛҶ v вҲ— ) , ЛҶ v вҲ— ) are the unique solution of the following algebra equations system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the argument ( s, i ) is suppressed for simplicity. In fact, regarding ЛҶ v as a function of (ЛҶ x, u ) and solving it from the second equation of (4.27), substituting the expression of ЛҶ v into the first equation of (4.27), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is coincides with ( u вҲ— , ЛҶ Оұ вҲ— 2 ( u вҲ— )) given by (4.12). On the other hand, regarding u as a function of (ЛҶ x, ЛҶ v ) and solving it from the first equation of (4.27), substituting the expression of u into the second equation of (4.27), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It can be seen that (4.29) is the same as ( Оұ вҲ— 1 (ЛҶ v вҲ— ) , ЛҶ v вҲ— ) denoted by (4.21). Moreover, by virtue of the existence and uniqueness of the solution to the algebraic equations (4.27), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then the corresponding value are equal, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, From (4.18), (4.27) and (4.28), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Lemma 4.2 (i) and the completion-of-squares method, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that (4.27) is equivalent to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the matrix ЛҶ R is invertible under Condition (I&amp;II), it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting the above equation into (4.30) yields (4.25), i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where О· is the solution of (4.13).

Next, we proof (4.13) (or (4.22)) is equivalent to (4.26), which is a more compact equation.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With the help of the above equation, we can obtain (4.26) through simplification. This completes the proof.

In what follows, we show that optimal feedback control-strategy pair ( u вҲ— ( В· ) , v вҲ— ( В· )) вҲҲ U [ t, T ] Г— V [ t, T ] for the zero-sum LQ stochastic differential game presented in Theorem 4.3, constitutes the outcome of the closed-loop saddle point for Problem (SCG).

Theorem 4.4. Let (H1)-(H3) hold, for any disturbance attenuation level Оі &gt; Оі вҲ— , assume the Riccati equations (4.8) and (4.9) admit a solution (О ( В· , В· ) , P ( В· , В· )) вҲҲ C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; S n ) Г— C ([ t, T ] Г— S ; S n ) satisfying Condition (I &amp; II), and О· ( В· , В· ) вҲҲ C ([ t, T ] Г— S ; R n ) is the solution to the BODE (4.26). Then Problem (SCG) admits a closed-loop saddle point ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , ВҜ v вҲ— ( В· )) вҲҲ Q [ t, T ] with ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) вүЎ ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) вҠӨ , ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 2 ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) вҠӨ ) вҠӨ , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) вүЎ (0 , Лң Оҳ вҲ— 2 ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) вҠӨ ) вҠӨ , ВҜ v вҲ— ( В· ) вүЎ ( v вҲ— 1 ( В· ) вҠӨ , v вҲ— 2 ( В· ) вҠӨ ) вҠӨ , which admits the following representation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the value function is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We take any ВҜ u ( В· ) вүЎ ( u ( В· ) вҠӨ , v ( В· ) вҠӨ ) вҠӨ вҲҲ L 2 G ( t, T ; R m ) Г— L 2 F ( t, T ; R n v ), and denote ЛҶ ВҜ u ( В· ) вүЎ ( u ( В· ) вҠӨ , ЛҶ v ( В· ) вҠӨ ) вҠӨ , Лң ВҜ u ( В· ) вүЎ (0 , Лң v ( В· ) вҠӨ ) вҠӨ . Let x ( В· ) вүЎ x ( В· ; t, Оҫ, i, ВҜ u ( В· )) be the corresponding state process, then let ЛҶ x ( В· ) вүЎ ЛҶ x ( В· ; t, ЛҶ Оҫ, i, ЛҶ ВҜ u ( В· )), Лң x ( В· ) вүЎ Лң x ( В· ; t, Лң Оҫ, i, ВҜ u ( В· )) be the filtering process and the difference, which satisfy the following SDEs, respectively:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying ItЛҶ o's formula to s вҶҰвҶ’ гҖҲ О ( s, Оұ ( s ))Лң x ( s ) , Лң x ( s ) гҖү , s вҶҰвҶ’ гҖҲ P ( s, Оұ ( s ))ЛҶ x ( s ) , ЛҶ x ( s ) гҖү and s вҶҰвҶ’ гҖҲ О· ( s, Оұ ( s )) , ЛҶ x ( s ) гҖү , respectively, Integrating from t to T , taking expectation, and substituting them into the cost functional J Оі ( t, Оҫ, i ; ВҜ u ( В· )), by the completion-of-squares method, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently,

Hence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if and only if

Similarly,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Remark 2.2, we get that under Condition (I&amp;II), ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— , Лң Оҳ вҲ— , ВҜ v вҲ— ) вҲҲ Q [ t, T ] is a closed-loop saddle point of Problem (SCG).

Theorem 4.4 provides the sufficient conditions for the existence of the closed-loop saddle point of Problem (SCG). Next, the following result is concerned with H вҲһ performance criterion of the outcome of the above closed-loop saddle point, which indicates that the outcome of the closed-loop saddle point ( u вҲ— , v вҲ— ) вҲҲ U [ t, T ] Г— V [ t, T ] constitutes the robust H вҲһ control and the worst-case disturbance for Problem (R-SCG).

From Lemma 4.2 (i) and

ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 ( s, i ) = -( ЛҶ R 11 ( s, i ) -ЛҶ R 12 ( s, i ) ЛҶ R 22 ( s, i ) -1 ЛҶ R 12 ( s, i ) вҠӨ ) -1 ( ЛҶ S 1 ( s, i ) -ЛҶ R 12 ( s, i ) ЛҶ R 22 ( s, i ) -1 ЛҶ S 2 ( s, i ) ) , it follows that

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, through the above substitution, the Riccati equation (4.9) can be rearranged as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 4.5. Let (H1)-(H3) hold, for any given disturbance attenuation level Оі &gt; Оі вҲ— , assume that the Riccati equations (4.8) and (4.32) admit a solution (О ( В· , В· ) , P ( В· , В· )) вҲҲ C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; S n ) Г— C ([ t, T ] Г—S ; S n ) satisfying Condition (I &amp; II), then one of the outcome of the closed-loop saddle point ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , ВҜ v вҲ— ( В· )) вҲҲ Q [ t, T ] for Problem (SCG)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

satisfies H вҲһ -performance, i.e., вҖ–L u вҲ— вҖ– &lt; Оі .

Proof. Substitute u вҲ— = ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 ЛҶ x 0 into the homogeneous system corresponding to (2.1), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі d ЛҶ x 0 ( s ) = [( A ( s, Оұ ( s )) + B 1 ( s, Оұ ( s )) ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 ( s, Оұ ( s )) ) ЛҶ x 0 ( s ) + B 2 ( s, Оұ ( s ))ЛҶ v ( s ) ] ds + [( C ( s, Оұ ( s )) + D 1 ( s, Оұ ( s )) ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 ( s, Оұ ( s )) ) ЛҶ x 0 ( s ) + D 2 ( s, Оұ ( s ))ЛҶ v ( s ) ] dW ( s ) , ЛҶ x 0 ( t ) = ЛҶ Оҫ, Оұ ( t ) = i, пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі d Лң x 0 ( s ) = [ A ( s, Оұ ( s ))Лң x 0 ( s ) + B 2 ( s, Оұ ( s ))Лң v ( s ) ] ds + [ C ( s, Оұ ( s ))Лң x 0 ( s ) + D 2 ( s, Оұ ( s ))Лң v ( s ) ] dW ( s ) + [ ВҜ C ( s, Оұ ( s )) x 0 ( s ) + ВҜ D 1 ( s, Оұ ( s )) ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 ( s, Оұ ( s ))ЛҶ x 0 ( s ) + ВҜ D 2 ( s, Оұ ( s )) v ( s ) ] dW ( s ) , Лң x 0 ( t ) = Лң Оҫ, Оұ ( t ) = i. The cost functional is given by

Similarly, by applying ItЛҶ o's formula to s вҶҰвҶ’гҖҲ О ( s, Оұ ( s ))Лң x 0 ( s ) , Лң x 0 ( s ) гҖү and s вҶҰвҶ’гҖҲ P ( s, Оұ ( s ))ЛҶ x 0 ( s ) , ЛҶ x 0 ( s ) гҖү , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that matrices ВҜ R 2 and ЛҶ R 22 are uniformly negative definite, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, define a bounded linear operator О“ 1 : L 2 F (0 , T ; R n v ) вҶ’ L 2 F (0 , T ; R n v ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then О“ 1 is bijective and its inverse О“ -1 1 is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x v ( В· ) and ЛҶ x v ( В· ) are the solutions of

пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі dx v ( s ) = [( A -B 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 ) x v + ( B 1 ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 + B 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 ) ЛҶ x v + B 2 v ] ds + [( C -D 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 ) x v + ( D 1 ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 + D 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 ) ЛҶ x v + D 2 v ] dW ( s ) + [( ВҜ C -ВҜ D 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 ) x v + ( ВҜ D 1 ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 + ВҜ D 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 ) ЛҶ x v + ВҜ D 2 v ] dW ( s ) , x v (0) = 0 , Оұ (0) = i, пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі d ЛҶ x v ( s ) = [( A + B 1 ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 + B 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 ) ЛҶ x v -B 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 x v + B 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 Лң x v + B 2 ЛҶ v ] ds + [( C + D 1 ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 + D 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 ) ЛҶ x v -D 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 x v + D 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 Лң x v + D 2 ЛҶ v ] dW ( s ) , ЛҶ x v (0) = 0 , Оұ (0) = i, and пЈұ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈІ пЈҙ пЈҙ пЈі d Лң x v ( s ) = [( A -B 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 ) Лң x v + B 2 Лң v ] ds + [( C -D 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 ) Лң x v + D 2 Лң v ] dW ( s ) + [( ВҜ C -ВҜ D 2 ВҜ R -1 2 ВҜ S 2 ) Лң x v + ВҜ D 2 Лң v ] dW ( s ) , Лң x v (0) = 0 , Оұ (0) = i. By the bounded inverse theorem, О“ -1 1 is bounded with вҖ– О“ -1 1 вҖ– &gt; 0. Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, define another bounded linear operator О“ 2 : L 2 G (0 , T ; R n v ) вҶ’ L 2 G (0 , T ; R n v ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Obviously, О“ 2 is bijective and its inverse О“ -1 2 is denoted by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ЛҮ x v ( В· ) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the bounded inverse theorem, О“ -1 2 is bounded with вҖ– О“ -1 2 вҖ– &gt; 0, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With the help of (4.34) and (4.35), (4.33) can be bounded as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Set ОІ := 1 вҖ– О“ -1 2 вҖ– , and the last equality holds. Since for any v ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by the definition of вҖ–L u вҲ— вҖ– , we have

Мё

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof is completed.

## 5 A numerical example

In this section, we would like to present a numerical example to better demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed H вҲһ control strategy. Assume that x ( В· ), the state of the stock market, satisfies a SDE, u ( В· ) denotes the investment strategy of an institutional investor in the market, and v ( В· ) is the external unknown disturbance faced by the institutional investor. We use bull market and bear market to describe market quotation, and they correspond to two states of Markov chain Оұ , respectively. Suppose that Оұ takes values in S = { 1 , 2 } with following generator

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The horizon length for the simulation is selected as T = 3 . 5. For the sake of simplifying computational complexity, we make the assumption that the system is homogeneous. Morover, we assume that the market is bear market when Оұ = 1 and it is bull market when Оұ = 2, which correspond to the different system coefficients shown in the following tables.

Table 1: Simulation parameters corresponding to Оұ = 1

| A  B  1  B  2  C  D  1  D  2  ВҜ  C  ВҜ  D  1  ВҜ  D  2  Q  R  1  R  2  S  1  S  2  G  Оҫ  0.1  0.3  -0.2  0.3  0.3  -0.25  0.1  0.3  -0.2  0.3  0.2  0.1  0.2  -0.1  0  1  Table 2: Simulation parameters corresponding to Оұ = 2  A  B  1  B  2  C  D  1  D  2  ВҜ  C  ВҜ  D  1  ВҜ  D  2  Q  R  1  R  2  S  1  S  2  G  Оҫ  0.2  0.2  -0.1  0.2  0.1  -0.1  0.2  0.1  -0.05  0.2  0.1  0.05  0.1  -0.05  0  1   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Obviously, the coefficients satisfy the assumption (H3). Set the disturbance attenuation level Оі = 1. Through computational simulations, we have obtained the following figures.

Figure 1: The numerical solutions of Riccati equations О ( В· , 1), О ( В· , 2), P ( В· , 1) and P ( В· , 2)

<!-- image -->

Figure 1 gives the numerical solutions of Riccati equations О ( В· , 1), О ( В· , 2), P ( В· , 1) and P ( В· , 2).

Figure 2: The closed-loop saddle point ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )))

<!-- image -->

The closed-loop saddle point ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· ))) of Problem (SCG) is shown in Figure 2. As can be seen from the figure, compared with the bull market ( Оұ = 2), the intensity of ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 is relatively weaker while the intensities of ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 2 and Лң Оҳ вҲ— 2 are relatively stronger when the market is in a bear market ( Оұ = 1). This is because when the market is in a bearish state, market sentiment turns sluggish, negative news emerges frequently, and uncertainty factors mount, which leads to higher intensities of ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 2 and Лң Оҳ вҲ— 2 . Meanwhile, the vast majority of investors run into losses and generally opt for a wait-and-see stance, thus resulting in a weaker intensity of ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 .

Figure 3: The state process x вҲ— ( В· ), the filtering state process ЛҶ x вҲ— ( В· ) and the difference Лң x вҲ— ( В· )

<!-- image -->

Figure 3 shows the corresponding state process x вҲ— ( В· ), the filtering state process ЛҶ x вҲ— ( В· ) and the difference Лң x вҲ— ( В· ) of the closed-loop system under the closed-loop point ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· ))).

Figure 4: The robust H вҲһ optimal control u вҲ— ( В· ) and the worst-case disturbance v вҲ— ( В· )

<!-- image -->

Figure 4 illustrates the corresponding robust H вҲһ control strategy u вҲ— ( В· ) and the worst-case disturbance v вҲ— ( В· ) of Problem (R-SCG), together with the corresponding filtering process ЛҶ v вҲ— ( В· ) and the difference Лң v вҲ— ( В· ) associated with the worst-case disturbance v вҲ— ( В· ). As can be seen from the figure, when the market is in a bear market, the intensity of the worst-case disturbance perceived by institutional investors is relatively high; consequently, the investment intensity u вҲ— ( В· ) of institutional investors decreases. This is consistent with practical market conditions: in a bear market, insufficient investor confidence and pessimistic market sentiment lead to reduced willingness of participation on the part of both buyers and sellers, which in turn results in diminished market trading activity and lower trading volume.

To conduct a sensitivity analysis of the disturbance attenuation level for the Markovian jump system, the parameter Оі is hereby set to 2. In the same way, we can obtain the figures of the corresponding closed-loop saddle point ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· ))) of Problem (SCG), the corresponding state processes ( x вҲ— ( В· ), ЛҶ x вҲ— ( В· ), Лң x вҲ— ( В· )) of the closed-loop system under ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· ))), and the solution ( u вҲ— ( В· ) , v вҲ— ( В· )) of Problem (R-SCG) (i.e., the robust H вҲһ closed-loop optimal control u вҲ— ( В· ) вҲҲ U [ t, T ] and the worst-case disturbance v вҲ— ( В· ) вҲҲ V [ t, T ]) corresponding to a disturbance attenuation level of 2. See Figures 5-7, respectively.

Figure 5: The closed-loop saddle point ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· ))) ( Оі = 2)

<!-- image -->

Figure 6: The state processes x вҲ— ( В· ), ЛҶ x вҲ— ( В· ) and Лң x вҲ— ( В· ) ( Оі = 2)

<!-- image -->

Figure 7: The robust H вҲһ optimal control u вҲ— ( В· ) and the worst-case disturbance v вҲ— ( В· ) ( Оі = 2)

<!-- image -->

Next, we intend to conduct a sensitivity analysis on the disturbance attenuation level Оі . With all other parameters fixed, we observe the impact of the disturbance attenuation level on the closed-loop saddle point, the corresponding state processes of the closed-loop system, the robust H вҲһ optimal control, and the worst-case disturbance. See Figures 8-10, respectively.

Figure 8: The impact of Оі on the closed-loop saddle point ( ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) , Лң Оҳ вҲ— ( В· , Оұ ( В· )))

<!-- image -->

From Figure 8, we can see that the impact of the disturbance attenuation level on ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 1 ( В· , Оұ ( В· ))

is relatively insignificant. However, as the disturbance attenuation level increases, the corresponding intensities of ЛҶ Оҳ вҲ— 2 ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) and Лң Оҳ вҲ— 2 ( В· , Оұ ( В· )) decrease significantly.

Figure 9: The impact of Оі on the state processes

<!-- image -->

It can be seen from Figure 9 that the higher the disturbance attenuation level, the greater the intensities of the corresponding state process x вҲ— ( В· ), filtering state process ЛҶ x вҲ— ( В· ), and the difference process Лң x вҲ— ( В· ) of the closed system under the closed-loop saddle point.

Figure 10: The impact of Оі on the H вҲһ control u вҲ— ( В· ) and the worst-case disturbance v вҲ— ( В· )

<!-- image -->

As can be seen from Figure 10, when the market remains in the same state, the higher the disturbance attenuation level, the greater the intensity of the corresponding optimal control strategy; conversely, the intensity of the worst-case disturbance decreases under this condition. This phenomenon is highly consistent with practical market scenarios. A higher disturbance attenuation level indicates that institutional investors can tolerate a greater degree of impact of external disturbances on the system output. Under such circumstances, institutional investors no longer maintain a risk-averse stance; instead, they become highly optimistic about the stock market, believing that the intensity of the worst-case disturbance is relatively low, and thus naturally increase their investment intensity.

## 6 Conclusions

In this paper, we have studied an SLQ optimal control problem with Markov chain and model uncertainty under partial information, where both the drift and diffusion terms of the state equation, as well as the cost functional contain the control and the external unknown disturbance, and the information available to the control is based on a subПғ -algebra of the filtration generated by the underlying Brownian motion and the Markov chain. By H вҲһ control theory and the zerosum game approach, a soft-constrained zero-sum LQ stochastic differential game with Markov chain and partial information has been considered. By the filtering technique, the Riccati equation approach, the method of orthogonal decomposition, and the completion-of-squares method, the closed-loop saddle point of the zero-sum game has been derived by means of the optimal feedback control-strategy pair. Then, we have also demonstrated that the corresponding outcome of the closed-loop saddle point ensures the H вҲһ performance holds. At last, we have given a numerical example as further illustrations of theoretical results.

In the future, it is interesting to consider partially observed SLQ optimal control problems with Markovian regime switching and model uncertainty.

## References

- [1] J.-M. Bismut, Linear-quadratic optimal stochastic control with random coefficients, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 14(3), 419-444, 1976.
- [2] T. BaВё sar, P. Bernhard, H вҲһ Optimal Control and Related Minimax Design Problems: A Dynamic Game Approach , BirkhВЁ auser, Boston, 1995.
- [3] B.-S. Chen, W. Zhang, Stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control with state-dependent noise, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control. , 49(1), 45-57, 2004.

- [4] S. Chen, X. Li, and X. Zhou, Stochastic linear-quadratic regulators with indefinite control weight costs, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 36(5), 1685-1702, 1998.
- [5] T. Chen, Z. Huang, and Z. Wu, Linear-convex partially observed optimal control problem with Markov chain and input constraint, ESAIM: Control Optim. Calc. Var. , 31, Article No. 41, 2025.
- [6] R.J. Elliot, N.J. Kalton, The existence of value in differential games, Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. , 126, 1-75, 1972.
- [7] D. Hinrichsen, A. Pritchard, Stochastic H вҲһ , SIAM J. Control Optim. , 36(5), 1504-1538, 1998.
- [8] J. Huang, M. Huang, Robust mean field linear-quadratic-Gaussian games with unknown L 2 -disturbance, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 55(5), 2811-2840, 2017.
- [9] J. Huang, G. Wang, and J. Xiong, A maximum principle for partial information backward stochastic control problems with applications, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 48(4), 2106-2117, 2009.
- [10] H. Kushner, Optimal stochastic control, IRE Trans. Autom. Control. , 7(5), 120-122, 1962.
- [11] Y. Liang, B. Wang, and H. Zhang, Robust mean field linear-quadratic social control: Openloop and closed-loop strategies, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 60(4), 2184-2213, 2022.
- [12] D. Limebeer, B. Anderson, and B. Hendel, A Nash game approach to mixed H 2 /H вҲһ control, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control. , 39(1), 69-82, 1994.
- [13] N. Li, G. Wang, and Z. Wu, Linear-quadratic optimal control for time-delay stochastic system with recursive utility under full and partial information, Automatica , 121, 109169, 2020.
- [14] N. Li, Z. Wu, and Z. Yu, Indefinite stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems with random jumps and related stochastic Riccati equations, Sci. China Math. , 61, 563-576, 2018.
- [15] X. Li, J. Sun, and J. Yong, Mean-field stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems: closed-loop solvability, Probab. Uncertain. Quant. Risk , 1(1), Article No. 2, 2016.
- [16] X. Li, G. Wang, J. Xiong, and H. Zhang, Weak closed-loop solvability of linear-quadratic stochastic optimal control problems with partial information, Appl. Math. Optim. , 91(3), Article No. 62, 2025.

- [17] X. Li, X. Zhou, Indefinite stochastic LQ controls with Markovian jumps in a finite time horizon, Commun. Inf. Syst. , 2(3), 265-282, 2002.
- [18] X. Li, X. Zhou, and M. Ait Rami, Indefinite stochastic linear-quadratic control with Markovian jumps in infinite time horizon, J. Global Optim. , 27(2-3), 149-175, 2003.
- [19] Z. Lin, Y. Lin, and W. Zhang, A unified design for state and output feedback H вҲһ control of nonlinear stochastic Markovian jump systems with state and disturbance-dependent noise, Automatica , 45(12), 2955-2962, 2009.
- [20] X. Mao, Stochastic Differential Equations with Markovian Switching , Imperial College Press, London, 2007.
- [21] J. Moon, Linear-quadratic stochastic teams and zero-sum differential games for jumpdiffusion systems with Markovian-switching coefficients under partial observations, ESAIM: Control Optim. Calc. Var. , 31, Article No. 35, 2025.
- [22] H. Mukaidani, S. Irie, H. Xu, and W. Zhang, Robust incentive Stackelberg games with a large population for stochastic mean-field systems, IEEE Control Systems Letters , 6, 19341939, 2022.
- [23] Y. Oh, J. Moon, A feedback-type optimal solution for partially-observed linear-quadratic risk-sensitive optimal control problem of mean-field type stochastic systems, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control. , 70(8), 5452-5459, 2025.
- [24] Z. Pan, T. BaВё sar, H вҲһ control of Markovian jump systems and solutions to associated piecewise-deterministic differential games, In: New Trends in Dynamic Games and Applications, Olsder, G.J. (eds.), Annals of the International Society of Dynamic Games , 3, 61-94, BirkhВЁ auser, Boston, 1995.
- [25] L. Sheng, W. Zhang, and M. Gao, Relationship between Nash equilibrium strategies and H 2 /H вҲһ control of stochastic Markov jump systems with multiplicative noise, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control. , 59(9), 2592-2597, 2014.
- [26] J. Shi, G. Wang, and J. Xiong, A Leader-follower stochastic differential game with asymmetric information and applications, Automatica , 63, 60-73, 2016.
- [27] Y. Si, Y. Zheng, and J. Shi, Linear-quadratic partially observed mean field Stackelberg stochastic differential game, arXiv: 2503.15803 , 2025.
- [28] J. Sun, X. Li, and J. Yong, Open-loop and closed-loop solvabilities for stochastic linearquadratic optimal control problems, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 54(5), 2274-2308, 2016.

- [29] J. Sun, J. Xiong, Stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control with partial observation, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 61(3), 1231-1247, 2023.
- [30] J. Sun, J. Yong, Linear-quadratic stochastic differential games: open-loop and closed-loop saddle points, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 52(6), 4082-4121, 2014.
- [31] J. Sun, J. Yong, Stochastic Linear-Quadratic Optimal Control Theory: Open-Loop and Closed-Loop Solutions , SpringerBriefs in Mathematics, 2020.
- [32] J. Sun, J. Yong, Turnpike properties for mean-field linear-quadratic optimal control problems, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 62(1), 752-775, 2024.
- [33] S. Tang, General linear-quadratic optimal stochastic control problems with random coefficients: Linear stochastic Hamilton systems and backward stochastic Riccati equations, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 42(1), 53-75, 2003.
- [34] S. Tang, Dynamic programming for general linear-quadratic optimal stochastic control with random coefficients, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 53(2), 1082-1106, 2015.
- [35] V. Ugrinovskii, Robust H вҲһ control in the presence of stochastic uncertainty, Int. J. Control. , 71(2), 219-237, 1998.
- [36] W. van den Broek, J. Engwerda, and J. Schumacher, Robust equilibria in indefinite linearquadratic differential games, J. Optim. Theory Appl. , 119(3), 565-595, 2003.
- [37] G. Wang, Z. Wu, and J. Xiong, A linear-quadratic optimal control problem of forward-backward stochastic differential equations with partial information, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control. , 60(11), 2904-2916, 2015.
- [38] M. Wang, Q. Meng, and Y. Shen, H 2 /H вҲһ control for stochastic jump-diffusion systems with Markovian switching, J. Syst. Sci. Complex. , 34(3), 924-954, 2021.
- [39] M. Wang, Q. Meng, Y. Shen, and P. Shi, Stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control for mean-field stochastic differential systems with ( x, u, v )-dependent noise, J. Optim. Theory Appl. , 197(3), 10241060, 2023.
- [40] Y. Wang, Z. Pan, Y. Li, and W. Zhang, H вҲһ control for nonlinear stochastic Markov systems with time-delay and multiplicative noise, J. Syst. Sci. Complex. , 30(6), 1293-1315, 2017.
- [41] J. Wen, X. Li, J. Xiong, and X. Zhang, Stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems with random coefficients and Markovian regime switching system, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 61(2), 949-979, 2023.

- [42] W.M. Wonham, On a matrix Riccati equation of stochastic control, SIAM J. Control , 6(4), 681-697, 1968.
- [43] F. Wu, X. Li, and X. Zhang, Stochastic linear-quadratic optimal control problems with regime-switching jumps in infinite horizon, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 63(2), 852-891, 2025.
- [44] N. Xiang, J. Shi, Three-level multi-leader-follower incentive Stackelberg differential game with H вҲһ constraint, ESAIM: Control Optim. Calc. Var. , 31, Article No. 97, 2025.
- [45] N. Xiang, J. Shi, Robust incentive Stackelberg mean field stochastic linear-quadratic differential game with model uncertainty, arXiv: 2507.04585 , 2025.
- [46] J. Xiong, An Introduction to Stochastic Filtering Theory , Oxford University Press, London, 2008.
- [47] J. Xiong, W. Xu, Mean-field stochastic linear-quadratic control problem with random coefficients, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 63(4), 3042-3060, 2025.
- [48] G. Yin, X. Zhou, Markowitz's mean-variance portfolio selection with regime switching: From discrete-time models to their continuous-time limits, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control. , 49(3), 349-360, 2004.
- [49] J. Yong, X. Zhou, Stochastic Controls: Hamiltonian Systems and HJB Equations , SpringerVerlag, New York, 1999.
- [50] Z. Yu, An optimal feedback control-strategy pair for zero-sum linear-quadratic stochastic differential game: the Riccati equation approach, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 53(4), 2141-2167, 2015.
- [51] S. Zhang, W. Zhang, and Q. Meng, Stackelberg game approach to mixed stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control for mean-field jump-diffusions systems, Appl. Math. Optim. , 89(1), Article No. 6, 2024.
- [52] S. Zhang, W. Zhang, and Q. Meng, Stackelberg game approach to mixed stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control for mean-field jump-diffusions systems with Markovian switching, Optim. Control Appl. Methods , 46(4), 1737-1758, 2025.
- [53] W. Zhang, B.-S. Chen, State feedback H вҲһ control for a class of nonlinear stochastic systems, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 44(6), 1973-1991, 2006.
- [54] W. Zhang, L. Xie, and B.-S. Chen, Stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control: A Nash game approach , CRC Press, 2017.

- [55] W. Zhang, H. Zhang, and B.-S. Chen, Stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control with ( x, u, v )-dependent noise, Proc. 44th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, and European Control Conference 2005 , 7352-7357, December 12-15, Seville, Spain, 2005.
- [56] W. Zhang, H. Zhang, and B.-S. Chen, Stochastic H 2 /H вҲһ control with ( x, u, v )-dependent noise: Finite horizon case, Automatica , 42(11), 1891-1898, 2006.
- [57] X. Zhang, R.J. Elliott, and T.K. Siu, A stochastic maximum principle for a Markov regimeswitching jump-diffusion model and its application to finance, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 50(2), 964-990, 2012.
- [58] X. Zhang, X. Li, and J. Xiong, Open-loop and closed-loop solvabilities for stochastic linearquadratic optimal control problems of Markovian regime switching system, ESAIM: Control Optim. Calc. Var. , 27, Article No. 69, 2021.
- [59] Y. Zheng, J. Shi, A Stackelberg game of backward stochastic differential equations with partial information, Math. Control Relat. Fields , 11(4), 797-828, 2021.
- [60] X. Zhou, G. Yin, Markowitz's mean-variance portfolio selection with regime switching: a continuous-time model, SIAM J. Control Optim. , 42(4), 1466-1482, 2003.