## Linear-quadratic mixed Stackelberg-zero-sum game for mean-field regime switching system

Pengyan Huang a , Na Li b, ∗ , Zuo Quan Xu c , Harry Zheng d

School of Statistics and Mathematics, Shandong University of Finance and Economics, Jinan 250014, China b School of Mathematical Sciences, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, China c Department of Applied Mathematics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China d Department of Mathematics, Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, UK

a

## Abstract

Motivated by a product pricing problem, a linear-quadratic Stackelberg differential game for a regime switching system involving one leader and two followers is studied. The two followers engage in a zero-sum differential game, and both the state system and the cost functional incorporate a conditional mean-field term. Applying continuation method and induction method, we first establish the existence and uniqueness of a conditional mean-field forward-backward stochastic differential equation with Markovian switching. Based on it, we prove the unique solvability of Hamiltonian systems for the two followers and the leader. Moreover, utilizing stochastic maximum principle, decoupling approach and optimal filtering technique, the optimal feedback strategies of two followers and leader are obtained. Employing the theoretical results, we solve a product pricing problem with some numerical simulations.

Keywords: Linear-quadratic, Optimal filter, Regime switching, Stackelberg game, Stochastic differential equation, Zero-sum game.

## 1. Introduction

## 1.1. Motivation

In recent decades, it is recognized that the traditional models using continuous processes alone are often inadequate to describe the real world. Numerous systems often exhibit both continuous and discrete characteristics. To meet the practical demands arising from real-world applications, regime switching diffusion modulated by finite state Markov chain has attracted increasing attentions. A regime switching diffusion is a hybrid stochastic process ( X ( t ) , α t ) t ≥ 0 containing two components. One is continuous-valued diffusion process X ( t ) , whose drift and diffusion coefficients rely on α t . Another one is Markov chain α t , which represents the discrete component taking values in a set of isolated points, and it is primarily employed to describe the phenomena involving trend change or system state shift. Indeed, regime switching diffusion provides an effective tool to character the discrete event and system state shift. Some of such financial examples can be seen in Zhou and Yin [34] for mean-variance portfolio selection, Guo and Zhang [5] for perpetual American put options, Sethi and Zhang [20] for hierarchical decision making of stochastic manufacturing systems, Song, Stockbridge and Zhu [22] for optimal harvesting problems, etc.

⋆ This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 12571475, 12401582 and 12571480, and the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province under Grant ZR2024QA240.

∗ Corresponding author

Email addresses: huang\_pengyan@163.com (Pengyan Huang), lina2025@dlut.edu.cn (Na Li), maxu@polyu.edu.hk (Zuo Quan Xu), h.zheng@imperial.ac.uk (Harry Zheng)

Recently, Xu and Zhang [29] consider a pricing problem in the mean-field framework, where the participants have identical roles. However, it is more common for participants to have heterogeneous statuses in practice. Inspired by the work of Xu and Zhang [29], in this work we will consider a more general product pricing problem involving government, consumer and seller, where the government plays the role of leader, consumer and seller play the role of followers and constitute a zero-sum game. Here is another example from reality: the government announces a bidding project with a fixed budget, and two companies bid for the project. If the contract will ultimately be awarded to one company, then one company's gain is the other's loss. Additionally, product pricing and corporate bidding are also influenced by the economic states. Thus, we will investigate a linear-quadratic (LQ) Stackelberg differential game for a regime switching system involving one leader and two followers, which possesses important theoretical significance and practical value. Our problem involves participants with heterogeneous statuses and situations across multiple economic states, and it makes our work to be more significant and challenging compared with the existing works.

Now we present the product pricing problem in details, which also motivates us to explore a linearquadratic Stackelberg differential game for regime switching system with one leader and two followers in Section 1.2. Product pricing stands at the heart of business strategy, which serves as a key determinant of profitability, a crucial factor in market competition, and a significant influencer of brand perception. Thus, product pricing problem is an extremely important issue that demands increasing attention and merits greater emphasis in business strategy. Now we take a brand of mobile phone as an example, whose pricing is not arbitrarily determined by companies but is rather the outcome of a interplay and influence among three primary forces: the government (macro-regulation), consumer (market demand), and seller (corporate strategy). Government first establishes the rules of financial market through policies and regulations, which fundamentally influence cost structures and pricing boundaries. Consumers are the ultimate acceptors of prices, and the overall health of the macro-economy and per capita income levels directly determine the market's aggregate purchasing power. Then, considering government policies and consumer acceptance, the sellers formulate pricing strategies based on their own objectives and costs. In detail, we denote by x ( · ) the price of the mobile phone, denote by u L ( · ) , u F, 1 ( · ) , u F, 2 ( · ) the strategies of government, consumer and seller, respectively. Meanwhile, the pricing is also significantly influenced by the economic state, which can be described by a finite state Markov chain α · taking values in M = { 1 , 2 , · · · , m } . With the notations and interpretations above, assume that the price of the mobile phone is modeled by a stochastic differential equation (SDE) as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x 0 is the initial price, and W ( · ) represents some uncertainties such as financial market volatility and consumer preferences. Here ̂ x ( t ) = E [ x ( t ) |F α t -] with F α t = σ { α s : 0 ≤ s ≤ t } , and it reflects the price at time t relying on the economic state α · . For any i ∈ M , the coefficients A ( · , i ) , ¯ A ( · , i ) , B L ( · , i ) , B F, 1 ( · , i ) , B F, 2 ( · , i ) , b ( · , i ) , C ( · , i ) , ¯ C ( · , i ) , D L ( · , i ) , D F, 1 ( · , i ) , D F, 2 ( · , i ) , σ ( · , i ) ∈ R .

Define an admissible control set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where L 2 F (0 , T ; R ) = { x : [0 , T ] × Ω → R | x ( · ) is F -progressively measurable process and satisfies E ( ∫ T 0 | x ( t ) | 2 dt ) &lt; + ∞ } .

The cost functional for the consumer and seller is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R F, 1 ( · , i ) &gt; 0 , R F, 2 ( · , i ) &lt; 0 , ¯ G F ( i ) ≥ 0 , i ∈ M . With the government policy, the consumer wants to minimize the cost functional (2) by choosing a suitable strategy u ∗ F, 1 ( · ) ∈ U , which implies that the consumer hopes to adopt the least strategy to obtain a low price of the mobile phone at terminal time T . In contrast, the seller aims to maximize the cost functional (2) by selecting a suitable strategy u ∗ F, 2 ( · ) ∈ U , which tells that the consumer hopes to adopt the least strategy to sell the mobile phone with a high price at time T . Based on above arguments, the interaction between consumer and seller constitutes a zero-sum game.

Knowing the strategy ( u ∗ F, 1 ( · ) , u ∗ F, 2 ( · )) of consumer and seller, the government wants to seek a suitable policy u ∗ L ( · ) ∈ U to minimize

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R L ( · , i ) &gt; 0 , ¯ G L ( i ) ≥ 0 , i ∈ M . Cost functional (3) shows that the government wants to find a suitable strategy u ∗ L ( · ) to minimize the price of mobile phone at time T , which is conducive to maintain market stability, ensure basic livelihoods for the people and promote the healthy development of industries.

It is worth pointing out that product pricing problem (1)-(3) can not be solved by existing approaches in the literature (see, e.g., Li and Yu [11], Shi, Wang and Xiong [21], Sun [24]), but it falls into the framework of our stochastic Stackelberg differential game for conditional mean-field regime switching diffusion with one leader and two followers (zero-sum game), and thus can be solved by the results obtained in this work.

## 1.2. Problem formulation

Motivated by the product pricing problem, we consider a more general Stackelberg differential game of regime switching system with one leader and two followers in this work. Let the state of the system be described by controlled linear conditional mean-field SDE with regime switching:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

u L ( · ) is the strategy process taken by the leader with values in R m 0 , and u F, 1 ( · ) , u F, 2 ( · ) are the strategy processes taken by two followers with values in R m 1 and R m 2 , respectively; x ( · ) is the state process corresponding to ( u L ( · ) , u F, 1 ( · ) , u F, 2 ( · )) , ̂ x ( t ) = E [ x ( t ) |F α t -] , x 0 ∈ R . Moreover, for any i ∈ M , the coefficients A ( · , i ) , ¯ A ( · , i ) , C ( · , i ) , ¯ C ( · , i ) ∈ L ∞ (0 , T ; R ) , B L ( · , i ) , D L ( · , i ) ∈ L ∞ (0 , T ; R 1 × m 0 ) , B F, 1 ( · , i ) , D F, 1 ( · , i ) ∈ L ∞ (0 , T ; R 1 × m 1 ) , B F, 2 ( · , i ) , D F, 2 ( · , i ) ∈ L ∞ (0 , T ; R 1 × m 2 ) , b ( · , i ) and σ ( · , i ) are F t -adapted processes with one-dimension, where L ∞ (0 , T ; V ) is the set of uniformly bounded functions with values in V .

The admissible strategy sets are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For simplicity, let U F 1 , 2 = U F, 1 ×U F, 2 . By virtue of Lemma 2.1 in Nguyen, Nguyen and Yin [17], for any given ( u L ( · ) , u F 1 , 2 ( · ) ) ∈ U L ×U F 1 , 2 , there exists a unique solution x ( · ) ∈ L 2 F (0 , T ; R ) to (4).

The cost functional for two followers is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

and the cost functional for the leader is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S F ( · , i ) ∈ L ∞ (0 , T ; R m 1 × m 2 ) , R F,j ( · , i ) ∈ L ∞ (0 , T ; R m j × m j ) , R L ( · , i ) ∈ L ∞ (0 , T ; R m 0 × m 0 ) are symmetric, i ∈ M , j = 1 , 2 . Q F ( · , i ) , ¯ Q F ( · , i ) , Q L ( · , i ) , ¯ Q L ( · , i ) , G F ( i ) , ¯ G F ( i ) , G L ( i ) , ¯ G L ( i ) ∈ L ∞ (0 , T ; R ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i ∈ M . Besides, R F, 1 ( · , i ) and R F, 2 ( · , i ) are positive and negative definite, respectively, i ∈ M . It is remarkable that if cost functionals (5) and (6) contain the linear terms, the results of this paper can be similarly obtained. To avoid heavy notations and to improve the readability of this work, the linear terms are dropped.

For the two followers, we assume that cost functional (5) is the loss of Follower 1 and the gain of Follower 2. Therefore, Follower 1 wants to minimize (5) by seeking a strategy u ∗ F, 1 ( · ) ∈ U F, 1 , while Follower 2 wants to maximize (5) by finding a strategy u ∗ F, 2 ( · ) ∈ U F, 2 . Knowing that the leader has chosen u L ( · ) ∈ U L , the two followers would like to select an admissible strategy u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) = u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · , u L ( · )) = ( u ∗ F, 1 ( · ) , u ∗ F, 2 ( · ) ) = ( u ∗ F, 1 ( · , u L ( · )) , u ∗ F, 2 ( · , u L ( · )) ) . The above problem involving two followers constitutes a zero-sum differential game, denoted by Problem (ZSDG) . If we can find an admissible strategy u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) ∈ U F 1 , 2 satisfying (7), then we call it an open-loop saddle point of Problem (ZSDG).

Knowing that the two followers take the strategy u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) ∈ U F 1 , 2 , the leader wants to seek a strategy u ∗ L ( · ) ∈ U L satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

subject to (4) and (6). For convenience, the problem for the leader can be seen as the leader's optimal control problem, denoted as Problem (LOC) .

We call the above optimization problem (4)-(8) a stochastic Stackelberg differential game (SDG) for conditional mean-field switching diffusion with one leader and two followers, denote by Problem (CMFSDG) , in which two followers formulate a zero-sum differential game. If ( u ∗ L ( · ) , u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) ) ∈ U L × U F 1 , 2 exists, we call it a Stackelberg equilibrium of Problem (CMF-SDG).

## 1.3. Literature review and contributions of this paper

Differential game has attracted considerable interest from diverse areas owing to its important theoretical and practical significance. Differential game was initiated by Isaacs [8], which involves multiple players whose strategies interact dynamically. In 1952, Stackelberg [23] introduced Stackelberg game, where the leader claims a strategy first, then the follower optimizes his cost functional based on the announcement taken by the leader. Next, knowing the follower's response, the leader wants to seek a strategy to optimize his cost functional. Due to the applications in macroeconomics, management sciences, social sciences and biology, Stackelberg game has emerged as a widely studied topic. Castanon and Athans [2] focused on a Stackelberg game of the stochastic system, and derived a feedback form for Stackelberg solution. Yong [30] studied a Stackelberg differential game in the LQ setting, where the coefficients of dynamic system and the cost functionals are random, and derived the open-loop strategies. Li and Yu [11] studied a more generalized Stackelberg game with N -level hierarchy, and obtained the unique equilibrium in a closed form. For more information, see Moon [16] for Stackelberg game of jump-diffusion systems, Shi, Wang, and Xiong [21] for leader-follower stochastic differential game with asymmetric information, Wang and Yan [28] for Paretobased Stackelberg differential game with multi-followers, Wang, Wang and Zhang [27] for Stackelberg game with one leader and two followers, and references therein.

Recall that, we present a product pricing problem involving government, consumer and seller, and a corporate bidding problem involving government and two companies in Section 1.1. However, the above two problems can not be described by a simple Stackelberg game model, the main reason is that the consumer and seller, and the two companies form zero-sum differential game. Examples of such game also include gambling, resource allocation, and options and futures contracts. In fact, zero-sum differential game is also an important branch of game theory. The initial work of zero-sum differential game can be traced back to the work of Ho, Bryson, and Baron [6]. Then, Fleming and Souganidis [4] gave the existence of value function for a two-player zero-sum stochastic differential game. Buckdahn and Li [1] investigated a zero-sum stochastic differential game using backward stochastic differential equation (BSDE), which generalized the results obtained in Fleming and Souganidis [4]. Sun and Yong [26] discussed the open-loop and closed-loop saddle points of two-person zero-sum differential game, where the control strategies of two players enter both drift and diffusion terms of the state equation. Recently, Sun, Wang and Wen [25] considered a zero-sum Stackelberg stochastic LQ differential game, and the Stackelberg equilibrium is derived under a fairly weak condition.

It is worth pointing out that, in most of the works mentioned above, Stackelberg game and zero-sum game are driven by SDE. However, numerous complex systems are inherently hybrid, combining continuous dynamics and discrete events. The discrete events can not be described by an SDE, but can be recast as a regime switching diffusion modulated by a continuous-time Markov chain. Unlike traditional system, a model incorporating a Markov chain can accurately capture the infrequent yet impactful behaviors that shape the system's long-term evolution. Regime switching models have attracted significant research interest in stochastic control theory and its financial applications, see the works of [5, 14, 20, 22, 34]. Ji and Chizeck [9] studied the continuous-time LQ control with Markovian jump. Zhang and Yin [33] considered a hybrid control for LQ Gaussian system modulated by Markov chain, and it established the approximation schemes for systems. Catherine [3] obtained a sufficient stochastic maximum principle for the optimal control of a regime-switching diffusion model. Further, Li and Zheng [12] gave a weak necessary and sufficient maximum principle for Markovian regime switching stochastic optimal control problems. Besides, Lv [13] considered a kind of two-player zero-sum stochastic differential games with regime switching, and the lower and upper value functions are discussed by dynamic programming principle.

Motivated by above, we study an LQ Stackelberg differential game for regime switching system with one leader and two followers, which is applicable to solve the product pricing problem given in Section 1.1. Such a problem possesses important values in both theoretical and practical aspects. Unfortunately, there exists little literature along this line. Compared with the existing works, the distinctive contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.

- We propose a new type of Stackelberg differential game stemming from the product pricing problem, and we give the existence and uniqueness of a set of coupled Riccati equations with Markov chain. Different from the works of Lv, Xiong and Zhang [15], Shi, Wang and Xiong [21], Sun [24], Wang,

Wang and Zhang [27], Yong [30], in our work the Riccati equations of the two followers is a set of coupled Riccati equations with Markov chain. Due to the fact that these Riccati equations are coupled with each other via a coupled term, thus they can not be solved by the traditional Riccati equation theory introduced in Yong and Zhou [32]. To do this, introducing some auxiliary equations, presenting some estimates and employing the monotone bounded theorem, the unique solvability of such coupled Riccati equations with Markov chain is derived.

- We obtain the unique solvability of a conditional mean-field forward-backward stochastic differential equation (CMF-FBSDE) with respect to regime switching. Compared with Li and Wang [10], Li and Yu [11], Moon [16], Shi, Wang and Xiong [21], the Hamiltonian system of the leader in this paper is more complicated, which contains two coupled CMF-FBSDEs with regime switching and is extremely challenging to derive its solvability. By introducing domination-monotonicity conditions with conditional expectation, applying continuation method and induction method, we prove the unique solvability of such CMF-FBSDE. Then, we discuss the Hamiltonian systems of the leader and two followers in some special cases, which is usually absent in the existing research works, such as Shi, Wang and Xiong [21], Wang and Yan [28], Wang, Wang and Zhang [27], etc.
- Wegive the closed-loop representation and open-loop strategy of the optimal strategies for two followers and leader, respectively. By virtue of stochastic maximum principle and optimal filter technique, one first derives the open-loop optimal strategies of two followers and leader, which depend on the associated Hamiltonian systems. Further, exploring the relation between optimal strategy and optimal state explicitly, introducing some Riccati equations with Markov chain, we obtain a feedback and closed-loop representation of the optimal strategy for the two followers and the leader, not just the open-loop form.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We investigate the unique solvability of the CMF-FBSDE with Markovian switching in Section 2, which plays an important role in analyzing the existence and uniqueness of Hamiltonian systems for two followers and leader. Furthermore, we study an LQ Stackelberg differential game for regime switching system with one leader and two followers in Section 3, and the optimal strategies are obtained. Finally, we solve the product pricing problem presented in Section 1.1 to illustrate the theoretical results and give some concluding remarks in Sections 4 and 5, respectively.

## 1.4. Notation

Let (Ω , F , F , P ) be a complete filtered probability space on which a one-dimensional standard Brownian motion W ( · ) and a Markov chain α · are defined. The Markov chain α · takes values in a finite state space M = { 1 , 2 , · · · , m } . Let Q = ( λ ij ) i,j ∈M be the generator (i.e., the matrix of transition rates) of α · with λ ij ≥ 0 for i = j and ∑ j ∈M λ ij = 0 for each i ∈ M . Assume that W ( · ) and α · are independent. Let F = {F t : 0 ≤ t ≤ T } be generated by W ( · ) and α · . For t &gt; 0 , let F α t = σ { α s : 0 ≤ s ≤ t } . For a stochastic process h ( · ) , we let ̂ h ( t ) = E [ h ( t ) |F α t -] . Let R l be the l -dimensional Euclidean space with norm | · | . Let 0 and I represent a zero matrix (or vector) and an identity matrix with suitable dimensions, respectively. Let A ⊤ be the transpose of matrix A . For symmetric matrices A,B ∈ R n × n , A ≥ B , if x ⊤ Ax ≥ x ⊤ Bx for

̸

any x ∈ R n . For convenience, let V represent some spaces such as R n , R n × k , etc., and we introduce several spaces as follows. L 2 F (0 , T ; V ) = { x : [0 , T ] × Ω → V | x ( · ) is F -progressively measurable process and satisfies E ( ∫ T 0 | x ( t ) | 2 dt ) &lt; + ∞ } , S 2 F (0 , T ; V ) = { x : [0 , T ] × Ω → V | x ( · ) is F -adapted c ` a dl ` a g process and satisfies E ( sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | x ( t ) | 2 ) &lt; + ∞ } , L 2 F T (Ω; V ) = { ξ : Ω → V | ξ is F T -measurable random variable and satisfies E | ξ | 2 &lt; + ∞ } , L 2 F (Ω; C ([0 , T ]; H )) = { x : [0 , T ] × Ω → H | x ( · ) is F -progressively measurable process valued in H , such that for almost all ω ∈ Ω , t → x ( t, ω ) is continuous and E ( sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | x ( t ) | 2 ) &lt; + ∞ } , L 2 F (Ω; L (0 , T ; H )) = { x : [0 , T ] × Ω → H | x ( · ) is F -progressively measurable process valued in H , such that E ( ∫ T 0 | g ( t ) | dt ) 2 &lt; + ∞ } . Moreover, we introduce the Banach spaces as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

For each pair ( i, j ) ∈ M×M with i = j , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 1 represents the indicator function. It follows from Nguyen, Nguyen and Yin [17, 18] that the process M ij ( t ) = [ M ij ]( t ) - ⟨ M ij ⟩ ( t ) is a purely discontinuous and square-integrable martingale with respect to F α t , which is null at the origin. Besides, we denote M ii ( t ) = [ M ii ]( t ) = ⟨ M ii ⟩ ( t ) = 0 for each i ∈ M and t ≥ 0 . Define M 2 F (0 , T ; R ) = { λ = ( λ ij : i, j ∈ M ) | λ ij is F -progressively measurable process, λ ii = 0 for i, j ∈ M , and ∑ i,j ∈M E ( ∫ T 0 | λ ij ( t ) | 2 d [ M ij ]( t ) ) &lt; + ∞ } . For convenience, let h ( · ) = ( h ij ( · )) i,j ∈M and h ( s ) · dM ( s ) = ∑ i,j ∈M h ij ( s ) dM ij ( s ) .

## 2. Unique solvability of CMF-FBSDE with regime switching

In this section, we are devoted to investigating the unique solvability of CMF-FBSDE with regime switching. For LQ Stackelberg game for stochastic system with regime switching discussed in Section 3, the Hamiltonian systems of two followers and the leader are a partially-coupled CMF-FBSDE and two fully-coupled CMF-FBSDEs with regime switching, respectively. Thus, we will discuss the solvability of CMF-FBSDE with regime switching, which plays a key role in proving the unique solvability of Hamiltonian systems for two followers and the leader.

Consider the CMF-FBSDE with regime switching as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Ψ j : R n → R n , Φ j : R 2 n ×M→ R n , b j , σ j , g j : [0 , T ] × R 6 n ×M→ R n , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For simplicity, let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we give the Lipschitz condition and domination-monotonicity conditions with conditional expectations.

Assumption (A1) (i) For any x, y ∈ R 2 n and any i ∈ M , Ψ( y ) is deterministic and Φ( x, ˆ x, i ) is F T -measurable. For any Θ ∈ R 6 n and any i ∈ M , Γ ( · , Θ , ̂ Θ , i ) is F -progressively measurable. Besides, Ψ( 0 ) ∈ R n , Φ( 0 , 0 , i ) ∈ L 2 F T (Ω; R n ) , and Γ( · , 0 , 0 , i ) ∈ N 2 F ( 0 , T ; R 3 n ) × N 2 F ( 0 , T ; R 3 n ) . (ii) For any i ∈ M , the functions Ψ , Φ and Γ are uniformly Lipschitz continuous with respect to y, ( x, ̂ x ) and ( Θ , ̂ Θ ) , respectively. Assumption (A2) There exist two nonnegative constants µ 1 ≥ 0 , ν 1 ≥ 0 satisfying µ 1 &gt; 0 , ν 1 = 0 or µ 1 = 0 , ν 1 &gt; 0 , a positive constant µ 2 &gt; 0 , matrices ˜ M j , ˜ G j ( i ) , ˜ G ′ j ( i ) , ˜ A 1 ( · , i ) , ˜ A ′ 1 ( · , i ) , ˜ B 1 ( · , i ) , ˜ B ′ 1 ( · , i ) , ˜ C 1 ( · , i ) , ˜ C ′ 1 ( · , i ) , ˜ L 2 ( · , i ) , ˜ L ′ 2 ( · , i ) with suitable dimensions, where ˜ L 2 ( · , i ) = ( ˜ A 2 ( · , i ) , ˜ B 2 ( · , i ) , ˜ C 2 ( · , i ) ) and ˜ L ′ 2 ( · , i ) = ( ˜ A ′ 2 ( · , i ) , ˜ B ′ 2 ( · , i ) , ˜ C ′ 2 ( · , i ) ) , i ∈ M , j = 1 , 2 , such that

(i) (Domination Condition) For any ( ω, t, i ) ∈ Ω × [0 , T ] ×M , any Θ j , ̂ Θ j , Θ ′ j , ̂ Θ ′ j ∈ R 3 n , j = 1 , 2 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where f j = b j , σ j , ∆ h j = h j -h ′ j , ∆ ̂ h j = ̂ h j -̂ h ′ j with h = x j , ̂ x j , y j , ̂ y j , z j , ̂ z j , ∆Θ 2 = Θ 2 -Θ ′ 2 and ∆ ̂ Θ 2 = ̂ Θ 2 -̂ Θ ′ 2 .

(ii) (Monotonicity Condition) For any ( ω, t, i ) ∈ Ω × [0 , T ] ×M , any Θ j , ̂ Θ j , Θ ′ j , ̂ Θ ′ j ∈ R 3 n , j = 1 , 2 , and any Θ , ̂ Θ , Θ ′ , ̂ Θ ′ ∈ R 6 n ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is remarkable that due to the presence of conditional expectation terms in (9), the domination and monotonicity conditions in Assumption (A2) are essentially different from the existing works, where the monotonicity conditions are the form of conditional expectation. Utilizing continuation method and induction method, the unique solvability of such CMF-FBSDE can be obtained. Now we present the existence and uniqueness result for CMF-FBSDE (9).

Theorem 2.1. Let Assumptions (A1)-(A2) hold with (Ψ , Φ , Γ) . Then, CMF-FBSDE (9) admits a unique solution π = ( x 1 , y 1 , z 1 , ˜ z 1 , x 2 , y 2 , z 2 , ˜ z 2 ) ∈ ( N 2 F ( 0 , T ; R 3 n ) ×M 2 F (0 , T ; R ) ) 2 . Moreover, if there exists another solution π ′ = ( x ′ 1 , y ′ 1 , z ′ 1 , ˜ z ′ 1 , x ′ 2 , y ′ 2 , z ′ 2 , ˜ z ′ 2 ) ∈ ( N 2 F ( 0 , T ; R 3 n ) ×M 2 F (0 , T ; R ) ) 2 to CMF-FBSDE (9) with (Ψ ′ , Φ ′ , Γ ′ ) satisfying Assumptions (A1)-(A2). Then, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where K is a constant depending on T , the Lipschitz constants, µ 1 , ν 1 , µ 2 , and the bounds of all coefficients in Assumptions (A1)-(A2), and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3. LQ Stackelberg game for stochastic system with regime switching

In this section, we aim to give the main results for Problem (CMF-SDG). To deal with Problem (CMFSDG), this section is divided into two subsections corresponding to the hierarchical structure of the game. First, we study Problem (ZSDG) between the two followers, and establish their equilibrium strategies. Subsequently, we solve the leader's optimization Problem (LOC), and complete the Stackelberg game solution framework.

## 3.1. Optimal strategies for two followers

We present a definition as follows.

Definition 1. The open-loop lower value V -F ( x 0 ) and the open-loop upper value V + F ( x 0 ) at the initial state x 0 ∈ R are defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively. If V -F ( x 0 ) = V + F ( x 0 ) , then we call it an open-loop value at the initial state x 0 .

and In what follows, we start to solve Problem (ZSDG), and give the representation form of the strategies for two followers. To do this, we give the following assumptions.

Assumption (F1) V + F ( x 0 ) and V -F ( x 0 ) are finite.

Assumption (F2) For any i ∈ M , R F ( · , i ) is invertible.

Assumption (F3) For any i ∈ M , Q F ( · , i ) , G F ( i ) , B F ( · , i ) R -1 F ( · , i ) B ⊤ F ( · , i ) and D F ( · , i ) R -1 F ( · , i ) D ⊤ F ( · , i ) are all non-negative, and ¯ Q F ( · , i ) = ¯ G F ( i ) = 0 . Moreover, for any i ∈ M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 3.1. Let Assumptions (F1) and (F2) hold. Then, a strategy u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) ∈ U F 1 , 2 is an open-loop saddle point if and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( x ( · ) , p ( · ) , q ( · ) , k ( · ) ) is the solution to Hamiltonian system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, if Assumption (F3) holds, then (15) admits a unique solution.

## Proof: See Appendix B.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that stochastic Hamiltonian system (15) is a partially-coupled CMF-FBSDE with Markovian switching. In the following, based on Hamiltonian system (15), employing the decoupling technique and Riccati equation approach, we will present a feedback representation of the open-loop saddle point for two followers.

Introduce the auxiliary equations as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In what follows, we focus on the solvability of (16)-(18). It is remarkable that, compared with the classical Riccati equations introduced in Yong and Zhou [32], (16) is a set of Riccati equations with Markov chain, and they are coupled via the term ∑ j ∈M λ ij [ P F ( · , j ) -P F ( · , i ) ] . As a result, the methods addressed in Yong and Zhou [32] are unavailable to prove the solvability of (16). Thus, (16) and (17) are essentially different from the classical Riccati equations. By introducing some auxiliary equations, presenting some estimates and employing the monotone bounded theorem, we will give the unique solvability of such Riccati equations with Markov chain.

Recall that the coefficients in (4)-(5) are bounded for any given i ∈ M , then there exist positive constants q 0 , g 0 , c 1 , ¯ c 2 , c 3 , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For convenience, define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assumption (F4) There exists a positive constant c 2 &gt; 0 , such that D ⊤ F,j ( · , i ) D F,j ( · , i ) ≥ c 2 I m j , i ∈ M , j = 1 , 2 .

Assumption (F5) R F,j ( · , i ) ≥ ( ϱ + ¯ ϱ ¯ c 2 ) I m j , i ∈ M , j = 1 , 2 .

Theorem 3.2. Under Assumptions (F1)-(F5), (16) -(18) admit unique solutions.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 3.1. Indeed, p ( · ) and q ( · ) given by (15) can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively, where P F ( · , i ) , ¯ P F ( · , i ) , ( ϕ ( · ) , ϕ W ( · ) , ϕ M ( · ) ) are represented by (16) -(18) , i ∈ M . Then, with the relations (21) and (22) , the strategy u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) in (14) can be expressed as an affine function of state process x ( · ) and its conditional expectation ̂ x ( · ) . In this sense, we obtain the feedback form of u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) .

## 3.2. Optimal strategy for the leader

Now, we are proceed to investigate Problem (LOC) for the leader, which is a stochastic optimal control problem governed by a CMF-FBSDE with regime switching, that is, to minimize the cost functional

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

subject to (15).

Assumption (L1) Q L ( · , i ) ≥ 0 , ¯ Q L ( · , i ) ≥ 0 , R L ( · , i ) &gt; 0 , G L ( i ) ≥ 0 , ¯ G L ( i ) ≥ 0 , i ∈ M .

Introduce

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that (23) involves two fully-coupled CMF-FBSDEs, whose existence and uniqueness are difficult to obtain. In what follows, we will discuss the unique solvability of (23) in a special but non-trivial case.

Assumption (L2) For any i ∈ M , B ⊤ L ( · , i ) D L ( · , i ) = D ⊤ L ( · , i ) B L ( · , i ) .

Lemma 3.1. Let Assumptions (F2), (F3), (L1) and (L2) hold, then Assumptions (A1) and (A2) hold true for the coefficients of (23) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we present the optimal strategy for the leader.

Theorem 3.3. Let Assumptions (L1) and (L2) hold. Then, Problem (LOC) admits a unique optimal strategy given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( y ( · ) , z ( · )) is given by (23) . Moreover, ( u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) , u ∗ L ( · ) ) defined by (14) and (24) is the unique Stackelberg equilibrium in the open-loop form of Problem (CMF-SDG).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## See Appendix E.

In what follows, we expect to give the feedback form of u ∗ L ( · ) by some Riccati equations. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, (23) and (24) are written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Assumption (L3) ¯ C = 0 , D L = D F = 0 , B L = 0 , B F R -1 F B ⊤ F = 0 .

Introduce the following auxiliary equations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where B j XY ( t, i ) = X + Y B j , j = 1 , 2 .

Theorem 3.4. Under Assumptions (L1)-(L3), (27) -(29) are uniquely solvable.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to Remark 3.1, we draw a conclusion as follows.

Remark 3.2. Indeed, Y ( · ) and Z ( · ) given by (25) can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively, where P L ( · , i ) , ¯ P L ( · , i ) , ( τ ( · ) , τ W ( · ) , τ M ( · ) ) are represented by (27) -(29) , i ∈ M . Then, with the relations (30) and (31) , the strategy u ∗ L ( · ) in (26) can be expressed as an affine function of state process X ( · ) and its conditional expectation ̂ X ( · ) . In this sense, we obtain the feedback form of u ∗ L ( · ) .

## 4. Product pricing problem

In this section, we employ the theoretical results obtained in Section 3 to solve the product pricing problem given in Section 1.1. Product pricing is a critical business decision with profound implications for market efficiency, resource allocation and social welfare. It acts as a pivotal nexus connecting microlevel corporate strategy with macro-level market dynamics. Simultaneously, the issue of product pricing is of significant importance. On the one hand, it determines a company's profitability and long-term development (such as brand, research and development). On the other hand, it dictates the firm's position within the competitive landscape and directly shapes the purchase decisions and user experiences of the consumers. This is particularly evident in the smartphone industry, where the mobile phone pricing can not be reduced to a mere 'cost plus profit'. Instead, it constitutes a complex, dynamic process of achieving an equilibrium

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

through the multifaceted interplay of the consumer, seller and government. Thus, the product pricing problem studied in this work possesses significant research value.

In this section, for simplicity, take ¯ A ( · , i ) = b ( · , i ) = C ( · , i ) = ¯ C ( · , i ) = D L ( · , i ) = D F, 1 ( · , i ) = D F, 2 ( · , i ) = 0 , i ∈ M . The more general cases can be handled similarly. Then, the price of the mobile phone is governed by the following SDE

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Obviously, product pricing problem can be regarded as a special case of Problem (CMF-SDG). Applying Theorems 3.1 and 3.3, we obtain that the optimal strategies of consumer, seller and government are presented by

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and ( p ( · ) , q ( · ) , k ( · ) , y ( · ) , z ( · ) , ζ ( · ) ) satisfies the decoupled BSDEs

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By virtue of Theorem 2.1, (34) is uniquely solvable. Here ( u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) , u ∗ L ( · ) ) given by (33) is called the Stackelberg equilibrium of the product pricing problem.

Now we solve the product pricing problem, in which the Markov chain takes values in M = { 1 , 2 } with the generator being

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the initial state x 0 = 1 . '1' and '2' in M = { 1 , 2 } represent the bull market and bear market, respectively. For illustration purpose, let T = 1 , and the coefficients of the dynamic equation (32) are given as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider the cost functionals defined by (2)-(3) with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the sake of clarity, in what follows, we will use h ( · , 1) and h ( · , 2) to represent the values of h ( · ) at state 1 and 2, respectively, where h = p, y, u ∗ F, 1 , u ∗ F, 2 , u ∗ L .

Employing Euler's method, we obtain the curves of Markov chain α · , p ( · ) and y ( · ) given by (34) shown in Figures 1 and 2, respectively. Figure 1 shows that Markov chain α · switches between state 1 and state 2. In Figure 2(a), the red dotted line is the graph of p ( · , 1) , the blue dotted line is the graph of p ( · , 2) , and the solid red and blue line is the graph of p ( · ) , whose values switch between the red dotted line p ( · , 1) and the blue dotted line p ( · , 2) . Similarly, in Figure 2(b), the values of y ( · ) also switch between the red dotted line y ( · , 1) and the blue dotted line y ( · , 2) .

According to (33), the optimal strategies u ∗ F, 1 ( · ) , u ∗ F, 2 ( · ) and u ∗ L ( · ) of consumer, seller and government are related to p ( · ) and y ( · ) given by (34). Then, we obtain their graphs shown in Figures 3 and 4, from which it can be seen that the control strategies u ∗ F, 1 ( · ) , u ∗ F, 2 ( · ) and u ∗ L ( · ) switch between two states. It can be seen from Figures 3 and 4 that, in state 1 (bull market), with the strong demand, seller gains greater pricing power and plays a dominant role in the financial market, while government intervention is minimal; In contrast, in state 2 (bear market), with the weak demand and consumer spending contraction, the government plays a leading role in regulating prices, through subsidies and stimulus measures (such as consumption vouchers). Moreover, the price x ∗ ( · ) of the mobile phone is shown in Figure 5. As shown in Figure 5, compared with state 2 (bear market), the prices generally exhibit more significant volatility during state 1 (bull market).

Figure 2: Numerical solutions of p ( t ) and y ( t ) .

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: Numerical solution of x ∗ ( t ) .

<!-- image -->

## 5. Conclusion and outlook

This paper investigates an LQ Stackelberg differential game with conditional mean-field and regime switching, where one leader and two followers (zero-sum game) involve. By domination-monotonicity conditions with conditional expectation, continuation method and induction method, we obtain the unique solvability of the CMF-FBSDE. Then, applying stochastic maximum principle, decoupling approach and optimal filtering technique, we derive the optimal strategies for two followers and the leader.

Except for noncooperative game studied in this work, the study of cooperative game also has important research value. We will consider the cooperative game with conditional mean-field and regime switching in our future work.

## Appendix A. Proof of Theorem 2.1

To prove Theorem 2.1, we first present a proposition.

Proposition 5.1. If b 2 ( · , · , · ) = σ 2 ( · , · , · ) = g 2 ( · , · , · ) = 0 , x 2 = y 2 = z 2 = ˜ z 2 = 0 , Theorem 2.1 holds true.

Proof of Proposition 5.1: By virtue of Theorem 3.1 of Peng and Wu [19] and Lemma 3.1 of Yong [31], the result can be derived. Here we omit the detailed proof. □

For any i ∈ M , let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we also denote G ′ 1 ( i ) = ν 1 ( ˜ G ′ 1 ( i ) ) ⊤ ˜ G ′ 1 ( i ) , similar inventions are used for G ′ 2 ( i ) , L ′ j ( · , i ) , G ′ j ( i ) , L ′ j ( · , i ) , j = 1 , 2 . Furthermore, for any i ∈ M , let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from (36) that ( Ψ 0 , Φ 0 , Γ 0 ) satisfies Assumptions (A1)-(A2).

For any ( κ, ξ, ρ ( · )) ∈ H [0 , T ] with ρ ( · ) = ( φ ⊤ ( · ) , η ⊤ ( · ) , γ ⊤ ( · ) ) ⊤ , we introduce a family of CMF-FBSDEs parameterized by δ ∈ [0 , 1] as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Θ δ t = ( t, Θ δ ( t ) , ̂ Θ δ ( t ) , α t -) , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall that ( Ψ 0 , Φ 0 , Γ 0 ) and (Ψ , Φ , Γ) satisfy Assumptions (A1)-(A2). Thus, ( Ψ δ + κ, Φ δ + ξ, Γ δ + ρ ) and ( Ψ δ , Φ δ , Γ δ ) also satisfy Assumptions (A1)-(A2). The next lemma tells that ( Ψ 0 , Φ 0 , Γ 0 ) implies a simple decoupled form.

Lemma 5.1. Let ( κ, ξ, ρ ( · )) ∈ H [0 , T ] be given. When δ = 0 , CMF-FBSDE (37) is decoupled and is uniquely solvable.

Proof of Lemma 5.1: Let δ = 0 , for any i ∈ M , it follows from (36) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Θ 0 2 ,t = ( t, Θ 0 2 ( t ) , ̂ Θ 0 2 ( t ) , α t -) , Θ 0 2 = ( ( x 0 2 ) ⊤ , ( y 0 2 ) ⊤ , ( z 0 2 ) ⊤ ) ⊤ , ̂ Θ 0 2 = ( ( ̂ x 0 2 ) ⊤ , ( ̂ y 0 2 ) ⊤ , ( ̂ z 0 2 ) ⊤ ) ⊤ , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that b 0 2 , σ 0 2 , g 0 2 depend on µ 1 , ν 1 . Recall that there are two cases about µ 1 , ν 1 in (A2). If ν 1 = 0 , then g 0 2 = 0 , G 1 = ν 1 ˜ G ⊤ 1 ˜ G 1 = 0 , G ′ 1 = ν 1 ( ˜ G ′ 1 ) ⊤ ˜ G ′ 1 = 0 . In this case, (39) is a partially-coupled CMF-FBSDE, where the backward equation does not depend on the forward one. So we can first solve ( y 0 2 ( · ) , z 0 2 ( · ) , ˜ z 0 2 ( · ) )

from the second equation of (39) with the terminal condition, and then solve x 0 2 ( · ) from the first equation. On the other hand, if µ 1 = 0 , then b 0 2 = σ 0 2 = 0 , and M 1 = µ 1 ˜ M ⊤ 1 ˜ M 1 = 0 . In this case, we can first solve the forward equation and subsequently handle the backward equation.

Based on the above discussion, the desired results can be obtained with δ = 0 . □

According to Lemma 5.1, when δ = 0 , CMF-FBSDE (37) is uniquely solvable. When δ = 1 and ( κ, ξ, ρ ( · )) = ( 0 , 0 , 0 ) , CMF-FBSDE (37) turns to (9). In what follows, we will prove that there exists a fixed step length ι 0 ≥ 0 , such that if for some δ 0 ∈ [0 , 1) , CMF-FBSDE (9) is uniquely solvable for any ( κ, ξ, ρ ( · )) ∈ H [0 , T ] , then the same conclusion also holds for δ 0 being replaced by δ 0 + ι ≤ 1 with ι ∈ [0 , ι 0 ] . Once this has been proved, we can increase the parameter δ step by step until it equals 1 . This approach is formally known as the continuation method, please refer to [7, 19, 31] for more information.

To establish the continuity lemma, we first present a priori estimate.

Lemma 5.2. Let Assumptions (A1)-(A2) hold for the given (Ψ , Φ , Γ) . Let δ ∈ [0 , 1] and ( κ, ξ, ρ ( · )) , ( κ ′ , ξ ′ , ρ ′ ( · )) ∈ H [0 , T ] . Suppose that π ( · ) , π ′ ( · ) ∈ ( N 2 F ( 0 , T ; R 3 n ) ×M 2 F (0 , T ; R ) ) 2 satisfying (37) with ( Ψ δ + κ, Φ δ + ξ, Γ + ρ ( · ) ) and ( Ψ δ + κ ′ , Φ δ + ξ ′ , Γ + ρ ′ ( · ) ) , respectively. Then, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ x ( · ) = x ( · ) -x ′ ( · ) , ∆ κ = κ -κ ′ , etc. Here K is a constant, which is independent of δ .

Proof of Lemma 5.2: For the sake of clarity, we divide the proof process into the following four steps. Step 1 . Freeze ( x 2 ( · ) , y 2 ( · ) , z 2 ( · ) , ˜ z 2 ( · )) . Then, utilizing Theorem 2.1 for ( x 1 , y 1 , z 1 , ˜ z 1 ) , it arrives that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With the definition of ( Ψ δ , Φ δ , Γ δ ) given by (38) and condition (10), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, we derive

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Based on (41)-(43), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Step 2 . Freeze ( x 1 ( · ) , y 1 ( · ) , z 1 ( · ) , ˜ z 1 ( · )) . Similar to (41), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the definition of ( Ψ δ , Φ δ , Γ δ ) given by (38) and the uniformly Lipschitz conditions of (Ψ , Φ , Γ) , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from (44) and (45) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Step 3 . Applying the generalized Itô's formula to ⟨ ∆ x 1 ( · ) , ∆ y 2 ( · ) ⟩ + ⟨ ∆ x 2 ( · ) , ∆ y 1 ( · ) ⟩ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recalling (11), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking E [ · ] on both sides of (49) and applying (48), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With Young's inequality, for any ϵ &gt; 0 , it yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where J is given by (47). It follows from (46) and (50) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Choosing ϵ = 4 K , we obtain (40).

With Lemma 5.2, we obtain the following continuation lemma.

Lemma 5.3. Let (Ψ , Φ , Γ) be given to satisfy Assumptions (A1)-(A2). Then there exists a positive constant ι 0 &gt; 0 , such that if for δ 0 ∈ [0 , 1) , CMF-FBSDE (37) is uniquely solvable for any ( κ, ξ, ρ ( · )) ∈ H [0 , T ] , then the same result holds for δ = δ 0 + ι with ι ∈ [0 , ι 0 ] and δ ≤ 1 .

Proof of Lemma 5.3: Let ι 0 &gt; 0 be determined later. Let ι ∈ [0 , ι 0 ] . For any ( κ ′ , ξ ′ , ρ ′ ( · )) ∈ H [0 , T ] with ρ ′ ( · ) = ( φ ′ ⊤ ( · ) , η ′ ⊤ ( · ) , γ ′ ⊤ ( · ) ) ⊤ , for any π ( · ) ∈ ( N 2 F ( 0 , T ; R 3 n ) ×M 2 F (0 , T ; R ) ) 2 , consider a CMF-FBSDE with unknown Π( · ) as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under our assumption, (51) is uniquely solvable in space ( N 2 F ( 0 , T ; R 3 n ) ×M 2 F (0 , T ; R ) ) 2 . Define a mapping f δ 0 + ι as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next we proceed to prove that f δ 0 + ι is contractive. Let π ( · ) , π ′ ( · ) ∈ ( N 2 F ( 0 , T ; R 3 n ) ×M 2 F (0 , T ; R ) ) 2 , and Π( · ) = f δ 0 + ι ( π ( · )) , Π ′ ( · ) = f δ 0 + ι ( π ′ ( · )) . Let ∆ π ( · ) = π ( · ) -π ′ ( · ) , ∆Π( · ) = Π( · ) -Π ′ ( · ) , etc. Applying Lemma 5.2, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Λ T = ( T, x ( T ) , ̂ x ( T ) , α T ) , Λ ′ T and Θ ′ · are given by (13). Take ι 0 = 1 2 √ K . Then, for any ι ∈ [0 , ι 0 ] , it follows from (52) that f δ 0 + ι is contractive. □

Finally, we present the proof of Theorem 2.1.

Proof of Theorem 2.1: Combining Lemmas 5.1 and 5.3, the unique solvability of (9) can be obtained. Besides, in Lemma 5.2, letting δ = 1 , ( κ, ξ, ρ ( · )) = ( 0 , 0 , 0 ) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Λ ′ T and Θ ′ · are given by (13), then we obtain estimate (12) from (40). □

## Appendix B. Proof of Theorem 3.1

Proof: Let u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) ∈ U F 1 , 2 and x ( · ) be the corresponding state, and let ( p ( · ) , q ( · ) , k ( · )) be given by (15). u ∗ F 1 , 2 ( · ) is an open-loop saddle point if and only if for any u F,j ∈ U F,j , j = 1 , 2 , and any ε ∈ R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any u F, 1 ( · ) ∈ U F, 1 and any ε ∈ R , let x ε ( · ) be the solution to (4) with ( u ∗ F, 1 ( · ) + εu F, 1 ( · ) , u ∗ F, 2 ( · ) ) . Moreover, let x F,j ( · ) , j = 1 , 2 , be the solution to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, x ε ( · ) = x ( · ) + εx F, 1 ( · ) , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying Itô's formula to p ( · ) x F, 1 ( · ) with the relation E [ ¯ G F ( α T ) ̂ x ( T ) ̂ x F, 1 ( T ) ] = E [ ¯ G F ( α T ) ̂ x ( T ) x F, 1 ( T ) ] , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As a result,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, for any u F, 2 ( · ) ∈ U F, 2 and any ε ∈ R , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

According to Proposition 4.3 in Sun and Yong [26], V + F ( x 0 ) and V -F ( x 0 ) are finite, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Based on (56), we obtain that (54) and (55) are equivalent to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively. Under Assumption (F2), it follows from (57) and (58) that (14) holds. Moreover, if Assumption (F3) holds, applying Theorem 2.1, we check that (15) admits a unique solution. □

## Appendix C. Proof of Theorem 3.2

To prove Theorem 3.2, we first present some arguments. Set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that (16) is a set of Riccati equations, and the solutions are expect to satisfy P F ( · , i ) ∈ [ -¯ ϱ, ¯ ϱ ] , i ∈ M . To prove the solvability of (16), we first give some estimates. Assume that P F ( · , i ) ∈ [ -¯ ϱ, ¯ ϱ ] , it follows from Assumption (F5) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that As a result,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recalling that R F is invertible, applying the block matrix inversion method, we obtain two forms of R -1 F as follows

or

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which also has two forms

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Theorem 3.2: We first prove the existence and uniqueness of (16). Then, we discuss the wellposedness of (17)-(18).

The existence of (16) . Let P F = ( P F ( · , 1) , · · · , P F ( · , m )) ⊤ ∈ R m , and let

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any ( t, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] ×M , let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from (60) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As a result, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

Utilizing (59), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining (61) and (62), we obtain

According to (63), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any k ≥ 1 and ( · , i, P F ( · , i ) ) ∈ [0 , T ] ×M× [ -¯ ϱ, ¯ ϱ ] , let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As a result, H k 1 1 ( · , i, P F ( · , i ) ) and H k 2 2 ( · , i, P F ( · , i ) ) ) are increasing and decreasing to H 1 ( · , i, P F ( · , i ) ) and H 2 ( · , i, P F ( · , i ) ) , respectively, as k 1 , k 2 → + ∞ . Then, for any k 1 , k 2 ≥ 1 , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we solve the following two ordinary differential equations (ODEs)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

( t, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] ×M , where ˙ P + F ( t, i ) = dP + F ( t,i ) dt , ˙ P -F ( t, i ) = dP -F ( t,i ) dt , g + ( t, i, P + F ) = c 1 ∑ j ∈M P + F ( t, j )+ q 0 + 1 ϱ c 3 ¯ ϱ 2 and g -( t, i, P -F ) = c 1 ∑ j ∈M P -F ( t, j ) -q 0 -1 ϱ c 3 ¯ ϱ 2 . Then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that

The following

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

admits a unique solution P k 1 ,k 2 F = ( P k 1 ,k 2 F ( · , 1) , · · · , P k 1 ,k 2 F ( · , m ) ) ⊤ , since g ( · , i, P k 1 ,k 2 F ) , H k 1 1 ( · , i, P k 1 ,k 2 F ( · , i ) ) and H k 2 2 ( · , i, P k 1 ,k 2 F ( · , i ) ) satisfy Lipschitz condition with respect to P k 1 ,k 2 F . Solving (64), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall that H k 1 1 ( · , i, P k 1 ,k 2 F ( · , i ) ) and H k 2 2 ( · , i, P k 1 ,k 2 F ( · , i ) ) are increasing and decreasing to H 1 ( · , i, P k 1 ,k 2 F ( · , i ) ) and H 2 ( · , i, P k 1 ,k 2 F ( · , i ) ) , respectively. Consequently, P k 1 ,k 2 F ( · , i ) is increasing and decreasing with respect to k 1 and k 2 , respectively. For any k 1 , k 2 ≥ 1 and i ∈ M , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, for any k 1 , k 2 ≥ 1 and ( t, i ) ∈ [0 , T ] ×M , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Recall that P k 1 ,k 2 F ( · , i ) is monotonic and bounded, then define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P F ( · , i ) ∈ [ -¯ ϱ, ¯ ϱ ] and satisfies (16). Thus, the existence of (16) is established.

The uniqueness of (16) . Assume that P F ( · , i ) and P ′ F ( · , i ) are two solutions of (16), i ∈ M . Set ∆ P F ( · , i ) = P F ( · , i ) -P ′ F ( · , i ) , which satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where H ( X,Y )( · , i ) = B ⊤ F X + D ⊤ F Y C , R F ( · , i ) = R F + D ⊤ F P F D F , R ′ F ( · , i ) = R F + D ⊤ F P ′ F D F . By virtue of Gronwall's inequality, it yields that ∆ P F ( · , i ) = 0 , i ∈ M . This proves the uniqueness of (16).

Based on the above analysis, (16) is uniquely solvable. Similar to (16), we can also prove that (17) admits a unique solution. Further, applying Theorem 3.4 of Nguyen, Nguyen and Yin [17], we get that (18) is uniquely solvable. □

## Appendix D. Proof of Lemma 3.1

Proof: For this result, we only verify (10) and (11) in Assumption (A2). For any ( ω, t, i ) ∈ Ω × [0 , T ] ×M , we can check that the first and the second inequalities of (10) and (11) hold with ˜ M 2 = ˜ G 2 = ˜ G ′ 2 = 0 .

For any ( ω, t, i ) ∈ Ω × [0 , T ] ×M , any Θ 1 = ( x ∗ , p ∗ , q ∗ ) , ̂ Θ 1 = ( ̂ x ∗ , ̂ p ∗ , ̂ q ∗ ) , Θ 2 = ( ψ, y, z ) , Θ ′ 2 = ( ψ ′ , y ′ , z ′ ) , ̂ Θ 2 = ( ̂ ψ, ̂ y, ̂ z ) , ̂ Θ ′ 2 = ( ̂ ψ ′ , ̂ y ′ , ̂ z ′ ) , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ h = h -h ′ , h = ψ, y, z . Then, the third inequality of (10) holds with ˜ L 2 ( · , i ) and a positive constant ∣ ∣ ∣ ˜ L 2 ( · , i ) ∣ ∣ ∣ + 1 is verified, where ˜ L 2 ( · , i ) = ( 0 , √ ( B L R -1 L B ⊤ L ) ( · , i ) , √ ( D L R -1 L D ⊤ L ) ( · , i ) ) . For any ( ω, t, i ) ∈ Ω × [0 , T ] ×M , any Θ , ̂ Θ , Θ ′ , ̂ Θ ′ ∈ R 6 n , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that the third inequality of (11) is verified with µ 2 = 1 .

## Appendix E. Proof of Theorem 3.3

Proof: For any u L ( · ) ∈ U L , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and x ∗ ( · ) is given by (23).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting (67) and (24) into (66), we obtain Υ L = 0 . Thus, for any u L ( · ) ∈ U L , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that u ∗ L ( · ) is the unique optimal strategy of the leader. We complete the proof. □

□

## Appendix F. Proof of Theorem 3.4

Proof: (27) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any i ∈ M , B 1 ( · , i ) &lt; 0 , Q ( · , i ) ≥ 0 and G ( i ) ≥ 0 , then B 1 ( · ) &lt; 0 , Q ( · ) ≥ 0 and G ≥ 0 . With this fact, it follows from Theorem 7.2 of Chapter 6 in Yong and Zhou [32] that (68) admits a unique solution, which implies that (27) is uniquely solvable. Similar to (27), the unique solvability of (28) can be obtained. Finally, based on the solvability of (27) and (28), applying Theorem 2.1, one derives that (29) is uniquely solvable. □

## References

- [1] R. Buckdahn and J. Li, Stochastic differential games and viscosity solutions of Hamilton-JacobiBellman-Isaacs equations, SIAM J. Control Optim., 47(1), 444-475, 2008.

- [2] D. Castanon and M. Athans, On stochastic dynamic Stackelberg strategies, Automatica, 12(2), 177-183, 1976.
- [3] D. Catherine, Sufficient stochastic maximum principle in a regime-switching diffusion model, Appl. Math. Optim., 64, 155-169, 2011.
- [4] W. H. Fleming and P. E. Souganidis, On the existence of value functions of two player, zero-sum stochastic differential games, Indiana Univ. Math. J., 38, 293-314, 1989.
- [5] X. Guo and Q. Zhang, Closed-form solutions for perpetual American put options with regime switching, SIAM J. Appl. Math., 64, 2034-2049, 2004.
- [6] Y. C. Ho, A. E. Bryson and S. Baron, Differential games and optimal pursuit-evasion strategies, IEEE Trans. Automat. Control, 10, 385-389, 1965.
- [7] Y. Hu and S. Peng, Solution of forward-backward stochastic differential equations, Probab. Theory Relat. Fields, 103, 273-283, 1995.
- [8] R. Isaacs, Differential Games, Parts 1-4, The Rand Corpration, Research Memorandums Nos. RM-1391, RM-1411, RM-1486, 1954-1955.
- [9] Y. Ji and H. Chizeck, Controllability, stabilizability, and continuous-time Markovian jump linear quadratic control, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control., 35, 777-788, 1990.
- [10] N. Li and S. Wang, Linear-quadratic stochastic Stackelberg games of N players for time-delay systems and related FBSDEs, Appl. Math. Optim., 89, 67, 2024.
- [11] N. Li and Z. Yu, Forward-backward stochastic differential equations and linear-quadratic generalized Stackelberg games, SIAM J. Control Optim., 56(6), 4148-4180, 2018.
- [12] Y. Li and H. Zheng, Weak necessary and sufficient stochastic maximum principle for Markovian regime switching diffusion models, Appl. Math. Optim., 71, 39-77, 2015.
- [13] S. Lv, Two-player zero-sum stochastic differential games with regime switching, Automatica, 114, 108819, 2020.
- [14] S. Lv, Z. Wu and Q. Zhang, The Dynkin game with regime switching and applications to pricing game options, Ann. Oper. Res., 313, 1159-1182, 2022.
- [15] S. Lv, J. Xiong and X. Zhang, Linear quadratic leader-follower stochastic differential games for meanfield switching diffusions, Automatica, 154, 111072, 2023.
- [16] J. Moon, Linear-quadratic stochastic Stackelberg differential games for jump-diffusion systems, SIAM J. Control Optim., 59, 954-976, 2021.
- [17] S. L. Nguyen, D. T. Nguyen and G. Yin, A stochastic maximum principle for switching diffusions using conditional mean-fields with applications to control problems, ESAIM Control Optim. Calc. Var., 26, 69, 2020.

- [18] S. L. Nguyen, G. Yin and D. T. Nguyen, A general stochastic maximum principle for mean-field controls with regime switching, Appl. Math. Optim., 84, 3255-3294, 2021.
- [19] S. Peng and Z. Wu, Fully coupled forward-backward stochastic differential equations and applications to optimal control, SIAM J. Control Optim., 37, 825-843, 1999.
- [20] S. P. Sethi and Q. Zhang, Hierarchical decision making in stochastic manufacturing systems, Boston, MA: Birkhäuser, 1994.
- [21] J. Shi, G. Wang and J. Xiong, Leader-follower stochastic differential game with asymmetric information and applications. Automatica, 63, 60-73, 2016.
- [22] Q. Song, R. H. Stockbridge and C. Zhu, On optimal harvesting problems in random environments, SIAM J. Control Optim., 49, 859-889, 2011.
- [23] H. V. Stackelberg, The Theory of the Market Economy. London, UK: Oxford University Press, 1952.
- [24] J. Sun, Two-person zero-sum stochastic linear-quadratic differential games, SIAM J. Control Optim., 59(3), 1804-1829, 2021.
- [25] J. Sun, H. Wang and J. Wen, Zero-sum Stackelberg stochastic linear-quadratic differential games, SIAM J. Control Optim., 61(1), 252-284, 2023.
- [26] J. Sun and J. Yong, Linear quadratic stochastic differential games: open-loop and closed-loop saddle points, SIAM J. Control Optim., 52(6), 4082-4121, 2014.
- [27] G. Wang, Y. Wang and S. Zhang, An asymmetric information mean-field type linear-quadratic stochastic Stackelberg differential game with one leader and two followers, Optim. Control Appl. Meth., 1-18, 2020.
- [28] Y. Wang and Z. Yan, Pareto-based Stackelberg differential game for stochastic systems with multifollowers, Appl. Math. Comput., 436, 127512, 2023.
- [29] R. Xu and F. Zhang, ϵ -Nash mean-field games for general linear-quadratic systems with applications, Automatica, 11, 108835, 2020.
- [30] J. Yong, A leader-follower stochastic linear quadratic differential game, SIAM J. Control Optim., 41(4), 1015-1041, 2002.
- [31] J. Yong, Finding adapted solutions of forward-backward stochastic differential equations: Method of continuation, Probab. Theory Relat. Fields, 107, 537-572, 1997.
- [32] J. Yong and X. Zhou, Stochastic Controls: Hamiltonian Systems and HJB Equations, Springer-Verlag, New York, USA, 1999.
- [33] Q. Zhang and G. Yin, On nearly optimal controls of hybrid LQG problems, IEEE Trans. Autom. Control, 44, 2271-2282, 1999.

- [34] X. Zhou and G. Yin, Markowitz's mean-variance portfolio selection with regime switching: A continuous-time model, SIAM J. Control Optim., 42, 1466-1482, 2003.