## Spatially Common Sparsity Based Adaptive Channel Estimation and Feedback for FDD Massive MIMO

Zhen Gao, Student Member, IEEE , Linglong Dai, Senior Member, IEEE , Zhaocheng Wang, Senior Member, IEEE , Sheng Chen, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract -This paper proposes a spatially common sparsity based adaptive channel estimation and feedback scheme for frequency division duplex based massive multi-input multi-output (MIMO) systems, which adapts training overhead and pilot design to reliably estimate and feed back the downlink channel state information (CSI) with significantly reduced overhead. Specifically, a non-orthogonal downlink pilot design is first proposed, which is very different from standard orthogonal pilots. By exploiting the spatially common sparsity of massive MIMO channels, a compressive sensing (CS) based adaptive CSI acquisition scheme is proposed, where the consumed time slot overhead only adaptively depends on the sparsity level of the channels. Additionally, a distributed sparsity adaptive matching pursuit algorithm is proposed to jointly estimate the channels of multiple subcarriers. Furthermore, by exploiting the temporal channel correlation, a closed-loop channel tracking scheme is provided, which adaptively designs the non-orthogonal pilot according to the previous channel estimation to achieve an enhanced CSI acquisition. Finally, we generalize the results of the multiple-measurement-vectors case in CS and derive the Cramer-Rao lower bound of the proposed scheme, which enlightens us to design the non-orthogonal pilot signals for the improved performance. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed scheme outperforms its counterparts, and it is capable of approaching the performance bound.

Index Terms -Massive multi-input multi-output, frequency division duplex, compressive sensing, channel estimation, feedback, spatially common sparsity, temporal correlation

## I. INTRODUCTION

By exploiting the increased degree of freedom in the spatial domain, massive multi-input multi-output (MIMO) can enhance the spectrum efficiency and energy efficiency by orders of magnitude [1], [2]. To harvest the benefits of massive MIMO, the base station (BS) needs the accurate channel state information (CSI) in the downlink for beamforming, resource allocation, and other operations. However, it is challenging for the BS to acquire the accurate downlink CSI in frequency division duplex (FDD) based massive MIMO, since the overhead used for the downlink channel estimation and feedback can be prohibitively high. Most of the researches sidestep this challenge by assuming the time division duplex (TDD) protocol. In TDD based massive MIMO, the CSI in the uplink can be more easily acquired at the BS due to the limited number of users, and the channel reciprocity property can be exploited to realize the downlink channel estimation using the uplink channel estimation [1]-[4]. However, in TDD massive MIMO, the CSI acquired in the uplink may not be always accurate for the downlink due to the calibration error of radio frequency chains [5]. In addition, frequency division duplex (FDD) protocol still dominates current wireless networks, where the downlink channel estimation is necessary, since the channel reciprocity does not hold. Thus, it is of great importance to explore an efficient approach to enable massive MIMO to be backward compatible with current wireless networks [6]. In this paper, we focus on the reliable and efficient channel estimation and feedback for FDD massive MIMO.

Z. Gao, L. Dai and Z. Wang (E-mails: gaozhen010375@foxmail.com; daill@tsinghua.edu.cn; zcwang@tsinghua.edu.cn) are with Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.

S. Chen (E-mail: sqc@ecs.soton.ac.uk) is with Electronics and Computer Science, University of Southampton, Southampton SO17 1BJ, UK, and also with King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.

Channel estimations in small-scale MIMO are usually based on orthogonal pilots [7]-[10]. In Long Term EvolutionAdvanced (LTE-A), for example, pilots associated with different BS antennas occupy the different frequency-domain subcarriers [9]. Pilot signals can be also orthogonal in the time or code domain. However, the overhead of orthogonal pilots increases with the number of BS antennas, which becomes unaffordable for massive MIMO. For FDD massive MIMO, the work [11] proposed a pilot design for the downlink channel estimation by exploiting the channel statistics. However, the acquisition of the downlink channel covariance matrix is challenging in practice. An open-loop and closed-loop training based channel estimation scheme was proposed in [5]. Nevertheless, the long-term channel statistics required by the user may increase the training time and memory cost. In [6], a sparse channel estimation scheme was proposed to acquire CSI with significantly reduced pilot overhead by exploiting the sparsity of time-domain channel impulse response (CIR). But this time-domain sparsity of the channels may not exist when the number of scatterers at the user side becomes large. Furthermore, [5], [6], [11] do not consider the channel feedback to the BS. In order to obtain the fine-grain spatial channel structures, the conventional codebook based CSI feedback schemes may become impossible, since the dimension of codebook can be huge in massive MIMO. Hence the design, storage, and encoding of the high-dimensional codebook can be difficult [12]. The compressive sensing (CS) based channel feedback schemes for massive MIMO were proposed to reduce the feedback overhead by exploiting the spatial correlation of CSI [12], [13]. However, these schemes do not consider downlink channel estimation. By exploiting the spatially joint sparsity of multiple users' channel matrices, the works [14], [15] proposed a joint orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) based CSI acquisition scheme. However, this scheme cannot adaptively adjust the required overhead according to the sparsity level of the channels. Moreover, the spatially joint sparsity may disappear when the users are not spatially close. Even for the best case that multiple users' channel matrices share the spatially common sparsity, the sparse CSI acquisition problem is a multiple-measurement-vectors (MMV) problem, where the reduction in required overhead is limited.

Recent study and experiments have shown that the wireless channels between the BS and users exhibit a small angle spread seen from the BS [4], [16], [17]. Due to the small angle spread and large dimension of the channels, massive MIMO channels exhibit the sparsity in the virtual angular domain [18]. Moreover, since the spatial propagation characteristics of the wireless channels within the system bandwidth are nearly unchanged, such sparsity is shared by subchannels of different subcarriers when the widely used orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) is considered. This phenomenon is referred to as the spatially common sparsity within the system bandwidth [19]. Besides, due to the temporal correlation of the channels [19], massive MIMO channels are quasi-static in several adjacent time slots or one time block consisting of multiple time slots. Moreover, the support set of the sparse channels in the virtual angular domain is almost unchanged in multiple time blocks, which is referred to as the spatially common sparsity during multiple time blocks .

By exploiting the spatially common sparsity and the temporal correlation of massive MIMO channels, this paper proposes an adaptive channel estimation and feedback scheme with low overhead. The proposed scheme consists of two stages: a CS based adaptive CSI acquisition with the adaptive training overhead and a follow-up closed-loop channel tracking with the adaptive pilot design. Specifically, the BS transmits the proposed non-orthogonal pilot. The users simply feed back the received non-orthogonal pilot signals to the BS. According to the feedback signals, the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition scheme acquires the downlink CSI at the BS with the adaptive training time slot overhead. For this stage, a distributed sparsity adaptive matching pursuit (DSAMP) algorithm is proposed to acquire the CSI, whereby the spatially common sparsity of massive MIMO channels within the system bandwidth is exploited. By exploiting the spatially common sparsity of massive MIMO channels during multiple time blocks, the closed-loop channel tracking scheme is proposed to track the channels in the second stage. For this stage, the BS can adaptively adjust the pilot signals according to the previous acquired CSI, and a simple least squares (LS) algorithm is used to estimate the channels with improved performance. Additionally, we generalize the results for the conventional MMV to the generalized MMV (GMMV) and provide the Cramer-Rao lower bound (CRLB) of the proposed scheme, which enlightens us to design the non-orthogonal pilot signals. Simulation results verify that the proposed scheme is superior to its counterparts, and it is capable of approaching the per- formance bound. We now summarize our novel contributions.

- CS based adaptive CSI acquisition scheme : By exploiting the spatially common sparsity of massive MIMO channels within the system bandwidth, this scheme substantially reduces the required time slot overhead for channel estimation and feedback, where the required time slot overhead is only dependent on the channel sparsity level, rather than the number of BS antennas as in conventional CSI acquisition schemes.
- Closed-loop channel tracking scheme : By leveraging the spatially common sparsity of massive MIMO channels during multiple time blocks, this scheme can further reduce the required time slot overhead.
- Non-orthogonal downlink pilot design at BS : i) We theoretically prove that the GMMV outperforms the conventional MMV on the sparse signal recovery performance. This enlightens us to design the non-orthogonal pilot for CS based adaptive CSI acquisition for improving channel estimation performance. ii) We derive the CRLB for the proposed scheme. In the stage of closed-loop channel tracking, the derived CRLB enlightens us to adaptively design the non-orthogonal pilot according to the previous channel estimation for further improving performance.
- DSAMP algorithm : This algorithm leverages the spatially common sparsity of massive MIMO channels to jointly estimate multiple channels associated with different subcarriers. Compared with the conventional algorithms, such as sparsity adaptive matching pursuit (SAMP), subspace pursuit (SP) and OMP, the proposed DSAMP substantially reduces the required time slot overhead with similar computational complexity.

Throughout our discussions, scalar variables are denoted by normal-face letters, while boldface lower and upper-case symbols denote column vectors and matrices, respectively, and j = √ -1 is the imaginary axis. The Moore-Penrose inversion, transpose and conjugate transpose operators are given by ( · ) † , ( · ) T and ( · ) ∗ , respectively, while ⌈·⌉ is the integer ceiling operator and ( · ) -1 is the inverse operator. The ℓ 0 -norm and ℓ 2 -norm are given by ‖ · ‖ 0 and ‖ · ‖ 2 , respectively, and | Γ | is the cardinality of the set Γ . The support set of the vector a is denoted by supp { a } , [ a ] i denotes the i th entry of the vector x , and [ A ] i,j denotes the i th-row and j th-column element of the matrix A , while I K is the K × K identity matrix. The rank of A is denoted by rank { A } and Tr {·} is the matrix trace operator, while E {·} is the expectation operator and var {·} is the variance of a random variable. Finally, ( a ) Γ denotes the entries of a whose indices are defined by Γ , while ( A ) Γ denotes a sub-matrix of A with column indices defined by Γ .

## II. SYSTEM MODEL

## A. Massive MIMO in the Downlink

In a typical massive MIMO system, the BS employing M antennas simultaneously serves K single-antenna users [2], where M ≫ K . For the subchannel at the n th subcarrier, where 1 ≤ n ≤ N and N is the size of the OFDM symbol, the received signal y k,n of the k th user can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where h k,n ∈ C M × 1 denotes the downlink channel between the k th user and the M antennas at the BS, x n ∈ C M × 1 is the transmitted signal after precoding, and w k,n is the associated additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). The received signal of the K users y n = [ y 1 ,n y 2 ,n · · · y K,n ] T ∈ C K × 1 can be collected together as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in which H n = [ h 1 ,n h 2 ,n · · · h K,n ] T ∈ C K × M is the downlink channel matrix, and w n = [ w 1 ,n w 2 ,n · · · w K,n ] T ∈ C K × 1 is the corresponding AWGN vector.

## B. Massive MIMO Channels in Virtual Angular Domain

We model the channel vector h k,n by using the virtual angular domain representation [18], [19]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the user index k in y k,n , h k,n and w k,n is dropped to simplify the notations, while h T n = ˜ h T n A ∗ B and A B ∈ C M × M is the unitary matrix representing the transformation matrix of the virtual angular domain at the BS side. A B is determined by the geometrical structure of the BS's antenna array.

Fig. 1. Channel vector representation in the virtual angular domain, where the BS employs the ULA with half wave-length spacing, M = 8 , and two clusters of scatterers are considered as an example.

<!-- image -->

To intuitively explain the channel vector ˜ h n , a simple example is illustrated in Fig. 1, where the BS employs the uniform linear array (ULA) with the antenna spacing of d = λ/ 2 and λ is the wave-length. In this case, A B becomes the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) matrix [19]. The channel vector in the virtual angular domain then simply means to 'sample' the channel in the angular domain at equi-spaced angular intervals at the BS side, or equivalently to represent the channel in the virtual angular domain coordinates. More specifically, the m th element of ˜ h n is the channel gain consisting of the aggregation of all the paths, whose transmit/receive directions are within an angular window around the m th angular coordinate [19].

As the BS is usually elevated high with few scatterers around, while users are located at low elevation with relatively rich local scatterers, the angle spread at the BS side is small [4], [16], [17]. Since the angle spread is limited at the BS, a small part of the elements in ˜ h n contain almost all the multipath signals reflected, diffracted, or refracted by scatterers around the user. If we take the typical angular-domain spread of 10 ◦ and the ULA with M = 128 as an example [4], the uniformly virtual angular domain sampling interval is ϕ s = 180 ◦ /M = 1 . 406 ◦ [18], and the vast majority of the channel energy is concentrated on around 8 = ⌈ 10 ◦ / 1 . 406 ◦ ⌉ virtual angular domain coordinates, which is far smaller than the total dimension M = 128 of the channel vector. Consequently, ˜ h n exhibits the sparsity [19], namely,

where Θ n is the support set, and S a is the sparsity level.

Moreover, since the spatial propagation characteristics of the channels within the system bandwidth (e.g. 10 MHz in typical LTE-A systems) are almost unchanged, the subchannels associated with different subcarriers share very similar scatterers in the propagation environment [19]. Hence the small angle spreads of the subchannels within the system bandwidth are very similar. Consequently, { ˜ h n } N n =1 have the common sparsity, namely,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig. 2. The virtual angular-domain channel vectors within the system bandwidth exhibit the common sparsity.

<!-- image -->

## C. Temporal Correlation of Wireless Channels

Since the user mobility is not very high in massive MIMO systems, the channels remain static for the duration of a block that consists of J consecutive time slots, while the channels change from block to block. Here, one time slot represents one OFDM symbol. This block fading implies that h ( q,t ) n = h ( q ) n for 1 ≤ t ≤ J , where h ( q,t ) n is the channel at the t th time slot of the q th block and h ( q ) n denotes the quasi-static channel in the q th block. Similarly, there exists the quasi-static relationship

˜ h ( q,t ) n = ˜ h ( q ) n for 1 ≤ t ≤ J , with ˜ h ( q,t ) n and ˜ h ( q ) n being the virtual angular representations of h ( q,t ) n and h ( q ) n , respectively.

For massive MIMO channels, J &lt; M due to the limited coherence time and the large number of BS antennas. For example, consider massive MIMO systems with: the carrier frequency f c = 2 GHz, the system bandwidth B s = 10 MHz, the OFDM size N = 2048 , the number of BS antennas M = 128 , and the maximum delay spread τ max = 6 . 4 µ s (need the guard interval N g = 64 ) [2], [20]. Suppose that the maximum mobile velocity of the supported users is v = 36 km/h. Then the maximum Doppler frequency shift is f d = vf c /c = 66 . 67 Hz, where c is the velocity of electromagnetic wave. Hence the coherence time T c = √ 9 / (16 πf 2 d ) ≈ 6 . 3 ms [21], or the coherence time slots J = T c B s / ( N + N g ) ≈ 30 , which is much smaller than M .

Since the channels change from block to block, they must be estimated in every time block, which may impose very high complexity and overhead. Fortunately, experiments and theoretical analysis have shown that although the channels vary continuously from one block to another, the variation rate of the channel angle spread is much lower than that of the associated channel gains [18]. This implies that

where Q is the number of consecutive time blocks over the duration of which the common support of virtual angular domain channels holds. For the example of Fig. 1, assume that the distance between the BS and the user is L BU = 250 m and v = 36 km / h . Further assume the case of the mobile direction of the user being perpendicular to the direction connecting the BS and the user. Then, over the duration of Q = 5 successive time blocks, the maximum variance in the virtual angular domain is around θ ∆ = arctan( QT c v/L BU ) ≈ 0 . 072 ◦ . Such a small variance of the angle spread is negligible, compared to the resolution of the virtual angular domain ϕ s = 1 . 406 ◦ . If v &lt; 36 km / h and/or the mobile direction of the user is not perpendicular to the direction connecting the BS and the user, Q can be larger than 5.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Challenges of Channel Estimation and Feedback

Consider the downlink channel estimation in the q th time block. To reliably estimate the channel of the n th subcarrier, the user should jointly utilize the received pilot signals over several successive time slots, say, G time slots, for channel estimation. Let y ( q,t ) n be the received pilot of (3) at the n th subcarrier in the t th time slot, and y ( q,t ) n for 1 ≤ t ≤ G can be collected together in the vector y [ q,G ] n = [ y ( q, 1) n y ( q, 2) n · · · y ( q,G ) n ] T ∈ C G × 1 . Then y [ q,G ] n = X [ q,G ] n h ( q ) n + w [ q,G ] n , (7)

where X [ q,G ] n = [ x ( q, 1) n x ( q, 2) n · · · x ( q,G ) n ] T ∈ C G × M with x ( q,t ) n ∈ C M × 1 being the transmitted pilot signals in the t th time slot, and w [ q,G ] n = [ w ( q, 1) n w ( q, 2) n · · · w ( q,G ) n ] T ∈ C G × 1 is the corresponding AWGN vector. To accurately estimate the channel from (7), the value of G used in conventional algorithms, such as the minimum mean square error (MMSE) algorithm, is heavily dependent on the value of M . Usually, G can be larger than J , which leads to the poor channel estimation performance [10]. Moreover, to minimize the mean square error (MSE) of the channel estimate, X [ q,G ] n should be a unitary matrix scaled by a transmit power factor [10]. Usually, X [ q,G ] n is a diagonal matrix with equal-power diagonal elements. Such a pilot design is illustrated in Fig. ?? (a), which is called the time-domain orthogonal pilot. It should be pointed out that in MIMO-OFDM systems, to estimate the channel associated with one transmit antenna, P pilot subcarriers should be used, and usually P = N g is considered since N c = N/N g adjacent subcarriers are correlated [10]. Hence the total pilot overhead to estimate the complete MIMO channel is P total = PG = N g M . Similarly, LTE-A adopts the time-frequency orthogonal pilots as shown in Fig. ?? (b), which also needs P total = PM = N g M . These two kinds of orthogonal pilots are equivalent, since both of them are based on the framework of Nyquist sampling theorem and have the same pilot overhead. Hence we only consider the time-domain orthogonal pilot in this paper, and we will propose an efficient non-orthogonal pilot scheme.

Codebook based channel feedback schemes are widely adopted in small-scale MIMO systems. However, to obtain the fine-grain spatial channel structures in massive MIMO systems, the codebook size can be huge. Moreover, the storage and encoding of large dimension codebook at the user is challenging. To overcome this difficulty, we combine the channel estimation and feedback, whereby the CSI acquisition is mainly realized at the BS which has sufficient computation capability. By exploiting the spatially common sparsity and temporal correlation of massive MIMO channels, the proposed scheme can significantly reduce the required overhead and complexity for channel estimation and feedback.

## III. SPATIALLY COMMON SPARSITY BASED ADAPTIVE CHANNEL ESTIMATION AND FEEDBACK SCHEME

The procedure of the proposed adaptive channel estimation and feedback scheme is first summarized.

Step 1 : In each time slot, the BS transmits a non-orthogonal pilot to the user, and the user directly feeds back the received pilot signal to the BS. Except for Step 4 , the pilot signal is designed in advance.

Step 2 : The BS uses the proposed DSAMP algorithm to jointly reconstruct multiple sparse virtual angular domain channels of high dimension from the feedback signals of low dimension collected in multiple time slots.

Step 3 : The BS judges the reliability of the estimated sparse channels according to a pre-specified criterion. If the given criterion is met, the BS stops transmitting pilot in the following time slots, and the acquired CSI at the BS is used for precoding and user scheduling in the current time block. Otherwise, the BS goes back to Step 1 until the feedback signals are sufficient for acquiring the reliable CSI.

Step 4 : Since the BS has acquired the estimated support set ̂ Θ and the estimated sparsity level ̂ S a , it can directly use the LS algorithm to estimate the channels in every time block of the following Q -1 blocks. Here, the time slot overhead required in Step 1 can be reduced to G = ̂ S a , and the pilot signals can be adaptively adjusted according to ̂ Θ for further improving performance.

It is seen that the proposed adaptive channel estimation and feedback scheme consists of two stages: the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition in the q th time block, which includes Step 1 to Step 3 , and the following closed-loop channel tracking in the following Q -1 time blocks, which includes Step 1 and Step 4 . We now detail all the key technical components.

## A. Non-Orthogonal Pilot for Downlink Channel Estimation

The proposed non-orthogonal pilot scheme is illustrated in Fig. ?? (c). Similar to the time-domain orthogonal pilot scheme, P subcarriers are dedicated to pilots in each OFDM symbol. However, the proposed scheme allows the non-orthogonal pilot signals associated with different BS antennas to occupy the completely identical frequency-domain subcarriers.

The orthogonal pilot based conventional designs usually require G ≥ M . By contrast, the proposed non-orthogonal pilot for CS based adaptive CSI acquisition is capable of providing the efficient compression and reliable recovery of sparse signals. Therefore, G is mainly determined by S a ≪ M . The non-orthogonal pilot of the first stage is designed in advance, which will be discussed in Section IV-A. According to the CSI acquired in the first stage, the non-orthogonal pilot used for closed-loop channel tracking is adaptively designed to minimize both G and the MSE performance of CSI acquisition, which will be illustrated in Section III-D.

For the placement of pilot subcarriers, the widely used equi-spaced pilot is considered, and the specific reason is given in Section IV-C. For convenience, we denote Ω ξ = { ξ 1 , ξ 2 , · · · , ξ P } as the index set of the pilot subcarriers, where ξ p for 1 ≤ p ≤ P denotes the subcarrier index dedicated to the p th pilot subcarrier. It is worth pointing out that the p th pilot subcarrier is shared by the pilot signals of the M transmit antennas as illustrated in Fig. ?? (c).

## B. CS Based Adaptive CSI Acquisition Scheme

In the q th time block, as indicated in Step 1 , the user directly feeds back the received pilot signals to the BS without performing downlink channel estimation where the feedback channel can be considered as the AWGN channel [12]-[15]. According to (7), at the BS, the fed back signal 1 (at the ξ p th subcarrier) in the t th time slot can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r ( q,t ) p = y ( q,t ) ξ p is the p th feedback pilot signal in the t th time slot, ¯ h ( q ) p = ˜ h ( q ) ξ p is the virtual angular domain channel vector associated with the p th pilot subcarrier, s ( q,t ) p = x ( q,t ) ξ p is

1 The delay of the feedback signal is negligible, compared with the relatively long channel coherence time.

## Algorithm 1 CS Based Adaptive CSI Acquisition Scheme

- 1: Determine the initial time slot overhead G 0 , and set the iteration index i = 0 .
- 2: repeat
- 3: Collect r [ q,G i ] p and Φ [ q,G i ] p in (9) for given G i , 1 ≤ p ≤ P . % G i is the required overhead at the i th iteration. ( q )
- 5: G i +1 = G i +1 ; i = i +1 . 6: until P ∑ p =1 ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ r [ q,G i -1 ] p -Φ [ q,G i -1 ] p ̂ ¯ h ( q ) p ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 2 / ( PG i -1 ) ≤ ε . % If the error is smaller than the threshold ε , end repeat; otherwise, continue transmitting the pilot in the next time slot.
- 4: Acquire the channel vectors ̂ ¯ h p ∀ p by using the proposed DSAMP algorithm (Algorithm 2).
- 7: G 0 = G i -1 . % Optional, determine the initial time slot overhead for the next CS based adaptive CSI acquisition.

the pilot signal vector transmitted by the M BS antennas, and v ( q,t ) p = w ( q,t ) ξ p is the effective noise which aggregates both the downlink channel's AWGN and feedback channel's AWGN.

Due to the quasi-static property of the channel during one time block, the feedback signals in G successive time slots can be jointly exploited to acquire the downlink CSI at the BS, which can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for 1 ≤ p ≤ P , where r [ q,G ] p = [ r ( q, 1) p r ( q, 2) p · · · r ( q,G ) p ] T , S [ q,G ] p = [ s ( q, 1) p s ( q, 2) p · · · s ( q,G ) p ] T ∈ C G × M , v [ q,G ] p = [ v ( q, 1) p v ( q, 2) p · · · v ( q,G ) p ] T and Φ [ q,G ] p = S [ q,G ] p ( A ∗ B ) T ∈ C G × M . The system's signal noise ratio (SNR) is defined as SNR = E {∥ ∥ ∥ Φ [ q,G ] p ¯ h ( q ) p ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 2 }/ E {∥ ∥ ∥ v [ q,G ] p ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 2 } , according to (9). By exploiting the spatially common sparsity within the system bandwidth, the proposed DSAMP algorithm can reconstruct the sparse angular domain channels of multiple pilot subcarriers, as will be detailed in Section III-C.

For practical massive MIMO systems, the sparsity level S a of the channels in the virtual angular domain can be timevarying. If S a is relatively small, a small time slot overhead G is sufficient to acquire an accurate CSI estimate, while if S a is relatively large, a large G is required to guarantee the reliable sparse signal recovery. We propose the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition as presented in Algorithm 1, which can adaptively adjust G to acquire the reliable CSI at the BS efficiently.

At the first CS based adaptive CSI acquisition, we need to empirically determine the initial time slot overhead G 0 . Since the typical angle spread is about 10 ◦ [4], for massive MIMO with M = 128 , the effective sparsity level S a = 8 . Thus, we may set G 0 = 8 to start. Given G i , the DSAMP algorithm (Algorithm 2) acquires the set of channel vectors ̂ ¯ h ( q ) p ∀ p . If ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ r [ q,G i ] p -Φ [ q,G i ] p ̂ ¯ h ( q ) p ∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 2 / ( PG i ) is larger than the predefined threshold ε , the sparse signal recovery is judged to be unreliable. Hence, the training time slots increase by one, and a set of the feedback pilot signals and transmitted pilot signals, r ( q,G i +1 ) p and s ( q,G i +1 ) p ∀ p , are collected in the ( G i +1 ) th time slot, which are combined with the previously collected r [ q,G i ] p and Φ [ q,G i ] p to enlarge the dimension of the measurement vectors sequentially, yielding

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to improve the channel estimation. Furthermore, an appropriate initial time slot overhead for the next CS based adaptive CSI acquisition is automatically determined at the end.

## C. Proposed DSAMP Algorithm for Channel Estimation

Given the measurements (9), the CSI can be acquired by solving the following optimization

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The DSAMP algorithm, listed in Algorithm 2, is used to solve the optimization (10) to simultaneously acquire multiple sparse channel vectors at different pilot subcarriers. This algorithm is developed from the SAMP algorithm [22]. Specifically, for each stage with the fixed sparsity level T , line 8 selects the T potential non-zero elements; line 9 estimates the values associated with the support set Ω i -1 ∪ Γ using LS; line 10 selects T most likely supports. Lines 7 ∼ 12 and line 21 together aim to find T virtual angular domain coordinates which contain most of the channel energy. In particular, Lines 7 ∼ 12 remove wrong indices added in the previous iteration and add the indices associated with the potential true indices. If line 18 is triggered, the algorithm updates T and begins a new stage. The algorithm is halted when the stopping criteria, indicated in lines 14 ∼ 17 and line 23 , are met.

Compared to the classical SAMP algorithm [22] which recovers one high-dimensional sparse signal from single lowdimensional received signal, the proposed DSAMP algorithm can simultaneously recover multiple high-dimensional sparse signals with the common support set by jointly processing multiple low-dimensional received signals. In terms of termination condition, the SAMP algorithm stops the iteration once the residual is smaller than a threshold p th . By contrast, the proposed DSAMP algorithm has two halting criteria. Specifically, if the energy associated with one virtual angular coordinate in the estimated support set is smaller than p th or the residual of the current stage is larger than that of the previous stage, the algorithm stops. The proposed halting criteria ensure the robust signal recovery performance, which will be discussed in Section IV-D2 and confirmed by simulations.

By using the DSAMP algorithm at the BS, we can acquire the estimates of the virtual angular domain channels at the pilot subcarriers, i.e., ̂ ¯ h ( q ) p for 1 ≤ p ≤ P . Consequently, the

## Algorithm 2 Proposed DSAMP Algorithm

- Input: Noisy feedback signals r [ q,G ] p and sensing matrices Φ [ q,G ] p in (10), 1 ≤ p ≤ P ; termination threshold p th .
- Output: Estimated channel vectors in the virtual angular domain at multiple pilot subcarriers ̂ ¯ h ( q ) p , ∀ p .
- 1: T = 1 ; i = 1 ; j = 1 . % T , i , j are the sparsity level of the current stage, iteration index, and stage index, respectively.
- 2: c p = t p = c last p = 0 ∈ C M × 1 , ∀ p . % c p and t p are intermediate variables, and c last p is the channel estimation of the last stage.
- 3: Ω 0 =Γ= ˜ Γ=Ω= ˜ Ω= ∅ ; l min = ˜ l =0 . % Ω i is the estimated support set in the i th iteration, Γ , ˜ Γ , Ω , and ˜ Ω are sets, l min and ˜ l denote the support indexes.
- 4: b 0 p = r [ q,G ] p ∈ C G × 1 , ∀ p . % b i p is the residual of the i th iteration. 5: ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ b last p ∥ ∥ 2 2 = + ∞ . % b last p is the residual of the last stage. 6: repeat 7: a p = ( Φ [ q,G ] p ) ∗ b i -1 p , ∀ p . % Signal proxy is saved in a p . 8: Γ=argmax ˜ Γ { ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ ( a p ) ˜ Γ ∥ ∥ 2 2 , ∣ ∣ ∣ ˜ Γ ∣ ∣ ∣ = T } . % Identify support. 9: ( t p ) Ω i -1 ∪ Γ = (( Φ [ q,G ] p ) Ω i -1 ∪ Γ ) † r [ q,G ] p , ∀ p . % LS estimation. 10: Ω=argmax ˜ Ω { ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ ( t p ) ˜ Ω ∥ ∥ 2 2 , ∣ ∣ ∣ ˜ Ω ∣ ∣ ∣ = T } . % Prune support. 11: ( c p ) Ω = (( Φ [ q,G ] p ) Ω ) † r [ q,G ] p , ∀ p . % LS estimation. 12: b p = r [ q,G ] p -Φ [ q,G ] p c p , ∀ p . % Compute the residual. 13: l min = arg min ˜ l { ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ [ c p ] ˜ l ∥ ∥ 2 2 , ˜ l ∈ Ω } . % Find the support of the minimum average energy according to the estimated c p .

% Support index cluded in Ω .

- 14: if ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ ∥ [ c p ] l min ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 2 /P &lt; p th then 15: Quit iteration. associated with AWGN may be in-

16:

17:

- 18: else if ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ b i -1 p ∥ ∥ 2 2 ≤ ∑ P p =1 ‖ b p ‖ 2 2 then 19: j = j +1 ; T = j ; c last = c , b last = b , ∀ p .
- else if ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ b last p ∥ ∥ 2 2 &lt; ∑ P p =1 ‖ b p ‖ 2 2 then Quit iteration. % Larger residual of the current stage than that of the last stage indicates that it is unnecessary to continue the iteration.

p p p p % Begin a new stage. The larger residual of current iteration than that of last iteration indicates that iteration at current stage converges.

- 20: else i i
- 21: Ω = Ω ; b p = b p , ∀ p ; i = i +1 . % Continue the iteration at the current stage.
- 22: end if 23: until ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ ∥ [ c p ] l min ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 2 /P &lt; p th 24: ̂ ¯ h ( q ) p = c last p , ∀ p . % Obtain the final channel estimation.

actual channel at the ξ p th subcarrier dedicated to the p th pilot signal can be acquired according to (8), yielding

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Closed-Loop Channel Tracking with Adaptive Pilot Design

Since the channels in Q successive time blocks share the spatially common sparsity, in the following Q -1 time blocks, we can use the simple LS algorithm to estimate the channels at the BS from the feedback pilot signals by utilizing the estimated support set ̂ Θ = supp ( ̂ ¯ h ( q ) p ) and the sparsity level ̂ S a = ∣ ∣̂ Θ ∣ ∣ acquired in the q th time block. Specifically, for the q b th time block, where q +1 ≤ q b ≤ q + Q -1 , the BS first transmits a non-orthogonal pilot to the user, and the user again directly feeds back the received pilot signal to the BS. At the BS, similar to (9), the feedback pilot signal associated with the p th pilot subcarrier r [ q b ,G ] p can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S [ q b ,G ] p , ¯ h ( q b ) p and v [ q b ,G ] p are the pilot signal matrix, virtual angular domain channel, and effective noise in the q b th time block, respectively. If Θ and S a are known, the CSI can be acquired using the LS algorithm as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As will be shown in Section IV-F, to acquire the estimate of ¯ h ( q b ) p , the required time slot overhead can be reduced to S a . Moreover, the non-orthogonal pilot used for channel tracking (for the time blocks of q +1 ≤ q b ≤ q + Q -1 ) is very different from that used in the q th time block. Specifically, to minimize the MSE performance of the channel estimation with G = S a , ( Φ [ q b ,G ] p ) Θ should be a unitary matrix scaled by a power factor √ G . Therefore, for the closed-loop channel tracking, we can design the non-orthogonal pilot signal to guarantee this condition, and reduce G to S a while attaining the best MSE performance for the channel estimation. Specifically, let G = S a and U S a ∈ C S a × S a be a unitary matrix. Then

which is an unbiased estimator for ¯ h ( q b ) p that is capable of approaching the CRLB [23]. The BS can use ̂ Θ and ̂ S a , obtained in the q th time block, to calculate this LS estimate.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which yields the required non-orthogonal pilot matrix S [ q b ,G ] p = √ G U S a (( ( A ∗ B ) T ) Θ ) † .

## IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

The performance analysis of the proposed scheme includes: 1) the non-orthogonal pilot design for the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition; 2) the theoretical limit of the required time slot overhead for the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition; 3) the placement of pilot subcarriers; 4) the computational complexity and convergence of the DSAMP algorithm; 5) the performance bound of the proposed scheme; 6) the required time slot overhead and the performance analysis for the adaptive non-orthogonal pilot based closed-loop channel tracking; and 7) the selection of thresholds for Algorithms 1 and 2.

## A. Non-Orthogonal Pilot Design for CS based Adaptive CSI Acquisition

In the q th time block, the measurement matrices Φ [ q,G ] p ∀ p in (9) are very important for guaranteeing the reliable CSI acquisition at the BS. Usually, G ≪ M . Since Φ [ q,G ] p = S [ q,G ] p ( A ∗ B ) T and A B is determined by the geometrical structure of the antenna array at the BS, the pilot signals S [ q,G ] p ∀ p transmitted by the BS should be designed to guarantee the desired robust channel estimation and feedback.

1) Restricted Isometry Property (RIP): In CS theory, RIP is used to evaluate the quality of the measurement matrix, in terms of the reliable compression and reconstruction of sparse signals. It is proven in [24] that the measurement matrix with its elements following the independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) complex Gaussian distributions satisfies the RIP and enjoys a satisfying performance in compressing and recovering sparse signals.

2) Processing Multiple Measurement Vectors in Parallel: The optimization problem (10) is essentially different from the single-measurement-vector (SMV) and MMV problems in CS.

The SMV recovers single high-dimensional sparse signal f from its low-dimensional measurement signal d , which may be formulated as d = Φf , where Φ ∈ C D × F , D &lt; F , and the support set Ξ = supp { f } with the sparsity level | Ξ | = S ≪ F .

By contrast, our problem (10) can jointly reconstruct multiple high-dimensional sparse signals with the common support set but having different measurement matrices, i.e.,

On the other hand, the MMV can simultaneously recover multiple high-dimensional sparse signals with the common support set and common measurement matrix from multiple low-dimensional measurement signals, which may be formulated as D = ΦF , with D = [ d 1 d 2 · · · d L ] , F = [ f 1 f 2 · · · f L ] , supp { f 1 } = supp { f 2 } = · · · = supp { f L } = Ξ , and the sparsity level | Ξ | = S .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Φ l ∈ C D × F , ∀ l . Therefore, our problem can be regarded as the GMMV problem, which includes the SMV and MMV problems as its special cases. Specifically, if the multiple measurement matrices are identical, our GMMV becomes the conventional MMV, and furthermore if L = 1 , it reduces to the conventional SMV.

Typically, the MMV has the better recovery performance than the SMV, due to the potential diversity from multiple sparse signals [24]. Intuitively, the recovery performance of multiple sparse signals with different measurement matrices, as defined in the GMMV, should be better than that with the common measurement matrix as given in the MMV. This is because the further potential diversity can benefit from different measurement matrices for the GMMV. To prove this, we investigate the uniqueness of the solution to the GMMV problem. First, we introduce the concept of 'spark' and the ℓ 0 -minimization based GMMV problem associated with (15).

Definition 1. [24] The smallest number of columns of Φ which are linearly dependent is the spark of the given matrix Φ , denoted by spark( Φ ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the above ℓ 0 -minimization based GMMV problem, the following result can be obtained.

Theorem 1. For Φ l , 1 ≤ l ≤ L , whose elements obey an i.i.d. continuous distribution, there exist full rank matrices Ψ l for 2 ≤ l ≤ L satisfying ( Φ l ) Ξ = Ψ l ( Φ 1 ) Ξ if we select ( Φ 1 ) Ξ as the bridge, where Ξ is the common support set. Consequently, f l for 1 ≤ l ≤ L will be the unique solution to Problem 1 if where ˜ D = d 1 Ψ -1 2 d 2 · · · Ψ -1 L d L . Proof. Consider (15) with Φ l ∈ C D × F for 1 ≤ l ≤ L , whose elements follow an i.i.d. continuous distribution. The common support set is Ξ = supp { f l } with the sparsity level | Ξ | = S . This GMMV can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The random matrix Z l = ( Φ l ) Ξ ∈ C D × S is a tall matrix, as D &gt; S . Clearly, rank { Z l } = S with high probability, since the measure of the set { Z l ∈ Ω Z : rank { Z l } &lt; S } is zero [25]. If we take ( Φ 1 ) Ξ as the bridge, then there exist the full rank matrices Ψ l , 2 ≤ l ≤ L , satisfying ( Φ l ) Ξ = Ψ l ( Φ 1 ) Ξ , and thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this way, the GMMV is converted to the 'equivalent' MMV

˜ D = Φ 1 F , (19) where F = [ f 1 f 2 · · · f L ] . Applying the existing result for the MMV given in [26], (16) can be directly obtained.

From Theorem 1, it is clear that the achievable diversity gain introduced by diversifying measurement matrices and sparse vectors is determined by rank { ˜ D } . The larger rank { ˜ D } is, the more reliable recovery of sparse signals can be achieved. Hence, compared to the SMV and MMV, more reliable recovery performance can be achieved by the proposed GMMV. For the special case that multiple sparse signals are identical, the MMVreduces to the SMV since rank( D ) = 1 , and there is no diversity gain by introducing multiple identical sparse signals. However, the GMMV in this case can still achieve diversity gain which comes from diversifying measurement matrices.

3) Pilot Design for CS Based Adaptive CSI Acquisition: According to the above discussions, a measurement matrix whose elements follow an i.i.d. Gaussian distribution satisfies the RIP. Furthermore, diversifying measurement matrices can further improve the recovery performance of sparse signals. This enlightens us to appropriately design pilot signals.

Specifically, each element of pilot signals is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S [ q,G ] p ∈ C G × M , and each θ t,m,p has the i.i.d. uniform distribution in [0 , 2 π ) , namely, the i.i.d. U [0 , 2 π ) . Note that the pilot signals for the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition are fixed once they have been designed. Moreover, when designing the pilot signals, the worst case of G = M has to be considered. It is readily seen that the designed pilot signals (20) guarantee that the elements of Φ [ q,G ] p of (10), ∀ p , obey the i.i.d. complex Gaussian distribution with zero mean and unit variance, i.e., the i.i.d. CN (0 , 1) . Hence, the proposed pilot signal design is 'optimal', in terms of the reliable compression and recovery of sparse angular domain channels.

B. Time Slot Overhead for CS based Adaptive CSI Acquisition

According to Theorem 1, for the optimization problem (10), ˜ D = Φ [ q,G ] 1 F with ˜ D = [ r [ q,G ] 1 Ψ -1 2 r [ q,G ] 2 · · · Ψ -1 P r [ q,G ] P ] and F = [ ¯ h ( q ) 1 ¯ h ( q ) 2 · · · ¯ h ( q ) P ] . Since ∣ ∣ supp { ¯ h ( q ) p }∣ ∣ = S a , it is clear that

Moreover, as Φ [ q,G ] 1 ∈ C G × M ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting (21) and (22) into (16) yields G ≥ S a +1 . Therefore, the smallest required time slot overhead is G = S a +1 . As discussed in Section III-B, an appropriate value of G that ensures the reliable CSI acquisition is adaptively determined by Algorithm 1. By increasing the number of measurement vectors P , the required time slot overhead for reliable channel estimation can be reduced, since more measurement matrices and sparse signals can increase rank { ˜ D } .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## C. Frequency-Domain Placement of Pilot Signals

Like any OFDM channel estimator, the proposed adaptive channel estimation and feedback scheme only estimates the channels at pilot subcarriers. Channels at data subcarriers are usually acquired based on the estimated channels at pilot subcarriers by using the off-the-shelf interpolation algorithms [21]. Clearly the frequency-domain placement of pilot signals Ω ξ significantly influences the achievable performance of an interpolation algorithm. Additionally, due to the frequencydomain correlation of wireless channels, the channels of adjacent subcarriers exhibit strong correlation. Hence, two adjacent subcarriers both dedicated to the pilot may result in ˜ D to be rank deficient. We adopt the widely used uniformly-spacing pilot placement with the spacing equal to the coherence bandwidth [21], which can reduce the correlation between different virtual angular domain channels, so that more diversity gain from the multiple sparse channels can be achieved.

## D. Performance Analysis of Proposed DSAMP Algorithm

1) Complexity: The computational complexity of the proposed DSAMP algorithm (Algorithm 2) in each iteration mainly depends on the following operations.

Signal proxy ( line 7 ): The matrix-vector multiplication involved has the complexity on the order of O ( PMG ) .

Identifying or Pruning ( lines 8 and 10 ): The cost to locate the largest T entries of a sizeM vector is O ( M ) [24].

ℓ 2 -norm operation ( lines 8, 10, 13, 14, 16, 18 , and 23 ): The computational complexity is O ( P ) .

LS operation ( lines 9 and 11 ): LS solution has the computational complexity on the order of O ( P (2 G T 2 + T 3 ) ) due to the joint recovery of P sparse signals [27].

Obviously the matrix inversion implemented in Algorithm 2 for LS operation contributes to most of the computational complexity. Table I compares the complexity of the proposed

Residual computation ( line 12 ): The complexity of computing the residual is O ( PMG ) .

TABLE I COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY TO ESTIMATE ONE SPARSE SIGNAL

| Algorithm  Number of complex multiplications in each iteration  OMP  2  GM  +  M  +2  Gi  2  +  i  3  SP  2  GM  +  G  +  M  +2  S  a  +2(2  GS  2  a  +  S  3  a  )  SAMP  2  GM  +  G  +  M  +3  S  a  +2(2  Gj  2  +  j  3  )  DSAMP  2  GM  +  G  +  M  +3  S  a  +2(2  Gj  2  +  j  3  )   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Note: i denotes the iteration index, and j denotes the stage index.

DSAMP algorithm, classical OMP algorithm, SP algorithm [24], and SAMP algorithm, in terms of the number of required complex multiplications in each iteration to estimate one sparse signal. It is clear that the four algorithms have the same order of computational complexity.

2) Stopping Criteria: For the conventional SAMP algorithm, the iterative procedure stops when the residual is less than a given threshold. By contrast, the proposed DSAMP algorithm has two halting criteria, and meeting either of them will trigger the termination of the iterative procedure. Regarding the first halting criterion, when the average energy of the wireless channels at a certain virtual angular coordinate is lower than the noise floor ( lines 14 and 23 ), the iterative procedure stops. When the residual of the current stage becomes larger than that of the previous stage ( line 16 ), the second halting criterion is met and the algorithm also terminates.

Due to S a ≪ M , after coordinates accounting for the majority of the channel energy is achieved, the next iteration will include a virtual angular coordinate that is dominated by the AWGN. The energy of such a new coordinate is usually lower than the noise floor. The first stopping criterion is designed to detect this situation and to terminate the algorithm when an appropriate number of virtual angular domain coordinates have been tracked.

As for the second halting criterion, the DSAMP algorithm is similar to the conventional SP algorithm in each stage with the fixed sparsity level, which can guarantee the sparse signal recovery with the exact sparsity level. The residual of the stage with the exact sparsity level is usually smaller than that with the incorrect sparsity level. Therefore, the DSAMP algorithm stops at the stage when the smallest residual is reached, which tends to be the stage associated with the exact sparsity level of the channels in the virtual angular domain.

## E. Performance Bound of Channel Estimation

By omitting q , p , and ξ p in (11) for simplicity, the variance of the channel estimation can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider the CRLB for the estimation problem associated with (9) given the true channel ¯ h and the support set Θ . Again for notational simplicity, q , G , and p in r [ q,G ] p , Φ [ q,G ] p , and v [ q,G ] p are omitted. Since the distribution of v is CN ( 0 , σ 2 I G ) , the conditional probability density function (PDF) of r given ¯ h is where σ 2 is the power of the effective noise. The element at the s i th-row and s j th-column of the Fisher information matrix I (( ¯ h ) Θ ) associated with this estimation problem is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let λ 1 , λ 2 , · · · , λ S a be the S a eigenvalues of the matrix (( Φ ) Θ ) ∗ ( Φ ) Θ ∈ C S a × S a . It is clear that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which can be calculated after the pilot signals, the geometrical structure of the BS antenna array, and the support set of the channel vectors in the virtual angular domain are given.

However, the support set Θ is 'random' since the channel vectors in practice are random and the elements of the measurement matrix Φ obey the i.i.d. CN (0 , 1) . Thus we should consider the 'expectation' of the CRLB defined by

For the matrix (( Φ ) Θ ) ∗ ( Φ ) Θ with the elements of Φ obeying the i.i.d. CN (0 , 1) , its eigenvalues { λ i } S a i =1 obey the following joint distribution [28]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, the expectation of the CRLB can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the computation of (30) can be highly complex, in practice we adopt the performance of the oracle LS estimator as the performance bound in the simulation study.

## F. Adaptive Pilot Design and Required Time Slot Overhead for Closed-Loop Channel Tracking

For the simplicity of analysis, the true support set Θ and the sparsity level S a of the virtual angular domain channels are assumed to have been acquired by the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition. Clearly, if S a is known, the smallest time slot overhead for CSI acquisition can be reduced to G = S a .

With the known Θ , by exploiting the arithmetic-harmonic means inequality [27], (27) can be further expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig. 4. The selection of threshold p th in Algorithm 2 given SNR = 15 dB and P = 64 : (a) estimated PDFs of g ρ 2 ( ρ 2 |H 0 2 , Λ ) and g ρ 2 ( ρ 2 |H 1 2 , Λ ) ; and (b) MSE performance of the DSAMP algorithm as the function of p th .

<!-- image -->

where the equality holds if and only if λ 1 = λ 2 = · · · = λ S a . This indicates that (( Φ ) Θ ) ∗ ( Φ ) Θ should be a diagonal matrix with identical diagonal elements to approach the lower bound. In particular, for ( Φ ) Θ with Tr { (( Φ ) Θ ) ∗ ( Φ ) Θ } = S a G ,

and the lower bound of (32) is attained if ( Φ ) Θ is a unitary matrix scaled by the factor √ G . This has inspired us to design the pilot signal matrix as S = √ G U S a (( ( A ∗ B ) T ) Θ ) † , where U S a ∈ C S a × S a is a unitary matrix. With this nonorthogonal pilot matrix, the lower bound of (32) is attained, i.e., var { ̂ ¯ h } = σ 2 S a /G = σ 2 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## G. Selection of Thresholds for Algorithms 1 and 2

1) p th in Algorithm 2: Consider the case Λ that for the stage of T = S a +1 in Algorithm 2, the final estimated support set, denoted as ̂ Ω T , is the proper superset of the true support set Θ , i.e., ̂ Ω T ⫌ Θ . This case implies that ̂ Ω T includes the support index associated with the noise. Define the test statistic as ρ 2 = ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ [ c p ] ˜ l ∥ ∥ 2 2 / P with ˜ l ∈ ̂ Ω T ( lines 13 and 14 in Algorithm 2). Two complete hypotheses for the case Λ are defined as: H 0 2 , indicating ˜ l ∈ Θ , and H 1 2 , indicating ˜ l / ∈ Θ . Furthermore, denote the PDFs of ρ 2 under H 0 2 and H 1 2 as g ρ 2 ( ρ 2 |H 0 2 , Λ ) and g ρ 2 ( ρ 2 |H 1 2 , Λ ) , respectively. By using the ksdensity function of MATLAB, we can obtain the estimated PDFs according to Monte-Carlo simulations, since the closedform expressions are difficult to obtain.

Fig. 4 (a) depicts the estimated PDFs of g ρ 2 ( ρ 2 |H 0 2 , Λ ) and g ρ 2 ( ρ 2 |H 1 2 , Λ ) with typical values of S a and G , given SNR = 15 dB and P = 64 . Fig. 4 (b) provides the MSE performance of Algorithm 2 as the function of p th , which indicates that p th = 0 . 02 achieves good MSE performance given typical values of S a and G . Following a similar procedure, suitable values of p th for different SNRs can be obtained.

2) ε in Algorithm 1: Consider the test statistic ρ 1 = ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ ∥ r [ q,G ] p -Φ [ q,G ] p ̂ ¯ h ( q ) p ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 2 / ( GP ) ( line 6 in Algorithm 1 with iteration index i omitted) and the two complete hypotheses H 0 1 and H 1 1 , where H 0 1 indicates that the support set of { ̂ ¯ h ( q ) p } P p =1 is correct, and H 1 1 is complementary to H 0 1 . Under H 0 1 , ρ 1 = ∑ P p =1 ∥ ∥ ∥ ( I -Φ ) Θ (( Φ ) Θ ) † ) v [ q,G ] p ∥ ∥ ∥ 2 2 / ( GP ) . However, under H 1 1 , the closed-form expression of ρ 1 is difficult to derive. Similar to Fig. 4, Fig. 5(a) provides the estimates of the PDF g ρ 1 ( ρ 1 |H 0 1 ) with typical values of S a and G , given SNR = 15 dB, G 0 = 10 and P = 64 . According to Neyman-Pearson criterion [23], an appropriate threshold ε should minimize the probability of false alarm given the probability of miss. Fig. 5 (b) depicts the simulated probability of false alarm Pr ( H 1 1 |H 0 1 ) and the miss probability Pr ( H 0 1 |H 1 1 ) of Algorithm 1 as the functions of ε , where p th = 0 . 02 is used in the simulation. The results of Fig. 5 (b) indicate that ε = 0 . 03 minimizes both Pr ( H 1 1 |H 0 1 ) and Pr ( H 0 1 |H 1 1 ) given typical values of S a and G . Similarly, appropriate values of ε for different SNRs can be obtained.

Fig. 5. The selection of threshold ε in Algorithm 1 given SNR = 15 dB, G 0 = 10 , and P = 64 : (a) estimated PDF of g ρ 1 ( ρ 1 |H 0 1 ) ; and (b) Pr ( H 1 1 |H 0 1 ) and Pr ( H 0 1 |H 1 1 ) as the functions of ε .

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6. Performance comparison of different CS algorithms as functions of the sparsity level S a given G = 30 , P = 64 and SNR = 20 dB: (a) MSE performance, and (b) computational complexity.

<!-- image -->

## V. SIMULATION RESULTS

Massive MIMO system with the ULA of M = 128 antennas and d = λ/ 2 was considered. The spatial angle spread varied from 10 ◦ to 20 ◦ [4], [16], and thus the effective sparsity level in the virtual angular domain S a was in the range of 8 to 14. In the simulations, f c = 2 GHz, B s = 10 MHz, N = 2048 , and v = 36 km/h, while the channels in the virtual angular domain exhibited the spatially common sparsity over Q = 5 time blocks. The length of the guard interval was 64, which indicates that the system can combat the maximum delay spread of 6 . 4 µ s [20], and thus we adopted P = 64 [10]. The threshold parameters, ε in Algorithm 1 and p th in Algorithm 2, were selected according to Section IV-G. Specifically, we set p th to 0.06, 0.02, 0.01, 0.008, and 0.005, while ε to 0.08, 0.03, 0.0.09, 0.003, and 0.001, respectively, at the SNR of 10dB, 15dB, 20dB, 25dB and ≥ 30 dB. The oracle LS estimator and the CRLB were used as the benchmarks for the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition and the following closedloop channel tracking, respectively. The time slot overhead G employed in the closed-loop channel tracking scheme was set to the estimated sparsity level obtained by the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition stage. The joint OMP (J-OMP) based CSI acquisition scheme [15] was also adopted for comparison.

Fig. 6 compares the MSE performance and complexity of four CS algorithms under various sparsity levels S a . In the simulations, P =64 sparse signals with the length of M =128 had the common sparsity, the measurement dimension was G = 30 , and SNR = 20 dB, while P measurement matrices were mutually independent with elements obeying the i.i.d CN (0 , 1) . Note that the conventional OMP and SP algorithms require S a as the priori information. Fig. 6 (a) shows that the DSAMP algorithm achieves the best MSE performance and it approaches the oracle LS estimator for S a ≤ 14 2 . This is because the DSAMP algorithm jointly estimates P sparse signals by exploiting the common sparsity. Moreover, Fig. 6 (b) shows that the complexity of the DSAMP algorithm is slightly higher than those of its counterparts, but all the four CS algorithms have the same order of complexity.

We defined the sparse signal detection probability as the probability of correctly acquiring the support set of sparse signal (channel). Fig. 7 compares the detection probabilities as functions of the measurement dimension G achieved by the SMV, MMV, and GMMV in noiseless scenario. In the simulation, the length of multiple sparse signals was M = 128 with the common sparsity level S a = 8 , and the DSAMP algorithm was employed to recover sparse signals. In particular, the SMV recovers single sparse signal from single measurement matrix, and the MMV jointly recovers P sparse signals with the multiple identical measurement matrices, where the elements of the measurement matrix obey the i.i.d.

2 The DSAMP algorithm suffers from certain performance loss, compared to the oracle LS estimator in the noisy scenario with G ≤ 2 S a . For G = 2 S a , the case of Ω i -1 ∩ Γ = ∅ ( line 9 ) and Ω = Ω i -1 ( line 13 ) may repeatedly appear due to noise, resulting in the failure of the backtracking function of lines 7 ∼ 12 . For G &lt; 2 S a , the case of Ω i -1 ∩ Γ = ∅ can lead to a poor LS estimation ( line 9 ) due to | Ω | &gt; G . Also see [22].

Fig. 7. Comparison of the sparse signal detection probabilities of the SMV, MMV and the proposed GMMV as functions of G .

<!-- image -->

Fig. 8. MSE performance of different channel estimation and feedback schemes as functions of the time overhead G and SNR.

<!-- image -->

CN (0 , 1) . By contrast, the GMMV recovers P sparse signals with mutually independent measurement matrices in parallel, where the elements of the measurement matrices also obey the i.i.d. CN (0 , 1) . From Fig. 7, it is clear that the joint processing of multiple sparse signals with the common support set and diversifying measurement matrices significantly enhance the performance of sparse signal recovery. For example, to obtain the detection probability of one with P = 64 , the MMV requires G = 17 , but the proposed GMMV only needs G = 11 , which indicates a reduction of approximately 35% in the required time slot overhead. Even the GMMV with P = 4 outperforms the MMV with P = 64 .

Fig. 8 compares the MSE performance of the J-OMP scheme [15] with fixed G , the DSAMP algorithm with fixed G , and the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition scheme (Al- gorithm 1), where S a = 8 was considered. The oracle LS estimator with the known support set of the sparse channel vectors was adopted as the performance bound. From Fig. 8, it can be seen that the J-OMP based CSI acquisition scheme performs poorly. By contrast, the proposed DSAMP algorithm is capable of approaching the oracle LS performance bound when G&gt; 2 S a . However, there still exists a significant performance gap between the DSAMP algorithm and the oracle LS estimator for G ≤ 2 S a . This is because the unreliable sparse signal recovery may occur when the time slot overhead G is insufficient, which degrades the MSE performance. Fortunately, the proposed CS based adaptive CSI acquisition scheme can adaptively adjust G to acquire the robust channel estimation. Observe from Fig. 8 that the proposed CS based adaptive CSI acquisition scheme approaches the oracle LS performance bound even for G ≤ 2 S a . Note that for Algorithm 1, we only plot the MSE associated with G ≤ 2 S a , because Algorithm 1 actually determines an appropriate G ≤ 2 S a adaptively.

Fig. ?? depicts the distributions of the adaptively determined time slot overhead G by the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition, given different sparsity level S a and SNRs. In Algorithm 1, G 0 was set to 8. The results of Fig. ?? show that the proposed scheme can adaptively determine an appropriate G according to S a . As pointed out in Section II-D, to reliably acquire CSI, the required G in conventional schemes can be as large as G = M = 128 . By exploiting the spatially common sparsity and temporal correlation of massive MIMO channels, the proposed scheme can effectively estimate the channels associated with hundreds of antennas at the BS with a dramatically reduced time slot overhead. Considering S a = 8 at SNR = 30 dB for example, our scheme only uses a time slot overhead of G ≈ 10 to acquire CSI at the BS, which represents a reduction in the required G by about 92%, compared to conventional schemes.

Fig. ?? plots the distributions of the acquired sparsity level ̂ S a by the proposed CS based adaptive CSI acquisition scheme, under the same settings of Fig. ?? . The results of Fig. ?? show that the proposed scheme can accurately acquire the true sparsity level S a . Note that the acquired ̂ S a may be smaller than S a at low SNR. This is because some virtual angular domain coordinates whose channel energy is lower than the noise floor may be discarded by the DSAMP algorithm. Because we set the time slot overhead G to ̂ S a in the closedloop channel tracking, Fig. ?? also provides the probability distributions of the time slot overhead used in the closed-loop channel tracking stage. As expected, the required time slot overhead in this stage is smaller than the time slot overhead actually used in the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition stage, which is confirmed by comparing Fig. ?? to Fig. ?? .

Fig. 11 compares the MSE and required average time slot overhead ¯ G of the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition with those of the closed-loop channel tracking for different S a at SNR =20 dB. The initial overhead G 0 =10 was set for the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition. It is clear that benefiting from the accurately estimated sparsity level information provided by the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition, the closed-loop channel tracking enjoys the better MSE performance with a smaller required time slot overhead. For S a = 14 , the required ¯ G by the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition and following closedloop channel tracking are 20.43 and 14.02, respectively. Since the acquired CSI by the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition is utilized to adaptively adjust the pilot signal for enhancing performance, the closed-loop channel tracking approaches the CRLB, as can be seen in Fig. 11. Also note that for the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition, the ratio ¯ G/S a increases slightly as S a increases. Hence the MSE performance of the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition improves slightly as the true sparsity level S a increases.

Fig. 12 provides the MSE performance comparison for different channel estimation and feedback schemes, given S a = 8 and various SNRs. Both the J-OMP based CSI acquisition scheme [15] and the DSAMP algorithm used the fixed G = 15 . For the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition scheme, G 0 =13 was considered. The required average time slot overheads for the proposed scheme are also marked in Fig. 12. Again, it is clear that the proposed CS based adaptive CSI acquisition stage (Algorithm 1), which uses the DSAMP algorithm with fixed G to adaptively determine an appropriate time slot overhead, outperforms the J-OMP based CSI acquisition scheme and DSAMP algorithm with a reduced time slot overhead requirement. By utilizing the accurately estimated channel sparsity information provided by the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition scheme, the closed-loop channel tracking stage can adaptively adjust the pilot signal to approach the CRLB with a further reduced time slot overhead. Specifically, the proposed scheme can reliably acquire the CSI of this massive MIMO system, approaching the CRLB, with an average time slot overhead ¯ G &lt; 2 S a .

Fig. 13 compares the downlink bit error rate (BER) performance with zero-forcing (ZF) precoding, where the precoding is based on the estimated CSI corresponding to Fig. 12 under the same setup. In the simulations, the BS simultaneously served 16 users using 16-quadrature amplitude modulation signaling, and the effective noise in CSI acquisition was only introduced in the downlink channel. It can be observed that the proposed channel estimation and feedback scheme outperforms its counterparts, and its BER performance is capable of approaching that of the CRLB.

Fig. 11. MSE performance comparison of the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition stage and closed-loop channel tracking stage for different sparsity levels S a at SNR = 20 dB, where the required ¯ G for each case is indicated.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 12. MSE performance comparison of different channel estimation and feedback schemes for various SNRs and true sparsity level S a = 8 , where the required average time slot overhead ¯ G for each case is indicated.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 13. Downlink BER performance with ZF precoding, where the CSI at the BS is acquired by different channel estimation and feedback schemes.

<!-- image -->

## VI. CONCLUSIONS

An adaptive channel estimation and feedback scheme has been proposed for FDD massive MIMO, which achieves robust and accurate CSI acquisition at the BS, while dramatically reducing the overhead for channel estimation and feedback. The proposed scheme consists of two stages, the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition and the following closed-loop channel tracking. By exploiting the spatially common sparsity of massive MIMO channels within the system bandwidth, the CS based adaptive CSI acquisition can acquire the highdimensional CSI from a small number of non-orthogonal pilots. The closed-loop channel tracking, which exploits the spatially common sparsity of massive MIMO channels over multiple consecutive time blocks, can effectively utilize the acquired CSI in the first stage to approach the CRLB. We have generalized the MMV to the GMMV in CS theory and provided the CRLB of the proposed scheme, which enlightens us to design the non-orthogonal pilot for different stages of the proposed scheme. Simulation results have confirmed that our scheme can reliably acquire the CSI of massive MIMO systems, specifically, approaching the performance bound with an adaptively determined time slot overhead.

## REFERENCES

- [1] L. Lu, G. Y. Li, A. L. Swindlehurst, A. Ashikhmin, and R. Zhang, 'An overview of massive MIMO: Benefits and challenges,' IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process. , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 742-758, Oct. 2014.
- [2] F. Rusek, D. Persson, B. K. Lau, E. G. Larsson, T. L.Marzetta, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson, and T. L. Marzetta, 'Scaling up MIMO: Opportunities and challenges with very large arrays,' IEEE Signal Process. Mag. , vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 40-60, Jan. 2013.
- [3] J. Hoydis, S. ten Brink, and M. Debbah, 'Massive MIMO in the UL/DL of cellular networks: How many antennas do we need?' IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 160-171, Feb. 2013.
- [4] H. Yin, D. Gesbert, M. Filippou, and Y. Liu, 'A coordinated approach to channel estimation in large-scale multiple-antenna systems,' IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 264-273, Feb. 2013.
- [5] J. Choi, D. J. Love, and P. Bidigare, 'Downlink training techniques for FDD massive MIMO systems: Open-loop and closed-loop training with memory,' IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process. , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 802-814, Oct. 2014.
- [6] L. Dai, Z. Wang, and Z. Yang, 'Spectrally efficient time-frequency training OFDM for mobile large-scale MIMO systems,' IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 251-263, Feb. 2013.
- [7] D. Angelosante, E. Biglieri, and M. Lops, 'Sequential estimation of multipath MIMO-OFDM channels,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 3167-3181, Aug. 2009.
- [8] M. Simko, P. S. R. Diniz, Q. Wang, and M. Rupp, 'Adaptive pilotsymbol patterns for MIMO OFDM systems,' IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 4705-4715, Sep. 2013.
- [9] Y.-H. Nam, Y. Akimoto, Y. Kim, M.-L. Lee, K. Bhattad, and A. Ekpenyong, 'Evolution of reference signals for LTE-advanced systems,' IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 132-138, Feb. 2012.
- [10] H. Minn and N. Al-Dhahir, 'Optimal training signals for MIMO OFDM channel estimation,' IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 1158-1168, May 2006.
- [11] S. Noh, M. D. Zoltowski, Y. Sung, and D. J. Love, 'Pilot beam pattern design for channel estimation in massive MIMO systems,' IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process. , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 787-801, Oct. 2014.
- [12] P. Cheng and Z. Chen, 'Multidimensional compressive sensing based analog CSI feedback for massive MIMO-OFDM systems,' in Proc. VTC 2014 Fall (Vancouver, Canada), Sep. 14-17, 2014, pp. 1-6.
- [13] P.-H. Kuo, H. T. Kung, and P.-A. Ting, 'Compressive sensing based channel feedback protocols for spatially-correlated massive antenna arrays,' in Proc. WCNC 2012 (Shanghai, China), Apr. 1-4, 2012, pp. 492-497.
- [14] X. Rao, V. K. N. Lau, and X. Kong, 'CSIT estimation and feedback for FDD multi-user massive MIMO systems,' in Proc. ICASSP 2014 (Florence, Italy), May 4-9, 2014, pp. 3157-3161.
- [15] X. Rao and V. K. N. Lau, 'Distributed compressive CSIT estimation and feedback for FDD multi-user massive MIMO systems,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 3261-3271, Jun. 2014.
- [16] J. Nam, A. Adhikary, J.-Y. Ahn, and G. Caire, 'Joint spatial division and multiplexing: Opportunistic beamforming, user grouping and simplified downlink scheduling,' IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process. , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 876-890, Oct. 2014.

- [17] A. Hu, T. Lv, H. Gao, Z. Zhang, and S. Yang, 'An ESPRIT-based approach for 2-D localization of incoherently distributed sources in massive MIMO systems,' IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process. , vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 996-1101, Oct. 2014.
- [18] Y. Zhou, M. Herdin, A. M. Sayeed, and E. Bonek, 'Experimental study of MIMO channel statistics and capacity via the virtual channel representation,' Tech. Rep. , Univ. Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA, Feb. 2007.
- [19] D. Tse and P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of Wireless Communication . Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005.
- [20] L. M. Correia (Ed.), Mobile Broadband Multimedia Networks, Techniques, Models and Tools for 4G . San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2006.
- [21] Y. S. Cho, J. Kim, W. Y. Yang, and C.-G. Kang, MIMO-OFDM Wireless Communications with MATLAB . Singapore: John Wiley &amp; Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd. 2010.
- [22] T. T. Do, L. Gan, N. Nguyen, and T. D. Tran, 'Sparsity adaptive matching pursuit algorithm for practical compressed sensing,' in Proc. 42nd Asilomar Conf. Signal Syst. Comput. (Pacific Grove, CA), Oct. 26-29, 2008, pp. 581-587.
- [23] S. M. Kay, Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing, Volume II: Detection Theory . Prentice Hall, 1998.
- [24] M. F. Duarte and Y. C. Eldar, 'Structured compressed sensing: From theory to applications,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 4053-4085, Sep. 2009.
- [25] P. Billingsley, Probability and Measure . Wiley, 1979.
- [26] J. Chen and X. Huo, 'Theoretical results on sparse representations of multiple-measurement vectors,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 4634-4643, Dec. 2006.
- [27] A. Bj¨ orck, Numerical Methods for Matrix Computations . Springer International Publishing AG, 2014.
- [28] R. Couillet and M. Debbah, Random Matrix Methods for Wireless Communications . Cambridge University Press, 2011.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->