## Concepts, Components and Collections of Trading Strategies and Market Color

Ravi Kashyap

SolBridge International School of Business / City University of Hong Kong

January 14, 2020

| Keywords: Trading Strategy; Investment Hypothesis; Uncertainty; Trial and Error; Risk Management; Volatility  JEL Codes: G11 Investment Decisions; D81 Criteria for Decision-Making under Risk and Uncertainty; C63 Computational Techniques  ## Contents  1  Abstract  2  2  To Trade or Not to Trade  2  3  Good Ideas, Bad Trades ... Ugly Risks  3  3.1  Models of Planes and Seesaws .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6  3.2  Efficient Assumptions, Rational Myths and Catch-22 Conundrums  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8  4  Sets of Strategies  11  4.1  Delta-One Strategies  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  11  4.2  Derivative Strategies  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  14  5  Conclusion  15  6  End-notes  16  7  References  20   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 1 Abstract

This paper acts as a collection of various trading strategies and useful pieces of market information that might help to implement such strategies. This list is meant to be comprehensive (though by no means exhaustive) and hence we only provide pointers and give further sources to explore each strategy further. To set the stage for this exploration, we consider the factors that determine good and bad trades, the notions of market efficiency, the real prospect amidst the seemingly high expectations of homogeneous expectations from human beings and the catch-22 connotations that arise while comprehending the true meaning of rational investing. We can broadly classify trading ideas and client market color material into Delta-One and Derivative strategies since this acts as a natural categorization that depends on the expertise of the various trading desks that will implement these strategies. For each strategy, we will have a core idea and we will present different flavors of this central theme to demonstrate that we can easily cater to the varying risk appetites, regional preferences, asset management styles, investment philosophies, liability constraints, investment horizons, notional trading size, trading frequency and other preferences of different market participants.

## 2 To Trade or Not to Trade

We can broadly classify trading ideas or strategies (Pardo 2011; Nekrasov 2014; End-note 1) and market color (Merkley, Michaely &amp; Pacelli 2017; Cheng, Liu &amp; Qian 2006; Groysberg, Healy &amp; Chapman 2008; Schipper 1991; Williams, Moyes &amp; Park 1996; End-note 2, 3, 4) material into Delta-One and Derivative strategies (generally, the price of Delta one securities have a one to one correspondence with the price of the underlying: Natenberg 1994; Hull &amp; Basu 2016; End-notes 5, 6), since this acts as a natural categorization that depends on the expertise of the various trading desks that will implement these strategies. For each strategy, we will have a core idea and it is very straight forward to present different flavors of this central theme that can easily cater to the varying risk appetites, regional preferences, asset management styles, investment philosophies, liability constraints, investment horizons, notional trading size, trading frequency and other preferences of different market participants. Once we have some market color or a possible trading idea, the conundrum seen in the title of this section presents itself, which is whether to implement it and how exactly; we address some of these concerns through the rest of this article.

As the number of securities in any trading idea is varied, the error in the expected returns, the variance of returns, the benefits of diversification and the liquidity constraints will vary (risk, return, diversification and liquidity are discussed in: Bodie, Kane &amp; Marcus 2014; Elton, Gruber, Brown &amp; Goetzmann 2009). Hence, it is important to consider different number of securities as different variations of the core strategy. The costs of implementing the strategy will also vary with the number of securities and other parameters used to create the strategy. Hence, it is important to explicitly calculate these figures for different variations of the core strategy (for trading costs see: Perold 1998; Almgren &amp; Neil 2001; Kashyap 2016b).

The Execution Risk and the Post Execution Portfolio risk of the strategy will depend on the Market Impact, Market Risk and the Timing of the executions that make up the strategy (Kashyap 2016b). Ways to achieve optimality in this regard are elaborated below in the 'Risk and Best Execution Advisory' point 10. Any investment firm that already has some of these trading strategies, can look for supplementary information to improve the pre and post trading experience. Combination strategies (or cross-trading) is possible when implementing two strategies reduces the overall market exposure and hence the risk of the blended strategies. Also, in certain cases, once we implement one strategy, the additional cost and the risk to implement another strategy, (marginal cost and risk) is significantly less and hence it is can be demonstrated that it is beneficial to implement multiple strategies.

These ideas can be implemented mostly with data available from Bloomberg (Bloomberg 1981; End-note 7) or other market data vendors. If additional information is required it is mentioned along with the specific trading idea (we might be able to supplement any basic data set with specialized data sources). A statistical tool like MATLAB (Window 2010; End-notes 8, 9; a basic database to maintain the time-series data and other information would be a prudent investment as well) would be required to perform the regressions and other computations to back-test (Bailey, Borwein, de Prado &amp; Zhu 2014) the strategies, estimate the risk and Profit and Loss (P&amp;L) levels on these strategies. For the sake of brevity and to keep this document simply as an overview of the possibilities, the computational complexities and implementation details have been abstracted away from the individual strategy sections below. As it will become clear, the design and implementation of these strategies will require personnel with quantitative skills and training in mathematics as it applies to finance and economics. In (Kashyap 2018a) we provide a complete numerical illustration of one trading strategy that can be beneficial when we expect the market to rebound after a slump or after a bad economic cycle.

This paper acts as a collection of various trading strategies and useful pieces of market information that might help to implement such strategies. This list is meant to be comprehensive (though by no means exhaustive) and hence we only provide pointers and give additional sources to explore each strategy further. To set the stage for this exploration, we consider the factors that determine good and bad trades, the notions of market efficiency, the real prospect amidst the seemingly high expectations of homogeneous expectations from human beings and the catch-22 connotations that arise while comprehending the true meaning of rational investing.

## 3 Good Ideas, Bad Trades ... Ugly Risks

We can represent the investment process as a dotted circle since there is a lot of ambiguity in the various steps involved. The circle also indicates the repetitive nature of many steps that are continuously carried out while investing. If we consider the entire investment management procedure as being akin to connecting the dots of a circle, then the Circle of Investment can be represented as a dotted circle with many dots falling approximately on the circumference, but it hard to have an exact clue about the exact location of the center or the length of the radius.

The Equity asset class holds the potential for unlimited upside and brings with it partial ownership of the firm and hence some influence over the decision making process. It can be argued that this premise of boundless profits, coupled with limited losses or liability and a certain degree of control, make this asset class an extremely appealing one, contributing to its immense popularity. Hence, the strategies discussed below are more immediately applicable to the stocks markets, but it is fairly straight forward to extend them to other asset classes (for foreign exchange and fixed income securities, see: Copeland 2008; Tuckman &amp; Serrat 2011). The various asset classes can be compared to balloons tethered to the ground, with the equity balloon having the weakest connections to the ground and also the weakest controls to guide it, if it is wind-borne. The lack of a strong controlling factor also makes regime changes much harder to detect for equities (regime changes are a major shift in the investment landscape: Wade 2008; Angeletos, Hellwig &amp; Pavan 2007; Gasiorowski 1995).

We need to keep in mind that good traders can make bad trades and bad traders can make good trades, but over many iterations, the good traders end up making a greater number of good trades and hence we provide some distinctions between good and bad trades below (Kashyap 2014b).

1. The factors that dictate a good trade or a bad trade depend on the Time Horizon and the Investment Objective. The time horizon can be classified into short term, medium term and long term. The investment objective can be conservative or aggressive. While there are no strict boundaries between these categories, such a classification helps us with the analysis and better identification of trades.
2. Any trade that fulfills the investment objective and time horizon for which it is made is a good trade. Otherwise, it is a bad trade.
3. On the face of it, we can view good trades as the profitable ones and bad trades as ones that lose money. But where possible, if we try and distinguish between proximate causes and ultimate reasons, it becomes apparent that good trades can lose money and bad trades can end up making money.
4. Due to the nature of uncertainty in the social sciences: the noise around the expected performance of any security; our ignorance of the true equilibrium; the behavior of other participants; risk constraints like liquidity, concentration, unfavorable Geo-political events; etc. implies we would have deviations from our intended results. The larger the deviation from the intended results, the worse our trade is.
5. What the above implies is that, bad trades show the deficiencies in our planning (estimation process) and how we have not been able to take into account factors that can lead our results astray. It is true that due to the extreme complexity of the financial markets, the unexpected ends up happening and

we can never take into account everything. We just need to make sure that the unexpected, even if it does happen, is contained in the harm it can cause. The good thing about bad trades is the extremely valuable lessons they hold for us, which takes us through the loop or trials, errors and improvements.

6. We then need to consider, how a good trade can lose money. When we make a trade, if we know the extent to which we can lose, when this loss can occur and that situation ends up happening, our planning did reveal the possibility and extent of the loss, hence it is a good trade.
7. The bottom line is that, good trades, or bad trades, are the result of our ability to come up with possible scenarios and how likely we think they will happen. The ability to visualize possible outcomes is related to intelligence. Everything else being equal, someone with experience or someone who has had the benefit of having participated in repetitions of similar situations and then having made decisions in some cases after mistakes in earlier iterations (learning through trial and error: Ismail 2014; Kashyap 2017; End-note 10) will be better at facing uncertain situations and solving problems.

Zooming back into equities, the following are some other factors that can contribute to good equity trades.

1. The trade will not soak too much of the available liquidity, as measured by the average trading volume, unless of course, we wish to take a controlling stake in the firm (Bernstein 1987; Pástor &amp; Stambaugh 2003; Bhide 1993; Amihud 2002; Hameed, Kang &amp; Viswanathan 2010).
2. It is held by a number of investors. There is more uncertainty if there are more investors, but it seems to work to our benefit in most cases. If the number of investors is limited, the possibility of all of them doing the opposite of what we want is higher and more likely (Amihud, Mendelson &amp; Uno 1999; Lakonishok, Shleifer &amp; Vishny 1992; Chan &amp; Lakonishok 1993; Gompers &amp; Metrick 2001; Asquith, Pathak &amp; Ritter 2005; An &amp; Zhang 2013).
3. The noise or the randomness is less so that our decisions can be more accurate. This can be measured by volatility or the price fluctuations that we see (French, Schwert &amp; Stambaugh 1987; Schwert 1989; Ang, Hodrick, Xing &amp; Zhang 2006; Glosten, Jagannathan &amp; Runkle 1993).
4. The firm issuing the securities is not too dependent on any particular product, profits from a particular region, is not overburdened with debt, is paying dividends consistently, its price is not too high compared to its earnings and other fundamental research indicators (Lancaster 1990; Spence 1976; Bilbiie, Ghironi &amp; Melitz 2012; Randall &amp; Ulrich 2001; Srinivasan, Pauwels, Silva-Risso &amp; Hanssens 2009).
5. If we are able to see some pattern in the share price changes, that is a good trade. This means that this security is exhibiting Non-Markovian behavior (Turner, Startz &amp; Nelson 1989; Hassan &amp; Nath 2005;

Cai 1994; Hassan 2009; Litterman 1983). Such behavior is usually hard to detect, but it comes down to the lens we are using to view the world or the methods we are using to perform historical analysis (Hamilton 1994; Gujarati 2009; Verbeek 2008).

6. If the security is affected by any asset price bubbles and we are able to detect the formation of such bubbles (Siegel 2003; Stöckl, Huber &amp; Kirchler 2010; Hott 2009; Andersen &amp; Sornette 2004; Scherbina &amp; Schlusche 2014; Kashyap 2016a).
7. If we are shorting the security and it has a greater tendency for a downward movement, as exhibited by its skew and other higher moments (Corrado &amp; Su 1996; Bakshi, Kapadia &amp; Madan 2003; Badrinath &amp; Chatterjee 1991; Badrinath &amp; Chatterjee 1988; Chen, Hong &amp; Stein 2001; Barberis, Mukherjee &amp; Wang 2016; Amaya, Christoffersen, Jacobs &amp; Vasquez 2015).
8. So far, we have talked about the unknowns that we know about. What about the unknowns that we don't know about. The only thing, we know about these unknown unknowns are that, there must be a lot of them, hence the need for us to be eternally vigilant (Taleb 2007).

## 3.1 Models of Planes and Seesaws

The analogy of, building a plane and flying it, to constructing a model and trading with it, will help us consider the associated risks in a better way. Modeling would be the phase when we are building a plane, and the outcome of this process is the plane or the model which we have built; trading would then be the act of flying the plane in the turbulent skies, which are the financial markets. The modelers would then be the scientists (also engineers) and the pilots would be traders. It is somewhat out of the scope of this document to discuss questions regarding what kind of person can be good at both modeling and trading. Trading would need a good understanding of what the model can do and where it will fall short; and building a model will need to know the conditions under which an model has to operate and the sudden changes the trading environment might encounter.

A deterministic world can be made to seem stochastic quite easily, since randomness is only from the point of the viewer, the creator of uncertainty (also perhaps, the universe) has no randomness. Hence, it might be possible to start with a few simple rules that makes sense intuitively and explain the stochastic behavior of most phenomenon. Our investment decisions are made over time and so we set the direction of forward movement in time to be equivalent to flying the plane forward. Since we cannot see what will happen in the future; to fly the plane forward, we should not be able to see what is in front of us. This is equivalent to a plane with the front windows blackened out. All we have are rear view mirrors (most planes don't exactly have rear view mirrors, but let us imagine our plane having one) and windows to the side.

As we are cruising along in time, what we have with us is the historical data or the view from behind and real time data which is the view from the side, to aid in navigating our way forward or to the future. We use the historical data to build our model and then use the data from the present to help us make forecasts for what the future holds. The modeling would involve using data inputs to come up with outputs that can help us decide which securities to pick, or to help set the direction of motion. The trading aspect would involve using the model outputs and checking if that is the direction in which we want to be heading, that is actually deciding which securities to pick, and watching out for cases where the predictions are not that reliable.

We can use multi-factor models (Hamilton 1994; Ng, Engle &amp; Rothschild 1992) to decompose overall portfolio risk and help identify the important sources of risk in the portfolio and link those sources with aspirations for active return. We need to use the right principles, the right material and the right processes.

1. The right principles would require understanding certain concepts that determine the relevant measure of risk for any asset and the relationship between expected return and risk when markets are tending towards equilibrium. Examples for these are the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), the Arbitrage Pricing Theory or other multi index models (Sharpe 1964; Ross 1976; Roll &amp; Ross 1980; Bodie, Kane &amp; Marcus 2014).
2. The right material translates to having data on the security returns and choosing the relevant factors. The amount of data and factors that is available is humongous. We need to use some judgment regarding how much history to use. We also need to be attuned to significance and causality among the factors. All this can involve some independent data analysis (Krejcie &amp; Morgan 1970; Granger 1981; Adcock 1997; Hair, Black, Babin, Anderson &amp; Tatham 1998; MacCallum, Widaman, Zhang &amp; Hong 1999; Lenth 2001).
3. The right process would mean using judicious concepts from econometric / statistical theory (Bishop, Fienberg &amp; Holland 2007; Eisenbeis 1977). Some examples would be to check for the stationarity of variables, to normalize the variables to scale them properly, to see if there is any correlation between the independent variables and correcting for it (Multi-Collinearity: Hamilton 1994; Maddala &amp; Lahiri 1992; End-note 11). We need to make sure no variables that would have an impact are left out (Omitted Variable Bias: Hamilton 1994; End-note 12).

There needs to be a lot of tinkering; this means we need to have a continuous cycle of coming up with a prototype, testing how it works and making improvements based on the performance. This is especially important in the financial markets, since we are chasing moving targets as the markets have a tendency to be quasi-equilibriums (we never know what a true equilibrium is but perhaps, the markets fluctuate between multiple equilibriums, somewhat like a see-saw: Mantzicopoulos &amp; Patrick 2010; Stocker 1998; End-note 13). Modeling needs to be well thought out, with due regard to anticipating as many scenarios as possible and building in the relevant corrective or abortive mechanisms when adverse situations occur. Given that, we are never close to accomplishing a perfect model, which can handle all cases without failure and without constant changes, we would need to constantly supervise the outcomes; hence models that are simple and robust are better suited, since it is easier to isolate the points of failure when things get rough. Robust here means producing similar results under a variety of conditions, with some changes to the inputs or the controls.

## 3.2 Efficient Assumptions, Rational Myths and Catch-22 Conundrums

A primary question that arises in finance is: whether markets are efficient? Questions &amp; Answers (Q&amp;A) are important. But Definitions &amp; Assumptions (D&amp;A) are perhaps, more important. The good news is that, Q&amp;A and D&amp;A might be in our very DNA, the biological one (Alberts, Johnson, Lewis, Raff, Roberts &amp; Walter 2002; End-note 14). Maybe, DNA hold the lessons from the lives of every ancestor we have ever had. Evolution is constantly coding the information, compressing it and passing forward, what is needed to survive better and to thrive, building what is essential right into our genes (Church, Gao &amp; Kosuri 2012; Lutz, Ouchi, Liu &amp; Sawamoto 2013; Kosuri &amp; Church 2014; Roy, Meszynska, Laure, Charles, Verchin &amp; Lutz 2015).

The assumption made in finance regarding homogeneous expectations (Levy &amp; Levy 1996; Chiarella &amp; He 2001), especially in the derivation of the efficient frontier, the CAPM and the Capital Market Line (Bodie, Kane &amp; Marcus 2014), is stunningly sophisticated, yet seemingly simplistic. Most people would argue that no two people are alike, so this assumption does not seem validated (Valsiner 2007; Buss 1985; Plomin &amp; Daniels 1987). Then again, this assumption is perhaps a very futuristic one, where we are picking the best habits and characteristics, from our fellow beings (maybe not just humans?) and at some point in the future, we might tend to have more in common with each other, fulfilling this great assumption, which seems more of a prophecy. Again, if we become too similar then mother nature, or, evolution, will have less to work with; since more differences tell her which characteristics are better for certain conditions and many possibilities create stronger survival potential (Rosenberg 1997; Wilke, ... , &amp; Adami 2001; Elena &amp; Lenski 2003; Nei 2013). Too much similarity might not be an issue if survival is no longer a concern (Kashyap 2018b). But with respect to finance, we might evolve enough, so that one day, we might have the same expectations with respect to our monetary concerns. This would also be the day when the Bid-Offer spread would cease to matter, or, we would be indifferent to it, making every coffee shop, theater, street corner, pub, or everywhere . . . a venue for any product (Kashyap 2015).

Hence if we vary our definitions of efficiency and the corresponding assumptions, a useful chain of thoughts and efforts would be to capture, whether and how much, the actions of various players takes the markets towards different forms of efficiency (Fama 1970). This implies a belief that different markets could have different levels and forms of efficiencies over different times and understanding how the players are acting could be useful to predict what information could be an advantage, depending on the efficiency that is believed to be at work.

Perhaps, another way of looking at and understanding this concept is by pondering over the notion of a rational investor, who has been defined in multiple ways and extensively discussed (also known in economic circles as Homo Economicus: Persky 1995; Thaler 2000; End-note 15). Before we consider the Q&amp;A / D&amp;A related to a rational investor, we state a simple game from game theory called 'Guess 2/3 of the average' (Nagel 1995; another related game is known as the Keynesian beauty contest: Keynes 2018; Büren, Frank &amp; Nagel 2012; Nagel, Bühren &amp; Frank 2017; End-note 16). The objective of the game is for the participants to guess what 2/3 of the average of the guesses of everyone participating in the game will be, and where the numbers are restricted to the real numbers between 0 and 100, inclusive. The winner is the person whose chosen number is closest to the 2/3 average of all chosen numbers and will obtain a fixed amount as a payoff that is independent of the stated number and 2/3. If there is a tie, the prize is divided equally among all the winners.

There is a unique Nash equilibrium (Nash 1951; Osborne &amp; Rubinstein 1994; End-note 17) for this game that can be found by iterated elimination of weakly dominated strategies. Suppose that all participants guess the highest possible number, 100, then clearly the average of all the guesses will be 100. But to win, they need to guess 2/3 of the average, hence their guess has to be 2/3*100, but if everybody has 2/3*100 as their guess, they need to guess 2/3 of 2/3*100 or 2/3*2/3*100 and this process will continue. Continuing this line of reasoning k times and as k gets larger and larger, that is as k → ∞ , the guess g of any participant gets closer and closer to zero. Alternately stated, the limiting value for the guess game, g , as the number of iterations k increases, (as we continue our line of reasoning by taking the 2 / 3 of the maximum value that someone can guess) is given by,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This game is usually played to demonstrate that few people, including students of economics and game theory, actually get the equilibrium answer of zero (End-note 18). Hence if a rational participant is someone who would want to win this game by making the right decisions and obtain the winning payoff, it is unclear whether he should present the above equilibrium guess (Eq 1). This example illustrates that other than the non-trivial mathematics expected from any rational participant, he is supposed to be anticipating what everyone will do, which could include the possibility that not everyone participating might be fully rational. Hence his winning guess might have to be different from the one shown in (Eq 1), making him do irrational things unless he can not only read the minds of everyone but also force his will upon them to be rational.

To be rational he has make sure everyone acts rationally or he has to act irrationally: a Catch-22 situation (Heller 1999).

In a similar vein, we can define a rational investor as someone who is not just factoring in the potential investment decisions of every market participant, but is also having to ensure that everyone is making the decisions that will be beneficial to him. In the above game, the decisions of everyone had to be the same, but it could be different in many other situations, especially in the financial markets (we will not discuss further the very stimulating topic of whether and how two different decisions can still be beneficial and rational to the participants; but it would perhaps be proper material for a slew of papers and books). The message for us is that either we all have to become rational investors or nobody can be a rational investor. Another implication of this chain of thoughts is that if all of us become rational investors then our expectations might become homogeneous, making markets efficient and validating the assumptions made to derive finance and economic theories; though if that happens there might be no need for economics and finance at that point, since we might have transcended beyond the need for wealth, wants and other worldly aspects: another Catch-22 situation.

The computational challenge in this case was limited due to the rather simplified nature of the exercise. But in other decision making situations encountered in daily life, the tools and theories of economics prescribe solving complex optimization problems to arrive at the right results. If we ponder on the intellectual requirements an agent has to possess to confront and navigate his daily challenges, it becomes clear that it is beyond the capabilities of all humans to use such calculations in their everyday decisions. We want to highlight here that some humans have created complex but wonderfully elegant solutions for many simple everyday problems. But even after assuming that such a human would use the solution he has developed for a particular problem, he would fail to adopt the solutions created by others for other problems he encounters since he would have limited expertise with problems in another domain.

Clearly, another case is where we might not have developed a solution ourselves, but we have studied the solutions of others extensively enough so that we are intimately familiar with it and using it has become second nature to us. Even if we make the valid argument that many solutions are related and the marginal effort to master a new solution is less once someone has good knowledge of a few solutions, we need to be aware that there are too many new techniques and tools being introduced and the complexity in solutions is increasing significantly. This issue of most of us not being familiar with most solutions is exacerbated with the highly specialized nature of academic research being conducted and encouraged, coumpounded by the artificial boundaries we have created by labeling disciplines. Many journals do state that they encourage multi-disciplinary work but when confronted with work that truly transcends the fake silos of knowledge we have created, editors and reviewers struggle to make the right decisions: (Ke, Ferrara, Radicchi &amp; Flammini 2015 study how common , 'sleeping beauties are in science', papers whose relevance has not been recognized for decades, but then suddenly become highly influential and cited; Gans &amp; Shepherd 1994 find that journals have rejected many papers that later became classics; this should make us aware of the possibility that many papers are being rejected only because their contributions are not being realized).

We want to emphasize that these are unintended consequences due to the constraints placed on the actual channeling of research efforts to knowledge creation and dissemination. One reason why such unwanted outcomes creep up, despite the fact that journals, editors, scholarly associations and other research institutions are wonderful innovations done with the honorable intention of helping us comprehend the cosmos around us, is because we live in a world that requires around 2000 IQ points to consistently make correct decisions; but the smartest of us has only a fraction of that (Ismail 2014; Kashyap 2017; End-note 10). Hence, we need to rise, above the urge to ridicule, the seemingly obvious blunders of others, since without those marvelous mistakes, the path ahead will not become clearer for us. Someone with 2000 IQ points is surely a super hero, aptly named IQ-Man. So a rational investor is this mythical character called IQ-Man, who unlike other super-humans like Super-Man does not even have a movie about him (for society's fascination with superheroes or super-humans see: Reynolds 1992).

## 4 Sets of Strategies

## 4.1 Delta-One Strategies

## 1. Index Re-balance

When an index is re-balanced, certain constituents are removed, added or their weights in the index are changed. Many participants try to anticipate these changes and take positions depending on what they expect to change in any index. Trading strategies and market color can be created indicating expected inflow and outflow at a security level based on the expected weight change or depending on the re-balancing event (Kostovetsky 2003; Bloom, Gouws &amp; Holmes 2000; Aked &amp; Moroz 2015; Chow, Hsu, Kalesnik &amp; Little 2011). Basket Trading Ideas to take advantage of expected inflow and outflow of Index Funds based on expected weights on the re-balance dates. We can use Index Tracking (Beasley, Meade &amp; Chang 2003; Guastaroba &amp; Speranza 2012; Dose &amp; Cincotti 2005; Stoyan &amp; Kwon 2010) and Co-Integration (Alexander 1999; Engle &amp; Clive 1987; Banerjee, Dolado, Galbraith &amp; Hendry 1993; Harris 1995; Alexander &amp; Dimitriu 2005a, b) principles to provide better estimates of the baskets and capture a certain level of dollar flows. MSCI (Hau, Massa &amp; Peress 2009; Chakrabarti, Huang, Jayaraman &amp; Lee 2005; End-note 19) indices are ideal set to start with and it is possible to extend it to other indices with minor adjustments depending on the rules used for the re-balancing that could differ among the many index providers. This strategy would need index membership information from the relevant index providers. Please see Index Tracking and Co-Integration in points 4, 5

## 2. Macro Theme Baskets

Creation of stock baskets depending on Macro themes (Burstein 1999; Franci, Marschinski &amp; Matassini 2001; Chen, Leung &amp; Daouk 2003). Bounce Basket: Securities expected to benefit the most from the rebound in the securities markets and the overall economy (Kashyap 2018a). Short Basket: Securities that are expected to show a significant fall due to fundamental weakness and an overall drop in the market. Securities that perform the best during upward expected Inflationary moves. Securities that perform the best during upward movement of Oil Prices, Gold Prices or other commodities. Regional baskets that can best cater to investors looking for regional exposure. These baskets are identified by performing a factor analysis (principal component analysis or regressions can also be used: Hamilton 1994; End-note 20) of historical security prices and other factor indicators (Ludvigson &amp; Ng 2007; Jolliffe 1986; Shlens 2005; Costello &amp; Osborne 2005). We can use Index Tracking and Co-Integration principles to provide better estimates of the baskets. Please see Index Tracking and Co-Integration in points 1, 4, 5. Macroeconomic data-sources would be required for this set of trading ideas.

## 3. Sector Theme Baskets

These set of strategies are aimed at capitalizing on expected sector rotations. Depending on various macroeconomic developments and business cycle trends, different sectors are expected to be either bullish or bearish. We can create baskets of stocks to benefit most from these expected trends. It is possible to put a regional spin on each of the baskets below. We can customize this for different durations of the trades and different notional amounts. We can use Index Tracking and Co-Integration principles to provide better estimates of the baskets. Please see Index Tracking and Co-Integration in points 1, 4, 5. Sector specific data-sources would be required for this set of trading ideas.

The following are some of the sector theme baskets.

- Gaming (Casino) Basket
- Real Estate Basket
- Technology Basket
- Financials Basket
- Utilities Basket

## · Travel and Luxury Hotels Basket

## 4. Index Tracking Baskets

We can customize this based on two characteristics. Create baskets of stocks to track the index with the least tracking error and a desired number of stocks. Produce a certain amount of tracking error and select the number of stocks required to achieve this level of tracking error. Please see Index Tracking and Co-Integration references in point 1.

## 5. Co-Integration Baskets

Pairs Trading Ideas are based on two portfolios (or even individual securities: Miao 2014) of stocks which have moved together historically, but are now in diverging positions, so we expect them to converge back. This is easily implemented for pairs of securities in the same sector. Please see Index Tracking and Co-Integration references in point 1.

## 6. Portfolio Risk Basket

Many sell side desks take on principal positions (commit their own capital instead of acting just as an intermediary) on baskets of stocks that are opposite to client trades. A basis point quote is provided to the client based on the market impact to enter the positions, to exit the positions, volatility of the security prices, expected duration to enter the position, expected duration to exit the position and transaction costs. Inventory Management techniques (Lancioni &amp; Howard 1978; Blackstone Jr &amp; Cox 1985) will need to be used to manage the overall exposures on the desk that is creating this strategy and this will be incorporated into the basis point pricing of the risk basket.

## 7. Index Arbitrage Trading Ideas

Arbitrage between the prices of index constituents and the corresponding futures contracts (Chung 1991; Dwyer Jr, Locke &amp; Yu 1996; Kumar &amp; Seppi 1994; Nandan, Agrawal &amp; Jindal 2015; Fung, Lau &amp; Tse 2015). We will need to consider the effect of stock commissions and futures commissions on the profitability of the trades. We can provide early close out options as opposed to close out on the expiration date. We will need to consider the market impact of the stock transactions on the stock price when we put on the trade and the effect of the same if we do an early close out.

## 8. Rich / Cheap Analysis based on Stock Beta

We can create baskets of under-priced and overpriced securities based on the Beta of individual securities versus different indices acting as a proxy for the market (Black 1992; Isakov 1999; Amihud &amp; Mendelson 1989; Fletcher 2000).

## 9. Equity Swap Baskets

In certain markets, most investors do not have access to trade the securities and the only way to get access to these markets is through swaps from a registered broker (Kijima &amp; Muromachi 2001; Gay, Venkateswaran, Kolb &amp; Overdahl 2008; Chance &amp; Rich 1998; Wang &amp; Liao 2003; Wu &amp; Chen 2007; End-note 21). We can create swap baskets to pick up exposure for the above themes; also swap baskets can be created for the other markets as well, since it could be a good alternative to trading all the other investments.

## 10. Risk and Best Execution Metrics

We can create risk metrics to supplement the information on trade execution in terms of market impact, market risk and optimal timing of transactions (Smithson 1998; Bouchaud &amp; Potters 2003; Wipplinger 2007; Christoffersen 2012). It would be helpful to collect information on the market impact of individual transactions or portfolios based on the timing requirements of implementing the strategies. This market impact can be calibrated to the orders, executions and the skill of the executions teams within the firm so that it will capitalize on the trading advantages possessed by the firm. Such information can not only help with the planning of optimal execution strategies to reduce the market impact and market risk of the resulting portfolio, but can be useful to check if the trading strategy is viable; since even though it promises to produce good returns but implementing it might eat away the returns. Optimal execution will be in terms of the number of pieces the overall basket will be broken into and the duration and timing over which to trade the individual pieces. Portfolio risk monitoring will be needed for the individual strategies and changes in risk levels will need to be monitored for different increments / decrements to the various trading strategies.

## 4.2 Derivative Strategies

To implement these, we would need some derivatives pricing and risk modules, a basic level of which can be implemented in MATLAB. Since the number of combinations of derivative instruments is huge, only a brief overview is provided below. Depending on the specifics of the instruments and the market conditions, various strategies can be implemented.

1. We can have trades on index options and options on the constituents based on the volatility of the individual securities and the volatility level of the index and the correlation between individual security pairs and the average level of correlation in the basket. These are known as volatility and dispersion Trades (Marshall 2009; Meissner 2016; Driessen, Maenhout &amp; Vilkov 2009);
2. We predict volatility levels using ARCH / GARCH models and trade instruments that are theoretically mispriced when compared to the implied volatility levels (Andersen, Bollerslev, Diebold &amp; Labys 2003; Andersen &amp; Bollerslev 1998; Engle &amp; Ng 1993; Xu &amp; Malkiel 2003; Bollerslev, Chou &amp; Kroner 1992; Nelson 1991).
3. Put - Call Parity violations (Cremers &amp; Weinbaumv 2010; Klemkosky &amp; Resnick 1979; Finucane 1991), combined with either implied volatilities or based on predicted ARCH / GARCH volatility levels, can be used to find undervalued or overvalued instruments and appropriate strategies can be constructed.
4. Option hedges are possible for basket trades constructed in the delta one section 4.1.
5. Structures based on different options, that is structured equity derivatives (Kat 2001) suitable for different Macro, Sector themes and Expectations.

## 5 Conclusion

We have looked at a number of delta-one and derivative trading strategies, related market color and pointers to practically implement these investment ideas. The advantages of investing in a moderate amount of computing infrastructure and hiring personnel with technical abilities were illustrated in terms of having a wider choice of investment alternatives, increased returns and better management of risky outcomes. In Kashyap (2018) we discuss in detail a trading strategy, called the bounce basket, for someone to express a bullish view on the market by allowing them to take long positions on securities that would benefit the most from a rally in the markets. Given the dynamic nature of the financial markets, it would be practical to have a feedback loop that changes the parameters of any trading strategy depending on changes in market conditions (Kashyap 2014a).

## 6 End-notes

1. Trading Strategy, Wikipedia Link In finance, a trading strategy is a fixed plan that is designed to achieve a profitable return by going long or short in markets. The main reasons that a properly researched trading strategy helps are its verifiability, quantifiability, consistency, and objectivity. For every trading strategy one needs to define assets to trade, entry/exit points and money management rules. Bad money management can make a potentially profitable strategy unprofitable.
2. Market Color is a word commonly used on trading desks both on the buy side and sell side (End-notes 3, 4). It refers to information regarding the financial markets, many times changes in variables that are deemed relevant to make trading decisions. The sell side provides many such pieces of information to the buy side, eventually hoping to get trades done on the back of this such material. This could also be considered as research done by analysts on both the sell side and the buy side.
3. Sell Side, Wikipedia Link Sell side is a term used in the financial services industry. The three main markets for this selling are the stock, bond, and foreign exchange market. It is a general term that indicates a firm that sells investment services to asset management firms, typically referred to as the buy side, or corporate entities. One important note, the sell side and the buy side work hand in hand and each side could not exist without the other. These services encompass a broad range of activities, including broking/dealing, investment banking, advisory functions, and investment research.
4. Buy Side, Wikipedia Link Buy-side is a term used in investment firms to refer to advising institutions concerned with buying investment services. Private equity funds, mutual funds, life insurance companies, unit trusts, hedge funds, and pension funds are the most common types of buy side entities. In sales and trading, the split between the buy side and sell side should be viewed from the perspective of securities exchange services. The investing community must use those services to trade securities. The "Buy Side" are the buyers of those services; the "Sell Side", also called "prime brokers", are the sellers of those services.
5. Delta One, Wikipedia Link Delta One products are financial derivatives that have no optionality and as such have a delta of (or very close to) one - meaning that for a given instantaneous move in the price of the underlying asset there is expected to be an identical move in the price of the derivative. Delta one products can sometimes be synthetically assembled by combining options.
6. Derivative (finance), Wikipedia Link In finance, a derivative is a contract that derives its value from the performance of an underlying entity. This underlying entity can be an asset, index, or interest rate, and is often simply called the "underlying." Derivatives can be used for a number of purposes, including

insuring against price movements (hedging), increasing exposure to price movements for speculation or getting access to otherwise hard-to-trade assets or markets.

7. Bloomberg, Wikipedia Link Bloomberg L.P. is a privately held financial, software, data, and media company headquartered in Midtown Manhattan, New York City. It was founded by Michael Bloomberg in 1981, with the help of Thomas Secunda, Duncan MacMillan, Charles Zegar, and a 30% ownership investment by Merrill Lynch.
8. Matlab, Wikipedia Link MATLAB (matrix laboratory) is a multi-paradigm numerical computing environment and proprietary programming language developed by MathWorks. MATLAB allows matrix manipulations, plotting of functions and data, implementation of algorithms, creation of user interfaces, and interfacing with programs written in other languages, including C, C++, C#, Java, Fortran and Python.
9. Statistical Software, Wikipedia Link Statistical software are specialized computer programs for analysis in statistics and econometrics.
10. Nassim Taleb and Daniel Kahneman discuss Trial and Error / IQ Points, among other things, at the New York Publi As Taleb explains, 'it is trial with small errors that are important for progress'. The emphasis on small errors is especially true in a portfolio management context, since a huge error could lead to a blow up of the investment fund. (Ismail 2014) mentions the following quote from Taleb, 'Knowledge gives you a little bit of an edge, but tinkering (trial and error) is the equivalent of 1,000 IQ points. It is tinkering that allowed the industrial revolution'.
11. Multicollinearity, Wikipedia Link In statistics, multicollinearity (also collinearity) is a phenomenon in which one predictor variable in a multiple regression model can be linearly predicted from the others with a substantial degree of accuracy. In this situation the coefficient estimates of the multiple regression may change erratically in response to small changes in the model or the data. Multicollinearity does not reduce the predictive power or reliability of the model as a whole, at least within the sample data set; it only affects calculations regarding individual predictors. That is, a multivariate regression model with collinear predictors can indicate how well the entire bundle of predictors predicts the outcome variable, but it may not give valid results about any individual predictor, or about which predictors are redundant with respect to others.
12. Omitted-variable bias, Wikipedia Link In statistics, omitted-variable bias (OVB) occurs when a statistical model leaves out one or more relevant variables. The bias results in the model attributing the effect of the missing variables to the estimated effects of the included variables. More specifically, OVB

is the bias that appears in the estimates of parameters in a regression analysis, when the assumed specification is incorrect in that it omits an independent variable that is correlated with both the dependent variable and one or more of the included independent variables.

13. A seesaw (also known as a teeter-totter or teeterboard) is a long, narrow board supported by a single pivot point, most commonly located at the midpoint between both ends; as one end goes up, the other goes down. Seesaw, Wikipedia Link
14. DNA, Wikipedia Link Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is a molecule composed of two chains that coil around each other to form a double helix carrying the genetic instructions used in the growth, development, functioning, and reproduction of all known living organisms and many viruses. DNA and ribonucleic acid (RNA) are nucleic acids; alongside proteins, lipids and complex carbohydrates (polysaccharides), nucleic acids are one of the four major types of macromolecules that are essential for all known forms of life.
15. Homo Economicus, Wikipedia Link The term homo economicus, or economic man, is a caricature of economic theory framed as a "mythical species" or word play on homo sapiens, and used in pedagogy. It stands for a portrayal of humans as agents who are consistently rational and narrowly self-interested, and who usually pursue their subjectively-defined ends optimally.
16. Keynesian Beauty Contest, Wikipedia Link. Keynes described the action of rational agents in a market using an analogy based on a fictional newspaper contest, in which entrants are asked to choose the six most attractive faces from a hundred photographs. Those who picked the most popular faces are then eligible for a prize. A naive strategy would be to choose the face that, in the opinion of the entrant, is the most handsome. A more sophisticated contest entrant, wishing to maximize the chances of winning a prize, would think about what the majority perception of attractive is, and then make a selection based on some inference from his knowledge of public perceptions. This can be carried one step further to take into account the fact that other entrants would each have their own opinion of what public perceptions are. Thus the strategy can be extended to the next order and the next and so on, at each level attempting to predict the eventual outcome of the process based on the reasoning of other rational agents. Keynes believed that similar behavior was at work within the stock market. This would have people pricing shares not based on what they think their fundamental value is, but rather on what they think everyone else thinks their value is, or what everybody else would predict the average assessment of value to be.
17. Nash Equilibrium, Wikipedia LinkIn game theory, the Nash equilibrium, named after American mathematician John Forbes Nash Jr., is a solution concept of a non-cooperative game involving two or more

players in which each player is assumed to know the equilibrium strategies of the other players, and no player has anything to gain by changing only their own strategy.

18. Experimental Results of Guess 2/3 of the average, Wikipedia LinkWe have tried more than ten trials of this game as a classroom experiment with students of economics and finance. The number of participants varied from 25 to around 60. When the number of participants were large, the students were asked to provide their answers in teams of three or four so that the total number of answers were usually between 15 to 20. This was done only to reduce the overhead later in finalizing the results. The students played the game to obtain a certain advantage in their final score for the course. The winning guess has usually been between 20 to 30. An interesting note is that when the team size is more than one, it leads to a lower guess.
19. MSCI, Wikipedia Link MSCI Inc. (formerly Morgan Stanley Capital International and MSCI Barra), is a Global provider of equity, fixed income, hedge fund stock market indexes, and multi-asset portfolio analysis tools. It publishes the MSCI BRIC, MSCI World and MSCI EAFE Indexes. The company is currently headquartered at 7 World Trade Center in Manhattan, New York City, U.S.
20. Factor Analysis, Wikipedia Link Factor analysis is a statistical method used to describe variability among observed, correlated variables in terms of a potentially lower number of unobserved variables called factors. For example, it is possible that variations in six observed variables mainly reflect the variations in two unobserved (underlying) variables. Factor analysis searches for such joint variations in response to unobserved latent variables. The observed variables are modelled as linear combinations of the potential factors, plus "error" terms. Factor analysis aims to find independent latent variables. The theory behind factor analytic methods is that the information gained about the interdependencies between observed variables can be used later to reduce the set of variables in a dataset.
21. Equity Swap, Wikipedia Link An equity swap is a financial derivative contract (a swap) where a set of future cash flows are agreed to be exchanged between two counterparties at set dates in the future. The two cash flows are usually referred to as "legs" of the swap; one of these "legs" is usually pegged to a floating rate such as LIBOR. This leg is also commonly referred to as the "floating leg". The other leg of the swap is based on the performance of either a share of stock or a stock market index. This leg is commonly referred to as the "equity leg". Most equity swaps involve a floating leg vs. an equity leg, although some exist with two equity legs. An equity swap involves a notional principal, a specified duration and predetermined payment intervals. The term "tenor" may refer either to the duration or the coupon frequency. Equity swaps are typically traded by Delta One trading desks.

## 7 References

1. Adcock, C. J. (1997). Sample size determination: a review. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The Statistician), 46(2), 261-283.
2. Aked, M., &amp; Moroz, M. (2015). The Market Impact of Passive Trading. Journal of Trading, 10(3), 5-12.
3. Alberts, B., Johnson, A., Lewis, J., Raff, M., Roberts, K., &amp; Walter, P. (2002). Cell junctions. In Molecular Biology of the Cell. 4th edition. Garland Science.
4. Alexander, C. (1999). Optimal hedging using cointegration. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 357(1758), 2039-2058.
5. Alexander, C., &amp; Dimitriu, A. (2005a). Indexing, cointegration and equity market regimes. International Journal of Finance &amp; Economics, 10(3), 213-231.
6. Alexander, C., &amp; Dimitriu, A. (2005b). Indexing and statistical arbitrage. The Journal of Portfolio Management, 31(2), 50-63.
7. Almgren, R., &amp; Neil, C. (2001). Optimal execution of portfolio transactions. Journal of Risk, 3, 5-40.
8. Amaya, D., Christoffersen, P., Jacobs, K., &amp; Vasquez, A. (2015). Does realized skewness predict the cross-section of equity returns?. Journal of Financial Economics, 118(1), 135-167.
9. Amihud, Y., &amp; Mendelson, H. (1989). The Effects of Beta, Bid-Ask Spread, Residual Risk, and Size on Stock Returns. The Journal of Finance, 44(2), 479-486.
10. Amihud, Y., Mendelson, H., &amp; Uno, J. (1999). Number of shareholders and stock prices: Evidence from Japan. The Journal of finance, 54(3), 1169-1184.
11. An, H., &amp; Zhang, T. (2013). Stock price synchronicity, crash risk, and institutional investors. Journal of Corporate Finance, 21, 1-15.
12. Andersen, T. G., &amp; Bollerslev, T. (1998). Answering the skeptics: Yes, standard volatility models do provide accurate forecasts. International economic review, 885-905.
13. Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F. X., &amp; Labys, P. (2003). Modeling and forecasting realized volatility. Econometrica, 71(2), 579-625.

14. Andersen, J. V., &amp; Sornette, D. (2004). Fearless versus fearful speculative financial bubbles. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 337(3-4), 565-585.
15. Ang, A., Hodrick, R. J., Xing, Y., &amp; Zhang, X. (2006). The cross-section of volatility and expected returns. The Journal of Finance, 61(1), 259-299.
16. Angeletos, G. M., Hellwig, C., &amp; Pavan, A. (2007). Dynamic global games of regime change: Learning, multiplicity, and the timing of attacks. Econometrica, 75(3), 711-756.
17. Badrinath, S. G., &amp; Chatterjee, S. (1988). On measuring skewness and elongation in common stock return distributions: The case of the market index. Journal of Business, 451-472.
18. Badrinath, S. G., &amp; Chatterjee, S. (1991). A data-analytic look at skewness and elongation in commonstock-return distributions. Journal of Business &amp; Economic Statistics, 9(2), 223-233.
19. Bailey, D. H., Borwein, J. M., de Prado, M. L., &amp; Zhu, Q. J. (2014). Pseudo-mathematics and financial charlatanism: the effefcts of backtest overfitting on out-of-sample performance. Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 61(5), 458-471.
20. Bakshi, G., Kapadia, N., &amp; Madan, D. (2003). Stock return characteristics, skew laws, and the differential pricing of individual equity options. The Review of Financial Studies, 16(1), 101-143.
21. Banerjee, A., Dolado, J. J., Galbraith, J. W., &amp; Hendry, D. (1993). Co-integration, error correction, and the econometric analysis of non-stationary data. OUP Catalogue.
22. Barberis, N., Mukherjee, A., &amp; Wang, B. (2016). Prospect theory and stock returns: an empirical test. The Review of Financial Studies, 29(11), 3068-3107.
23. Beasley, J. E., Meade, N., &amp; Chang, T. J. (2003). An evolutionary heuristic for the index tracking problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 148(3), 621-643.
24. Bernstein, P. L. (1987). Liquidity, stock markets, and market makers. Financial Management, 54-62.
25. Bhide, A. (1993). The hidden costs of stock market liquidity. Journal of financial economics, 34(1), 31-51.
26. Bilbiie, F. O., Ghironi, F., &amp; Melitz, M. J. (2012). Endogenous entry, product variety, and business cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 120(2), 304-345.
27. Bishop, Y. M., Fienberg, S. E., &amp; Holland, P. W. (2007). Discrete Multivariate Analysis: Theory and Practice. Springer Science &amp; Business Media.
28. Black, F. (1992). Beta and return. Journal of portfolio management, 1.

29. Blackstone Jr, J. H., &amp; Cox, J. F. (1985). Inventory management techniques. Journal of Small Business Management (pre-1986), 23(000002), 27.
30. Bloom, S. M., Gouws, F., &amp; Holmes, D. T. (2000). U.S. Patent No. 6,061,663. Washington, DC: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
31. Bloomberg, L. P. (1981). Bloomberg Terminal. New York: Bloomberg LP.
32. Bodie, Z., Kane, A., &amp; Marcus, A. (2014). Investments (10th global ed.). Berkshire: McGraw-Hill Education.
33. Bollerslev, T., Chou, R. Y., &amp; Kroner, K. F. (1992). ARCH modeling in finance: A review of the theory and empirical evidence. Journal of econometrics, 52(1-2), 5-59.
34. Bouchaud, J. P., &amp; Potters, M. (2003). Theory of financial risk and derivative pricing: from statistical physics to risk management. Cambridge university press.
35. Büren, C., Frank, B., &amp; Nagel, R. (2012). A historical note on the beauty contest (No. 11-2012). Joint discussion paper series in economics.
36. Buss, D. M. (1985). Human mate selection: Opposites are sometimes said to attract, but in fact we are likely to marry someone who is similar to us in almost every variable. American scientist, 73(1), 47-51.
37. Burstein, G. (1999). Macro trading and investment strategies: macroeconomic arbitrage in global markets (Vol. 3). John Wiley &amp; Sons.
38. Cai, J. (1994). A Markov model of switching-regime ARCH. Journal of Business &amp; Economic Statistics, 12(3), 309-316.
39. Chan, L. K., &amp; Lakonishok, J. (1993). Institutional trades and intraday stock price behavior. Journal of Financial Economics, 33(2), 173-199.
40. Chance, D. M., &amp; Rich, D. R. (1998). The pricing of equity swaps and swaptions. The Journal of Derivatives, 5(4), 19-31.
41. Chen, J., Hong, H., &amp; Stein, J. C. (2001). Forecasting crashes: Trading volume, past returns, and conditional skewness in stock prices. Journal of financial Economics, 61(3), 345-381.
42. Chen, A. S., Leung, M. T., &amp; Daouk, H. (2003). Application of neural networks to an emerging financial market: forecasting and trading the Taiwan Stock Index. Computers &amp; Operations Research, 30(6), 901-923.

43. Cheng, Y., Liu, M. H., &amp; Qian, J. (2006). Buy-side analysts, sell-side analysts, and investment decisions of money managers. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 41(1), 51-83.
44. Chiarella, C., &amp; He, X. (2001). Asset price and wealth dynamics under heterogeneous expectations. Quantitative Finance, 1(5), 509-526.
45. Church, G. M., Gao, Y., &amp; Kosuri, S. (2012). Next-generation digital information storage in DNA. Science, 1226355.
46. Chow, T. M., Hsu, J., Kalesnik, V., &amp; Little, B. (2011). A survey of alternative equity index strategies. Financial Analysts Journal, 67(5), 37-57.
47. Christoffersen, P. F. (2012). Elements of financial risk management. Academic Press.
48. Chung, Y. P. (1991). A transactions data test of stock index futures market efficiency and index arbitrage profitability. The Journal of Finance, 46(5), 1791-1809.
49. Copeland, L. S. (2008). Exchange rates and international finance. Pearson Education.
50. Corrado, C. J., &amp; Su, T. (1996). Skewness and kurtosis in S&amp;P 500 index returns implied by option prices. Journal of Financial research, 19(2), 175-192.
51. Costello, A. B., &amp; Osborne, J. W. (2005). Best practices in exploratory factor analysis: Four recommendations for getting the most from your analysis. Practical assessment, research &amp; evaluation, 10(7), 1-9.
52. Cremers, M., &amp; Weinbaum, D. (2010). Deviations from put-call parity and stock return predictability. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 45(2), 335-367.
53. Datar, V. T., Naik, N. Y., &amp; Radcliffe, R. (1998). Liquidity and stock returns: An alternative test. Journal of Financial Markets, 1(2), 203-219.
54. Dose, C., &amp; Cincotti, S. (2005). Clustering of financial time series with application to index and enhanced index tracking portfolio. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 355(1), 145151.
55. Driessen, J., Maenhout, P. J., &amp; Vilkov, G. (2009). The price of correlation risk: Evidence from equity options. The Journal of Finance, 64(3), 1377-1406.
56. Dwyer Jr, G. P., Locke, P., &amp; Yu, W. (1996). Index arbitrage and nonlinear dynamics between the S&amp;P 500 futures and cash. The Review of Financial Studies, 9(1), 301-332.

57. Eisenbeis, R. A. (1977). Pitfalls in the application of discriminant analysis in business, finance, and economics. The Journal of Finance, 32(3), 875-900.
58. Elena, S. F., &amp; Lenski, R. E. (2003). Microbial genetics: evolution experiments with microorganisms: the dynamics and genetic bases of adaptation. Nature Reviews Genetics, 4(6), 457.
59. Elton, E. J., Gruber, M. J., Brown, S. J., &amp; Goetzmann, W. N. (2009). Modern portfolio theory and investment analysis. John Wiley &amp; Sons.
60. Engle, R. F., &amp; Clive, W. J. G. (1987). Co-integration and error correction: representation, estimation, &amp; testing. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 251-276.
61. Engle, R. F., &amp; Ng, V. K. (1993). Measuring and testing the impact of news on volatility. The journal of finance, 48(5), 1749-1778.
62. Fama, E. F. (1970). Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work. The journal of Finance, 25(2), 383-417.
63. Finucane, T. J. (1991). Put-call parity and expected returns. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 26(4), 445-457.
64. Fletcher, J. (2000). On the conditional relationship between beta and return in international stock returns. International Review of Financial Analysis, 9(3), 235-245.
65. Franci, F., Marschinski, R., &amp; Matassini, L. (2001). Learning the optimal trading strategy. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 294(1-2), 213-225.
66. French, K. R., Schwert, G. W., &amp; Stambaugh, R. F. (1987). Expected stock returns and volatility. Journal of financial Economics, 19(1), 3-29.
67. Fung, J. K., Lau, F., &amp; Tse, Y. (2015). The impact of sampling frequency on intraday correlation and lead-lag relationships between index futures and individual stocks. Journal of Futures Markets, 35(10), 939-952.
68. Gans, J. S., &amp; Shepherd, G. B. (1994). How are the mighty fallen: Rejected classic articles by leading economists. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 8(1), 165-179.
69. Gasiorowski, M. J. (1995). Economic crisis and political regime change: An event history analysis. American political science review, 89(4), 882-897.

70. Gay, G., Venkateswaran, A., Kolb, R. W., &amp; Overdahl, J. A. (2008). The pricing and valuation of swaps. Financial Derivatives: Pricing and Risk Management, 405-422.
71. Glosten, L. R., Jagannathan, R., &amp; Runkle, D. E. (1993). On the relation between the expected value and the volatility of the nominal excess return on stocks. The journal of finance, 48(5), 1779-1801.
72. Gompers, P. A., &amp; Metrick, A. (2001). Institutional investors and equity prices. The quarterly journal of Economics, 116(1), 229-259.
73. Granger, C. W. (1981). Some properties of time series data and their use in econometric model specification. Journal of econometrics, 16(1), 121-130.
74. Groysberg, B., Healy, P., &amp; Chapman, C. (2008). Buy-side vs. sell-side analysts' earnings forecasts. Financial Analysts Journal, 64(4), 25-39.
75. Guastaroba, G., &amp; Speranza, M. G. (2012). Kernel search: An application to the index tracking problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 217(1), 54-68.
76. Gujarati, D. N. (2009). Basic econometrics. Tata McGraw-Hill Education.
77. Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., Anderson, R. E., &amp; Tatham, R. L. (1998). Multivariate data analysis (Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 207-219). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice hall.
78. Hameed, A., Kang, W., &amp; Viswanathan, S. (2010). Stock market declines and liquidity. The Journal of Finance, 65(1), 257-293.
79. Hamilton, J. D. (1994). Time series analysis (Vol. 2). Princeton: Princeton university press.
80. Harris, R. I. (1995). Using cointegration analysis in econometric modelling.
81. Hassan, M. R., &amp; Nath, B. (2005). Stock market forecasting using hidden Markov model: a new approach. In Intelligent Systems Design and Applications, 2005. ISDA'05. Proceedings. 5th International Conference on (pp. 192-196). IEEE.
82. Hassan, M. R. (2009). A combination of hidden Markov model and fuzzy model for stock market forecasting. Neurocomputing, 72(16-18), 3439-3446.
83. Hau, H., Massa, M., &amp; Peress, J. (2009). Do demand curves for currencies slope down? Evidence from the MSCI global index change. The Review of Financial Studies, 23(4), 1681-1717.
84. Heller, J. (1999). Catch-22: a novel (Vol. 4). Simon and Schuster.

85. Hong, H., Li, W., Ni, S. X., Scheinkman, J. A., &amp; Yan, P. (2015). Days to cover and stock returns (No. w21166). National Bureau of Economic Research.
86. Hott, C. (2009). Herding behavior in asset markets. Journal of Financial Stability, 5(1), 35-56.
87. Hull, J. C., &amp; Basu, S. (2016). Options, futures, and other derivatives. Pearson Education India.
88. Isakov, D. (1999). Is beta still alive? Conclusive evidence from the Swiss stock market. The European Journal of Finance, 5(3), 202-212.
89. Ismail, S. (2014). Exponential Organizations: Why new organizations are ten times better, faster, and cheaper than yours (and what to do about it). Diversion Books.
90. Jacobs, B. I., &amp; Levy, K. N. (1993). Long/short equity investing. Journal of Portfolio Management, 20(1), 52.
91. Jolliffe, I. T. (1986). Principal component analysis and factor analysis. In Principal component analysis (pp. 115-128). Springer, New York, NY.
92. Kashyap, R. (2014a). Dynamic Multi-Factor Bid-Offer Adjustment Model. The Journal of Trading, 9(3), 42-55.
93. Kashyap, R. (2014b). The Circle of Investment. International Journal of Economics and Finance, 6(5), 244-263.
94. Kashyap, R. (2015). A Tale of Two Consequences. The Journal of Trading, 10(4), 51-95.
95. Kashyap, R. (2016a). Hong Kong - Shanghai Connect / Hong Kong - Beijing Disconnect (?), Scaling the Great Wall of Chinese Securities Trading Costs. The Journal of Trading, 11(3), 81-134.
96. Kashyap, R. (2016b). David vs Goliath (You against the Markets), A Dynamic Programming Approach to Separate the Impact and Timing of Trading Costs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.00984.
97. Kashyap, R (2017). Artificial Intelligence: A Child's Play. Working Paper.
98. Kashyap, R (2018a). Beating Benchmarks by Building Bouncy Baskets. Working Paper.
99. Kashyap, R (2018b). Seven Survival Senses: Evolutionary Training makes Discerning Differences more Natural than Spotting Similarities. Working Paper.
100. Kat, H. M. (2001). Structured equity derivatives. England: John Wiley &amp; Sons.

101. Ke, Q., Ferrara, E., Radicchi, F., &amp; Flammini, A. (2015). Defining and identifying Sleeping Beauties in science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(24), 7426-7431.
102. Keynes, J. M. (2018). The general theory of employment, interest, and money. Springer.
103. Kijima, M., &amp; Muromachi, Y. (2001). Pricing equity swaps in a stochastic interest rate economy. The Journal of Derivatives, 8(4), 19-35.
104. Klemkosky, R. C., &amp; Resnick, B. G. (1979). Put-Call Parity and Market Efficiency. The Journal of Finance, 34(5), 1141-1155.
105. Kostovetsky, L. (2003). Index mutual funds and exchange-traded funds. Journal of Portfolio Management, 29(4), 80-92.
106. Kosuri, S., &amp; Church, G. M. (2014). Large-scale de novo DNA synthesis: technologies and applications. Nature methods, 11(5), 499.
107. Krejcie, R. V., &amp; Morgan, D. W. (1970). Determining sample size for research activities. Educational and psychological measurement, 30(3), 607-610.
108. Kumar, P., &amp; Seppi, D. J. (1994). Information and index arbitrage. Journal of Business, 481-509.
109. Lakonishok, J., Shleifer, A., &amp; Vishny, R. W. (1992). The impact of institutional trading on stock prices. Journal of financial economics, 32(1), 23-43.
110. Lancaster, K. (1990). The economics of product variety: A survey. Marketing science, 9(3), 189-206.
111. Lancioni, R. A., &amp; Howard, K. (1978). Inventory management techniques. International Journal of Physical Distribution &amp; Materials Management, 8(8), 385-428.
112. Lenth, R. V. (2001). Some practical guidelines for effective sample size determination. The American Statistician, 55(3), 187-193.
113. Levy, M., &amp; Levy, H. (1996). The danger of assuming homogeneous expectations. Financial Analysts Journal, 52(3), 65-70.
114. Litterman, R. B. (1983). A random walk, Markov model for the distribution of time series. Journal of Business &amp; Economic Statistics, 1(2), 169-173.
115. Ludvigson, S. C., &amp; Ng, S. (2007). The empirical risk-return relation: A factor analysis approach. Journal of Financial Economics, 83(1), 171-222.
116. Lutz, J. F., Ouchi, M., Liu, D. R., &amp; Sawamoto, M. (2013). Sequence-controlled polymers. Science, 341(6146), 1238149.

117. Maddala, G. S., &amp; Lahiri, K. (1992). Introduction to econometrics (Vol. 2). New York: Macmillan.
118. Mantzicopoulos, P., &amp; Patrick, H. (2010). 'The seesaw is a machine that goes up and down': Young children's narrative responses to science-related informational text. Early Education and Development, 21(3), 412-444.
119. Marshall, C. M. (2009). Dispersion trading: Empirical evidence from US options markets. Global Finance Journal, 20(3), 289-301.
120. MacCallum, R. C., Widaman, K. F., Zhang, S., &amp; Hong, S. (1999). Sample size in factor analysis. Psychological methods, 4(1), 84.
121. Meissner, G. (2016). Correlation Trading Strategies-Opportunities and Limitations. The Journal of Trading, 11(4), 14-32.
122. Merkley, K., Michaely, R., &amp; Pacelli, J. (2017). Does the scope of the sell-side analyst industry matter? An examination of bias, accuracy, and information content of analyst reports. The Journal of Finance, 72(3), 1285-1334.
123. Miao, G. J. (2014). High frequency and dynamic pairs trading based on statistical arbitrage using a two-stage correlation and cointegration approach. International Journal of Economics and Finance, 6(3), 96.
124. Nagel, R. (1995). Unraveling in guessing games: An experimental study. The American Economic Review, 85(5), 1313-1326.
125. Nagel, R., Bühren, C., &amp; Frank, B. (2017). Inspired and inspiring: Hervé Moulin and the discovery of the beauty contest game. Mathematical Social Sciences, 90, 191-207.
126. Nash, J. (1951). Non-cooperative games. Annals of mathematics, 286-295.
127. Nandan, T., Agrawal, P., &amp; Jindal, S. (2015). An Empirical Investigation of Mispricing in Stock Futures at the National Stock Exchange. Indian Journal of Finance, 9(9), 23-35.
128. Natenberg, S. (1994). Option volatility &amp; pricing: advanced trading strategies and techniques. McGraw Hill Professional.
129. Nei, M. (2013). Mutation-driven evolution. OUP Oxford.
130. Nekrasov, V. (2014). Knowledge Rather Than Hope: a Book for Retail Investors and Mathematical Finance Students. Vasily Nekrasov.

131. Nelson, D. B. (1991). Conditional heteroskedasticity in asset returns: A new approach. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 347-370.
132. Ng, V. K., Engle, R. F., &amp; Rothschild, M. (1992). A multi-dynamic-factor model for stock returns.
133. Osborne, M. J., &amp; Rubinstein, A. (1994). A course in game theory. MIT press.
134. Pardo, R. (2011). The evaluation and optimization of trading strategies (Vol. 314). John Wiley &amp; Sons.
135. Pástor, Ľ., &amp; Stambaugh, R. F. (2003). Liquidity risk and expected stock returns. Journal of Political economy, 111(3), 642-685.
136. Perold., R. F. (1998). The implementation shortfall: Paper versus reality. Streetwise: the best of the Journal of Portfolio Management, 106.
137. Persky, J. (1995). The ethology of homo economicus. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(2), 221-231.
138. Plomin, R., &amp; Daniels, D. (1987). Why are children in the same family so different from one another?. Behavioral and brain Sciences, 10(1), 1-16.
139. Randall, T., &amp; Ulrich, K. (2001). Product variety, supply chain structure, and firm performance: Analysis of the US bicycle industry. Management Science, 47(12), 1588-1604.
140. Reynolds, R. (1992). Super heroes: A modern mythology. Univ. Press of Mississippi.
141. Rosenberg, S. M. (1997). Mutation for survival. Current opinion in genetics &amp; development, 7(6), 829-834.
142. Roll, R., &amp; Ross, S. A. (1980). An empirical investigation of the arbitrage pricing theory. The Journal of Finance, 35(5), 1073-1103.
143. Ross, S. A. (1976). The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing. Journal of Economic Theory, 13(3), 341-360.
144. Roy, R. K., Meszynska, A., Laure, C., Charles, L., Verchin, C., &amp; Lutz, J. F. (2015). Design and synthesis of digitally encoded polymers that can be decoded and erased. Nature communications, 6, 7237.

145. Scherbina, A., &amp; Schlusche, B. (2014). Asset price bubbles: a survey. Quantitative Finance, 14(4), 589-604.
146. Schipper, K. (1991). Analysts' forecasts. Accounting horizons, 5(4), 105.
147. Schwert, G. W. (1989). Why does stock market volatility change over time?. The journal of finance, 44(5), 1115-1153.
148. Sharpe, W. F. (1964). Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under conditions of risk. The journal of finance, 19(3), 425-442.
149. Shlens, J. (2005). A tutorial on principal component analysis. Systems Neurobiology Laboratory, University of California at San Diego.
150. Siegel, J. J. (2003). What is an asset price bubble? An operational definition. European financial management, 9(1), 11-24.
151. Smithson, C. W. (1998). Managing financial risk. McGraw-Hill.
152. Spence, M. (1976). Product selection, fixed costs, and monopolistic competition. The Review of economic studies, 43(2), 217-235.
153. Srinivasan, S., Pauwels, K., Silva-Risso, J., &amp; Hanssens, D. M. (2009). Product innovations, advertising, and stock returns. Journal of Marketing, 73(1), 24-43.
154. Stocker, T. F. (1998). The seesaw effect. Science, 282(5386), 61-62.
155. Stöckl, T., Huber, J., &amp; Kirchler, M. (2010). Bubble measures in experimental asset markets. Experimental Economics, 13(3), 284-298.
156. Stoyan, S. J., &amp; Kwon, R. H. (2010). A two-stage stochastic mixed-integer programming approach to the index tracking problem. Optimization and Engineering, 11(2), 247-275.
157. Taleb, N. N. (2007). The black swan: The impact of the highly improbable (Vol. 2). Random house.
158. Thaler, R. H. (2000). From homo economicus to homo sapiens. Journal of economic perspectives, 14(1), 133-141.
159. Tuckman, B., &amp; Serrat, A. (2011). Fixed income securities: tools for today's markets (Vol. 626). John Wiley &amp; Sons.
160. Turner, C. M., Startz, R., &amp; Nelson, C. R. (1989). A Markov model of heteroskedasticity, risk, and learning in the stock market. Journal of Financial Economics, 25(1), 3-22.

161. Valsiner, J. (2007). Culture in minds and societies: Foundations of cultural psychology. Psychol. Stud.(September 2009), 54, 238-239.
162. Verbeek, M. (2008). A guide to modern econometrics. John Wiley &amp; Sons.
163. Wade, R. H. (2008). Financial regime change?. New Left Review, 53, 5-21.
164. Wang, M. C., &amp; Liao, S. L. (2003). Pricing models of equity swaps. Journal of Futures Markets, 23(8), 751-772.
165. Williams, P. A., Moyes, G. D., &amp; Park, K. (1996). Factors affecting earnings forecast revisions for the buy-side and sell-side analyst. Accounting Horizons, 10(3), 112.
166. Wilke, C. O., Wang, J. L., Ofria, C., Lenski, R. E., &amp; Adami, C. (2001). Evolution of digital organisms at high mutation rates leads to survival of the flattest. Nature, 412(6844), 331.
167. Window, C. (2010). What is MATLAB?.
168. Wipplinger, E. (2007). Philippe Jorion: Value at Risk-The New Benchmark for Managing Financial Risk. Financial Markets and Portfolio Management, 21(3), 397.
169. Wu, T. P., &amp; Chen, S. N. (2007). Equity swaps in a LIBOR market model. Journal of Futures Markets, 27(9), 893-920.
170. Xu, Y., &amp; Malkiel, B. G. (2003). Investigating the Behavior of Idiosyncratic Volatility. The Journal of Business, 76(4), 613-645.