## Pilot Beam Pattern Design for Channel Estimation in Massive MIMO Systems

Song Noh, Michael D. Zoltowski, Youngchul Sung † , and David J. Love

Abstract -In this paper, the problem of pilot beam pattern design for channel estimation in massive multiple-input multipleoutput systems with a large number of transmit antennas at the base station is considered, and a new algorithm for pilot beam pattern design for optimal channel estimation is proposed under the assumption that the channel is a stationary GaussMarkov random process. The proposed algorithm designs the pilot beam pattern sequentially by exploiting the properties of Kalman filtering and the associated prediction error covariance matrices and also the channel statistics such as spatial and temporal channel correlation. The resulting design generates a sequentially-optimal sequence of pilot beam patterns with low complexity for a given set of system parameters. Numerical results show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) systems with largescale transmit antenna arrays, so called massive MIMO systems, is one of the key technologies for future wireless communications. The large size of the transmit antenna array relative to the number of receive terminals can average out thermal noise, fast channel fading, and some interference, based on the law of large numbers [2], [3]. Massive MIMO provides high data rates and energy efficiency with simple signal processing because the propagation channels to terminal stations served by a base station equipped with massive MIMO are asymptotically orthogonal due to the increased beam resolution [4], [5]. However, in practice, such benefits may be limited by channel estimation accuracy [6]. This is especially true when full frequency reuse across neighboring cells is adopted; in this case, pilot contamination [2], [6]-[8] leads to imperfect channel estimation which, in turn, yields severely degraded system performance. Furthermore, in contrast to the conventional MIMO system employing a small number of antennas, the overhead required for channel estimation for massive MIMO can be overwhelming and thereby severely limit the above mentioned benefits of massive MIMO. Since the available training resources are limited by either the channel coherence interval or the amount of interference induced by neighboring cells, fast and reliable channel estimation with reduced training overhead is critical to massive MIMO systems.

† Corresponding author

S. Noh, M. Zoltowski, and D. J. Love are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA (email:songnoh@purude.edu and { mikedz,djlove } @ecn.purdue.edu). Y. Sung is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, South Korea 305-701 (e-mail: ysung@ee.kaist.ac.kr). This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education (2013R1A1A2A10060852). A preliminary version of this work was presented in [1], in which only the MISO case is considered. In this paper, the sequential design proposed in [1] is extended to the MIMO case, power allocation, and the block-fading case. Extensive simulation results with some realistic channel models are provided.

To tackle the challenge of channel estimation, much of the prior work focused on time-division duplex (TDD) operation assumed channel reciprocity [2], [3], [9], and reciprocity calibration [4] under the assumption of time-invariant channels within the coherence time. More recently, Wiener prediction has been employed to mitigate the impact of channel aging over time under the assumption of time-varying channels [10]. However, in most wireless systems, frequency-division duplex (FDD) operation is employed, and in this case the problem of channel estimation becomes more challenging because MIMO channel sounding requires substantial overhead (such as feedback and/or dedicated times for channel sounding) that scales with the number of antennas. Such overhead can limit the performance improvement that is expected in massive MIMO systems. There has been some work on channel estimation and channel state information (CSI) feedback techniques for FDD massive MIMO systems, based on compressive sensing [11], limited feedback [12], [13], and projected channels [14]. Also, to improve channel estimation performance, the problem of pilot beam design was investigated for massive MIMO systems under the assumption of closed-loop training [15], [16].

In this paper, we consider the problem of pilot beam design for downlink channel estimation in FDD massive MIMO systems, for the case where the number of symbol times for channel sounding within a channel coherence time is typically much less than the number of antennas. To design efficient pilot beam patterns, we here exploit channel statistics for massive MIMO systems derived from dynamic channel modelling [17]-[19] and analytical channel spatial correlation models [20]-[23]. Since the gain of beamforming in practical wireless systems is obtained mainly in slowly fading channels, we focus on slowly fading and exploit the correlated timevariations in the channel by adopting the widely-used GaussMarkov channel model [24]. Under this model, the channel estimation performance can be enhanced through the use of optimal Kalman filtering and prediction that exploits the current and all previously received pilot signals, thereby shortening the required time for accurate channel estimation. Our model also incorporates spatial channel correlation that depends on both the antenna geometry and the scattering environment; experimental investigations and analytical studies have confirmed that this information is typically available in (massive) MIMO systems [4], [5], [20]-[23] and is locally 1 time-wise stationary [25]. By exploiting both the channel dynamics and the spatial correlation, we develop a low-complexity pilot beam pattern design procedure that provides a sequence of optimal pilot beam patterns that sequentially minimize the channel estimation mean square error (MSE) at each training instant based on a greedy approach. (The definition of sequential optimality will be provided soon.) The key idea underlying the proposed method is the joint use of spatio-temporal channel correlation and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) combined with the exploitation of the structure of the error covariance matrices generated with optimal Kalman filtering under the GaussMarkov model, to derive a sequence of optimal pilot beam patterns for each training period.

1 It means that for a short period of time, the correlation characteristics do not change much.

This paper is organized as follows: The system model and background are described in Section II. Section III describes the proposed pilot beam pattern design method. Practical issues of implementing the proposed method are discussed in Section IV. Numerical results are provided in Section V, followed by conclusions in Section VI.

Notation Vectors and matrices are written in boldface with matrices in capitals. All vectors are column vectors. For a matrix A , A T , A H , and A ∗ indicate the transpose, Hermitian transpose, and complex conjugate of A , respectively. tr ( A ) and var ( A ) denote the trace of A and the variance operator, respectively. vec ( A ) denotes the column vector obtained by stacking the elements of A columnwise. [ A ] i,j denotes the element of A at the i -th row, and j -th column. diag ( a 1 , · · · , a n ) denotes a diagonal matrix with diagonal elements a 1 , · · · , a n , whereas diag ( A ) is the column vector containing the diagonal elements of a matrix A . For a vector a , we use ‖ a ‖ 1 for 1 -norm and ‖ a ‖ 2 for 2 -norm. For two matrices A and B , A ⊗ B denotes the Kronecker product, and A ⪯ B means that B -A is positive semi-definite. E { x } represents the expectation of x . I n stands for the identity matrix of size n , and 1 denotes a column vector with all one elements. R + denotes the set of non-negative real numbers. ι = √ -1 is used for the imaginary number so that i and j may be used as indices.

## II. SYSTEM MODEL

## A. System Setup

We consider a massive MIMO system with N t transmit antennas and N r received antennas ( N t ≫ N r ) , where the channel is given by an N r × N t MIMO system with flat Rayleigh fading under the narrowband assumption [26] (which easily extends to the case of wideband frequency-selective channel when the system adopts OFDM transmission [27]). The received signal at the k -th symbol time is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where s k is the N t × 1 transmitted symbol vector at time k , H k is the N r × N t MIMO channel matrix at time k , and w k is the zero-mean independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) complex Gaussian noise vector at time k with covariance matrix σ 2 w I N r , as shown in Fig. 1. (Here, we used the complex conjugate on s k to keep the notation consistent with (7).)

1) MIMO Channel Correlation Model: For channel correlation, we consider the general Kronecker model that captures the transmit and receive antenna correlation [21], [22]. The transmit and receive channel covariance matrices reflect the geometry of the propagation paths and remain almost unchanged (locally time-wise) when compared to the rapidlyvarying instant channel realization, since the array response to the scattering environments changes slowly compared to the user's location [25], [28]. Thus, the channel covariance matrices are assumed to be fixed over the considered time period for channel estimation, and the considered Kronecker channel model is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where { ˜ H k ∈ C N r × N t , k = 1 , 2 , · · · } is an ergodic sequence of random matrices with independent zero-mean Gaussian elements with some variance, and R t ∈ C N t × N t and R r ∈ C N r × N r are deterministic transmit and receive correlation matrices, respectively, i.e., R t = 1 N r E { H H k H k } and R r = 1 N t E { H k H H k } so that tr ( E { H k H H k } ) = N t N r . (Case studies for some channel models are discussed in [29].)

In the downlink training, the channel covariance matrices can be estimated by subspace estimation methods even without the knowledge of instantaneous channel state information [30][32], and there also exist methods that estimate the downlink channel covariance matrix using uplink training in FDD systems using techniques such as frequency calibration matrix [33], log-periodic array [34], or duplex array approach [35]. Furthermore, under some circumstances the channel covariance matrices R t and R r are approximately known a priori . For example, under the virtual channel condition [20], the use of uniform linear arrays (ULAs) at the transmitter and the receiver makes R t and R r approximately Toeplitz. By extending the one-ring model introduced by Jakes [27], the spatial correlation in the flat-fading case can be determined by the physical environment such as angle spread (AS), angle of arrival (AoA), and antenna geometry [21]. That is, in the case of a ULA with the AoA θ and the antenna spacing λD , the channel covariance matrix is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where λ is the wavelength and ∆ is the AS. (This result can be extended to two-dimensional or planar arrays [23].) When the number of transmit antennas grows large, the eigenspace of R t is closely approximated by a unitary Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) matrix with the support of AoA distribution. Hereafter, we shall assume that the transmitter and the receiver have the knowledge of the channel covariance matrices. The assumption of known R t will be revisited in Section IV.

2) Channel Variation in Time and Slotted Transmission Structure: For channel variation in time, we adopt a statespace model, i.e., the channel dynamic is given by the firstorder stationary Gauss-Markov process [17]-[19], [36]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that satisfies the Lyapunov equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- image -->

t

Fig. 1. Massive MIMO system model where λ is the eigenvalues of the prediction covariance matrix P k | k -1

and R h = E { h k h H k } = R b = E { b k b H k } for all k [25], where h k := vec ( H k ) , b k is a zero-mean and temporally independent plant Gaussian vector, and a ∈ (0 , 1] is the temporal fading coefficient. 2 (It is easy to verify that { h k , k = 1 , 2 , · · · } is a stationary process under this assumption.) The temporal fading correlation coefficient a can be estimated [36]-[39], and we assume that a is known. Then, under the Kronecker channel model (2) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume slotted transmission with M consecutive symbols as one slot which is comprised of a training period of M p symbols and a data transmission period of M d symbols so that M = M p + M d .

## B. Channel Estimation

We consider the minimum mean square error (MMSE) approach for channel estimation [40] based on the current and all previous observations during training periods, i.e., ˆ h k | k := E { h k | y ( k ) p } where y ( k ) p denotes all received signals during the pilot transmission up to symbol time k , given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where I p := { k = lM + m | l = 0 , 1 , 2 , · · · , m = 1 , · · · , M p } . At each training symbol time, a pilot beam vector (or beam pattern) s k of size N t , k ∈ I p , is transmitted for channel estimation. During the data transmission period, on the other hand, the base station sends unknown data with transmit beamforming based on the estimated channel. 3

Note that the received signal model (1) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S k := s k ⊗ I N r is an N t N r × N r matrix. Then, we have a state-space model obtained from (4) and (7) and the optimal channel estimation is given by the Kalman filter for this statespace model [42]. During the training period, the Kalman filter performs a measurement update step for channel estimation at each symbol time, where the Kalman channel estimate and the related error covariance matrices are given by [42]

2 For Jakes' model, a = J 0 (2 πf D T s ) [27], where J 0 ( · ) is the zeroth-order Bessel function, T s is the transmit symbol interval, and f D is the maximum Doppler frequency shift.

3 Transmit beamforming in FDD requires feedback information for channel state information (CSI) from the receiver. Thus, the quantized version of the downlink channel or the index of the quantized version of the channel chosen from a receiver can be fed back to the base station [41]. In addition, a quantized (or analog) version of the received training signal y k ∈ C N r can be fed back to enable channel estimation at the base station [1]. The focus of the paper is not feedback quantization but optimal design of the pilot beam pattern for channel estimation.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where K k = P k | k -1 S k ( S H k P k | k -1 S k + σ 2 w I N r ) -1 , ˆ h 1 | 0 = 0 , and P 1 | 0 = R h . Here, P k | k and P k | k -1 are the estimation and prediction error covariance matrices, respectively, defined as P k | k ′ = E { ( h k -ˆ h k | k ′ )( h k -ˆ h k | k ′ ) H | y ( k ′ ) p } , where ˆ h k | k ′ := E { h k | y ( k ′ ) p } . During the data transmission period, the channel is predicted based on the last channel estimate of the previous training period as [42]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where m = 1 , . . . , M d . During the data transmission period, the predicted channel can be used for transmit beamforming; for example, eigen-beamforming [2], [43] based on the predicted channel can be applied for maximum rate transmission.

In the simple case of multiple-input single-output (MISO) transmission, maximal ratio transmit beamforming based on the current channel estimate can be applied, and the transmit signal vector in this case is given by s k = ˆ h k | lM + Mp ‖ ˆ h k | lM + Mp ‖ 2 d k , where d k is the data symbol at symbol time k , k = lM + M p + m . From (7) and ∆ h k := h k -ˆ h k | lM + M p , the received signal model can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The second term in (12) denotes the additional noise resulting from imperfect channel estimation. By using the deterministic approximation of 1 N t | s H k ∆ h k | 2 -1 N t s H k P k | lM + M p s k a.s. -→ N t →∞ 0 [9], the received SNR with the estimated channel is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## III. THE PROPOSED PILOT BEAM PATTERN DESIGN

In this section, we present our proposed pilot beam pattern design methods that minimize the channel estimation MSE associated with optimal Kalman filtering explained in the previous section. The channel estimation MSE is directly related to the effective SNR [44] and thus such pilot beam pattern design can be leveraged to improve the training-based channel capacity.

## A. Greedy Sequential Design

We notice from (11) that the channel estimation error during the data transmission period depends only on a , R h and the estimation error covariance matrix P lM + M p | lM + M p at the last pilot symbol time. a and R h are given, but the estimation MSE at the last pilot symbol time, tr ( P lM + M p | lM + M p ) , can be minimized by properly designing the pilot beam pattern sequence { s k | k = l ′ M + m , l ′ ≤ l , m = 1 , . . . , M p } . Here, since P lM + M p | lM + M p is a function of S := { s j | j = l ′ M + m,m = 1 , · · · , M p , j ≤ lM + M p } , S should be jointly optimized to minimize the MSE at time k = lM + M p . However, this joint optimization is too complicated because the impact of S on P lM + M p | lM + M p is intertwined over time. 4 Furthermore, optimal channel estimation at k = lM + M p for some l is not the only optimization goal since the MSE at k = l ′ M + M p for each and every l ′ should be optimized for the l ′ -th data transmission period. Therefore, we first adopt a greedy sequential optimization approach to design the pilot beam pattern sequence, which is formally stated as follows.

Problem 1: For each pilot symbol time k starting from 1, given s j for all pilot symbol time j &lt; k , design s k such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The solution to Problem 1 is given by the following proposition.

Proposition 1: Given all previous pilot signals s j ( j &lt; k ), i) in the MISO case, the pilot beam pattern s k at time k minimizing tr ( P k | k ) is given by a scaled dominant eigenvector of the error covariance matrix P k | k ′ of the Kalman prediction for time k [1], and

ii) in the MIMO case, if the Kalman prediction error covariance matrix P k | k ′ for time k is decomposed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where U ∈ C N t × N t and V ∈ C N r × N r are unitary matrices, and Λ i ∈ R N r × N r + is a diagonal matrix with nonnegative real elements, 5 then a locally optimal pilot beam pattern s k at time k for minimizing tr ( P k | k ) is given by a scaled version of a column vector of the unitary matrix U in (16).

## Proof: See Appendix A.

Interestingly, it can be shown in the MISO case that the pilot beam pattern s k obtained from (33) is equivalent to the first principal component direction of P k | k -1 given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As seen in the proof, in the MIMO case, it is not easy to obtain a globally optimal solution, but the obtained locally optimal solution yields a nice property that can be exploited to derive an efficient pilot beam pattern design algorithm. Note that to obtain the (sequentially) optimal s k , we need to perform the eigen-decomposition (ED) of P k | k ′ at each pilot symbol time k , and this can be computationally expensive since N t is large for massive MIMO systems. However, due to the following proposition regarding the eigen-space of the Kalman prediction error covariance matrix associated with Proposition 1, we can eliminate such heavy complexity burden when designing a sequentially optimal pilot beam pattern sequence.

4 The difficulty in applying standard dynamic programming (DP) [45] to the problem is that the contribution of s k at time k to the cost function is not localized at time k . It affects the so-called branch metric at time k and all the following branch metrics.

5 This assumption will be verified shortly in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2: The Kalman filtering error covariance matrix P k | k and the Kalman prediction error covariance matrix P k | k ′ generated by sequentially optimal s k given by Proposition 1 are simultaneously diagonalizable with R h for any k and k ′ ( &lt; k ) , under the assumption of P 1 | 0 = R h = R t ⊗ R r . 6

For any pilot symbol time k = lM + m ( m = 1 , . . . , M p ), suppose that the Kalman prediction matrix for time k is given by P k | k -1 = ( U ⊗ V ) Λ ( k ) ( U ⊗ V ) H , where U ∈ C N t × N t and V ∈ C N r × N r are unitary matrices, and Λ ( k ) ∈ R N t N r × N t N r is a diagonal matrix given as

Proof: Proof is by induction. Let R t = UΣU H and R r = VΓV H be the ED of R t and R r , respectively. Then, P 1 | 0 = ( U ⊗ V ) Λ (1) ( U ⊗ V ) H , where Λ (1) = Σ ⊗ Γ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Proposition 1, s k is given by a scaled version of a column vector u i k of U , i.e., s k = √ ρ p u i k with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, from the measurement update (10), P k | k is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ¯ Λ ( k ) is a diagonal matrix with nonnegative elements. (See Appendix B for details.) Thus, P k | k and P k | k -1 are simultaneously diagonalizable. Since R h = R t ⊗ R r = ( U ⊗ V ) Λ (1) ( U ⊗ V ) H , P k +1 | k from the prediction step (9) is also simultaneously diagonalizable with R h since P k | k is simultaneously diagonalizable with R h .

Now consider a symbol time k during the first data transmission period. In this case, the prediction error covariance matrix is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where m = 1 , . . . , M d and ¯ Λ ( M p ) is defined in (20). Thus, any prediction error covariance matrix during the first data period is simultaneously diagonalizable with P k | k for k ≤ M p . Since this Kalman recursion repeats, we have the claim. ■

6 Such an initial parameter is a typical value for the Kalman filter, and there will be no loss [45].

Note that the assumption (16) is valid under the Kronecker channel correlation model together with the pilot beam pattern selection proposed in Proposition 1. Proposition 2 states that all Kalman error covariance matrices under the sequentially optimal pilot beam pattern design have the same set of eigenvectors as R h . This has an important practical implication: in each pilot transmission period, the base station transmits a pilot beam pattern at time k chosen from a fixed set of orthogonal beam patterns, i.e., the transmit eigenvectors of R h , according to some order depending on { Λ ( k ) i , i = 1 , · · · , N t } (defined in (18)). Note that (20) shows how a sequentially optimal pilot beam pattern at time k reduces the channel estimation error by changing the eigenvalue distribution from Λ ( k ) to ¯ Λ ( k ) with the measurement update step (only the i k -th subblock is updated as ¯ Λ ( k ) i k = σ 2 w ( ρ p Λ ( k ) i k + σ 2 w I N r ) -1 Λ ( k ) i k ), and (21) shows how the eigenvalues of the channel prediction error covariance matrix change (from ¯ Λ ( k ) to Λ ( k + m ) ) during the pure prediction period. Exploiting these facts, we propose an efficient algorithm to obtain the sequence of sequentially optimal pilot beam patterns to minimize the channel estimation MSE at each symbol time. The algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.

| ## Algorithm 1 Sequentially Optimal Pilot Beam Pattern Design  $$Require: Perform the ED of R t = UΣU H and R r = VΓV H , and R h = R t ⊗ R r . Store λ (1) = diag ( Σ ⊗ Γ ) , and U = [ u 1 , · · · , u N t ] . λ = λ (1) and partition λ = [ λ T 1 , · · · , λ T N t ] T while l = 0 , 1 , · · · do for m = 1 to M do k = lM + m if m ≤ M p then i k = argmax i ∑ N r j =1 ρ p λ 2 ij ρ p λ ij + σ 2 w (See (19) and (39).) s k = √ ρ p u i k λ i k ← σ 2 w λ i k ./ ( ρ p λ i k + σ 2 w 1 ) (Step *) end if λ ← a 2 λ +(1 - a 2 ) λ (1) (Step **) end for end while$$   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

(Here, ./ denotes the element-wise division and λ ij is the j -th element of λ i . Step * incorporates the measurement update step (20) and Step ** incorporates the prediction step (21).)

In Algorithm 1, the Kalman filtering error covariance matrix tr ( P k | k ) is minimized at each time k with the hope that such a sequence minimizes the channel estimation MSE at the end of the pilot period of a slot. Since the important estimation measure is the estimation error at the end of the pilot period of each slot (which affects the channel estimation quality for the data transmission period under the time-varying channel assumption, as seen in (11)), we consider a modification to Algorithm 1 to design a pilot beam pattern sequence, targeting at the estimation error only at lM + M p for the l -th transmission block.

Problem 2: For each pilot symbol time k = lM + m starting from 1, given s i for all pilot symbol time i &lt; k , design s k such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where lM + M p is the end of the pilot period to which k belongs.

Since we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the solution to Problem 2 is given by minimizing tr ( P k | k ) and Algorithm 1 can be used for this purpose too.

## B. Pilot Power Allocation

In the pilot beam pattern design in Section III-A, we considered equal pilot power for each pilot symbol time. We relax the equal-power constraint here and consider the pilot beam pattern design problem again.

Fig. 2. The use of the i -th transmit eigenvector u i as the pilot beam in a slot where k i j ∈ K i and ¯ p i = M p -‖ p i ‖ 1 : (a) u i is not used and (b) u i is used.

<!-- image -->

First, we will derive a necessary condition of an optimal pilot beam sequence that is useful for further pilot design. (This condition is given in Proposition 3.) To do so, let us first define some notations. For 1 ≤ i ≤ N t , let K i = { k | s k = √ ρ k u i } = { k i 1 , k i 2 , · · · , k i |K i | } ⊂ { lM + 1 , . . . , lM + M p } be the time index set in the l -th slot for which the i -th transmit eigenvector u i (obtained from R t = UΣU H and U = [ u 1 , · · · , u N t ] ) is used as the pilot beam pattern. Note that some eigenvectors may not be used as the pilot beam pattern depending on the channel statistics. Under the assumption that the transmitter has total power M p ρ p for the pilot transmission period, we denote by ρ k i j the pilot signal power for the use of the i -th transmit eigenvector at time k i j ∈ K i and define a pilot interval vector p i = [ p i 1 , p i 2 , · · · , p i |K i | ] T as shown in Fig. 2. The following proposition provides a property regarding optimal pilot power allocation.

Proposition 3: An optimal pilot beam pattern sequence minimizing tr ( P lM + M p | lM + M p ) in the l -th slot should satisfy the condition that all the pilot power for a transmit eigendirection is allocated to the last use of the eigen-direction in the slot. That is, one transmit eigen-direction should not appear more than once in the pilot period of each slot.

## Proof: See Appendix C.

Now consider the problem of joint design of beam patten index selection and power allocation. As seen in Section III-A,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the pilot beam pattern sequence design is a difficult problem even with fixed pilot power. In the case of pilot beam pattern sequence design with power control, we have a more complicated situation. Our approach to this complicated joint design problem is to separate the beam pattern index selection and the power allocation, although it is suboptimal. We again use the sequential beam pattern index selection based on (19) together with Proposition 3, but now we do not know the allocated pilot power beforehand. To circumvent this difficulty, we exploit the property of the argument in (19). Note that the argument in (19) is an increasing 7 function of Λ ( k ) i for any positive ρ p . Hence, if we choose Λ ( k ) i ′ s.t. Λ ( k ) i ′ ⪰ Λ ( k ) i for all i = i ′ , this index i ′ is optimal. Note that for this selection method, we do not need the knowledge of the current pilot power ρ k at time k ( ρ p in the case of (19)). However, there may not be such an index and hence, we replace this majorization criterion with a simple trace criterion since all the elements Λ ( k ) i are non-negative. (Having the maximum trace is at least a necessary condition for being the majorizing index.) Based on this, we propose to choose the beam pattern index at time k to minimize tr ( P k | k ) (or equivalently tr ( P lM + M p | k ) as follows. First, consider time k = lM +1 under the assumption that the pilot sequence and power is already determined for the previous slots. We choose i 1 := argmax i tr ( Λ (1) i ) . With the first index selected, consider k = lM +2 . Now, applying the condition of Proposition 3, we choose i 2 := argmax i/ ∈{ i 1 } tr ( Λ (2) i ) . This is possible without knowing ρ lM +1 since only Λ (2) i 1 is affected by ρ lM +1 and i 1 is not considered from k ≥ lM + 2 . Then, we proceed to k = lM +3 . In this way, we can choose i 1 , · · · , i M p without knowing ρ lM +1 , · · · , ρ lM + M p based on the trace criterion and Proposition 3. For a selected index i , K i = { k i 1 } and for an unselected index i , K i = ∅ . Then, we have ∑ N t i =1 |K i | ≤ M p . (Let us use k i for k i 1 .) Once i 1 , · · · , i M p are determined, the optimization goal tr ( P lM + M p | lM + M p ) is given by (22).

̸

Based on (22), the pilot power optimization problem is formulated as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ρ = [ ρ lM +1 , . . . , ρ lM + M p ] T . The problem (26) can be

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

7 A real-valued function φ defined on some set H of n × n Hermitian matrices is increasing on H if A ⪯ B ⇒ φ ( A ) ≤ φ ( B ) , whenever A , B ∈ H [46, Ch. 16].

solved by water-filling power allocation [47] (see Appendix E for details), and the corresponding algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 2. In the MIMO case, ρ needs to be solved numerically from (61), whereas in the MISO case we have a closed-form solution given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( · ) + = max( · , 0) and ν is evaluated from the power constraint (27).

In high and low SNR regimes, the optimal power allocation can be approximated by simpler forms:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where λ ( k i ) ij is the j -th diagonal element of Λ ( k i ) i .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the special case of static channels, i.e., a = 1 , the proposed power allocation strategy covers the result of Kotecha and Sayeed [48], which considers the MMSE channel estimation with power control for quasi-static channels.

## C. Block-fading Channel Model

In this subsection, we consider a block Gauss-Markov fading channel model under which the channel is constant for each slot, i.e., h k = h l for k = lM + m ( m = 1 , 2 , · · · , M ) , but varies continuously across slots according to h l +1 = a h l + √ 1 -a 2 b l . We assume that the base station equipped with N t antennas serves a single-antenna terminal for simplicity [2]; each coherence time block of M symbols is composed of a training period of M p symbols and a data transmission period of M d symbols; and M p &lt; N t . By stacking M p symbols during the l -th training period, we have the received signal y l ∈ C M p , given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where y l = [ y lM +1 , . . . , y lM + M p ] T and S l = [ s lM +1 · · · s lM + M p ] . We further assume that S H l S l = ρ p I M p Algorithm 2 Sequential Pilot Beam Pattern Design with Power Allocation

```
Require: Perform the ED of R t = UΣU H and R r = VΓV H where R h = R t ⊗ R r . Store λ (1) = diag ( Σ ⊗ Γ ) , and U = [ u 1 , · · · , u N t ] . λ = λ (1) and partition λ = [ λ T 1 , · · · , λ T N t ] T while l = 0 , 1 , · · · do K i = ∅ for 1 ≤ i ≤ N t for m = 1 to M p do k = lM + m i k = argmax i : not used in this slot ∑ j λ ij , where λ ij is the j -th element of λ i , i.e., ∑ j λ ij = tr ( Λ i ) . Set K i k = k λ ← a 2 λ +(1 -a 2 ) λ (1) end for Obtain the power allocation ρ by solving (26). for i = 1 to N t do if |K i | = 1 then s k i = √ ρ k i u i k end if end for for m = 1 to M do
```

Perform Kalman measurement update and prediction with the obtained { s k } to track the correct error covariance matrix.

## end for end while

Note that in the first for-loop, the measurement update step is not implemented since we do not choose the used eigendirection index again and thus we only need the prediction steps to select the eigen-direction indices.

[44], [49]. The following proposition provides a property of optimal S l under the block-fading channel model.

Proposition 4: Given all previous pilot signals S l ′ ( l ′ &lt; l ), the pilot beam signal S l at the l -th training period minimizing tr ( P l | l ) is given by the scaled version of the M p dominant eigenvectors of the Kalman prediction error covariance matrix P l | l -1 for the l -th training period.

Proof: See Appendix D.

As in the symbolwise Gauss-Markov channel model, all Kalman prediction error covariance matrices that are used for the orthogonal pilot beam pattern design have the same set of eigenvectors of R h , i.e., R h , P l | l and P l | l ′ are simultaneously diagonalizable . (Proof is omitted since it can be shown similarly as in Proposition 2.) Thus, the proposed algorithm in the previous section can easily be extended to the block-fading Gauss-Markov channel model. Previously, it was proposed by some other researchers that the M p dominant eigenvectors of R h are used for the M p pilot symbol times for every slot under the block i.i.d. fading model [48]. However, in our proposed method, we use for the M p pilot beam patterns in the l -th slot the M p dominant eigenvectors of P l | l ′ instead of R h to incorporate channel dynamics and to track the most efficient M p eigen-directions over time. Note that the full set of eigenvectors is the same for R h and P l | l ′ and that R h does not change over time under the considered stationary GaussMarkov channel model. This tracking feature of the proposed method yields a significant gain over the previous method in time-varying channels when the channel dynamic is known, as seen in Section V.

## IV. DISCUSSION: PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION AND MULTI-USER SCENARIO

In this section, we make some comments relative to practical implementation of our proposed pilot design and channel estimation scheme in real-world massive MIMO systems.

First, consider the type and amount of feedback necessary for a massive MIMO system. One approach is to have the mobile station estimate the full channel state vector and feed that back to the base station. For a massive MIMO system, this approach requires a large amount of feedback and may be difficult to implement in practice. Alternatively, the mobile station may simply feed back the received signal y k ∈ C N r at each time instant, i.e., have the mobile station effectively transmit back the inner product between the current beamforming vector and the current channel state vector plus noise, and use that information to form an estimate of the channel at the base station [1]. The latter method is more effective in terms of the amount of feedback and does not require any modifications to the algorithm proposed in this paper.

Second, consider the estimation of the channel fading coefficient a in the channel time-varying model (4). Since a depends on the mobile speed of the receiver, it can be estimated by using the uplink received signal directly [36]-[39]. (A simple correction due to the uplink and downlink carrier frequency difference in FDD systems should be applied.) This problem falls into the general area of system identification of statespace models. Especially, blind techniques based on subspace approaches can be applied here. Interested readers are referred to [39, Section 2].

Next, throughout the paper, we assume that the downlink channel covariance matrix R h is known to the system. If R h is estimated at the receiver (mobile station) and fed back to the base station through some control channel, the feedback overhead may be significant. Fortunately, there exist methods that can circumvent this difficulty. One way is to estimate the downlink channel covariance matrix R h from the uplink channel covariance matrix [33]-[35]. 8 The downlink R h can be estimated from the uplink channel covariance matrix even though they are a bit separated in the frequency domain in the FDD case. Interested readers are referred to [33]-[35].

Furthermore, we here propose even a simpler method to obtain R h based on the one ring model and the Toeplitz distribution theorem for 1-dimensional or 2-dimenional large uniform arrays. Consider a 1-dimensional large uniform array with N t antenna elements for simplicity. Each element of the array performs spatial-sampling of the signal. Thus, if we view these spatial samples as discrete-time samples, the conventional (discrete-time) frequency domain corresponds to the virtual angle domain. 9 For the one-ring model with a uniform array under a far-field assumption, the channel covariance matrix R h is Toeplitz [23]. It is known that when the size of a Toeplitz covariance matrix is large, the Toeplitz matrix can be eigen-decomposed by a DFT matrix, which is known as the Toeplitz distribution theorem [23], [50], [51], i.e., R h ≈ FDF H where F is a DFT matrix and D is a diagonal matrix that contains the virtual angular power spectral values. (This is why the eigen-decomposition of a Toeplitz covariance matrix is also called the spectral decomposition.) For a one-ring model with angle-of-arrival (AoA) and angledispersion ( ∆ ), the elements of D are non-zero only for the angle spectrum ( AoA -∆ , AoA +∆) . Thus, when AoA and ∆ are given, R h can be constructed from the corresponding columns of F and the angular power spectral values. Note that the k -th column of F is given by

8 Note that in the MISO downlink case, the uplink is SIMO. In the timedomain duplex (TDD) case, the uplink and downlink channel covariance matrices are the same.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is simply the steering vector for the physical angle θ k = sin -1 ( ξ k λ/d ) . Under the model, the channel is given by a random linear combination of column vectors or steering vectors with the form (32) looking at the angle range ( AoA -∆ , AoA + ∆) . (Channel estimation in the previous sections is nothing but estimation of these random linear combination coefficients.) The AoA can be estimated from the uplink signal model (there are numerous practical AoA or DoA estimation algorithms) and ∆ can be pre-measured or predetermined for each carrier frequency by reflecting the typical scattering environment. The angular power spectrum can also be estimated based on one of typical spectral estimation methods [52]. Here, the angular power spectrum is estimated by using the uplink signal and a correction similar to those in [33]-[35] can be applied to obtain a downlink counterpart. Simulations will be presented towards the end of the next section in which the pilot beam patterns are approximated by DFT vectors without much loss in performance.

In summary, the proposed pilot design and channel estimation method can be run in the following practical way:

- 1) first estimate the AoA based on the uplink signal and selects the columns of F corresponding to ( AoA -∆ , AoA +∆) ;
- 2) estimate the angular power profile for ( AoA -∆ , AoA +∆) from the uplink channel response [52], and finally obtain a downlink power profile via correction [33]-[35]. This downlink angular power profile gives λ (1) in Algorithm 1;
- 3) estimate the mobile speed of the terminal (i.e., a ) based on the uplink by using one of system identification algorithms [36]-[39]; and
- 4) finally run one of the algorithms in the previous sections. (By reciprocity, the AoA and the terminal velocity are the same for the up and down links.)

9 The virtual angle ξ is related to the physical angle θ by ξ = d λ sin( θ ) , where d is the antenna spacing and λ is the carrier wavelength. When d/λ = 1 / 2 , -π 2 ≤ θ ≤ π 2 corresponds to -1 2 ≤ ξ ≤ 1 2 .

Finally, consider the multi-user case. Note that the system model (1) is for a single-user MIMO channel. However, many of current real-world wireless communication systems as those in 3GPP support user-dedicated pilot and control channels in addition to a common pilot and control channel for effective channel estimation for each user. Thus, the proposed method can be applied to these dedicated pilot channels. Furthermore, the proposed method can well be combined with the recently proposed joint spatial division and multiplexing (JSDM) framework for multiuser massive MIMO systems [23]. In the JSDM, the multiple users (MU) in a sector are partitioned into groups each of which has approximately the same channel covariance matrix. (Each set of the partition can be viewed as a virtual subsector.) Here, if the groups or subsectors are sufficiently well separated in the AoA domain, the dominant eigenvectors of the channel covariance matrices become linearly independent for different groups. To serve MU-MIMO in the same time-frequency slot, we can choose the users that have non-overlapping supports of their AoA distribution as in [23]. Then, the optimal pilot beam patterns become different and orthogonal among non-overlapping groups. In this case, the system model (1) can be regarded as the signal model for a scheduled user in one of the non-overlapping subsectors of the overall multi-user downlink.

## V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

In this section, we provide some numerical results to evaluate the performance of the proposed algorithms. We considered N t ∈ { 32 , 250 } transmit antennas and N r ∈ { 1 , 2 } receive antennas for our massive MIMO systems. We adopted 2 . 5 GHz carrier frequency and 100 µs symbol duration with a typical mobile speed range from v = 3 km/h ( a = 0 . 9999) to 30 km/h ( a = 0 . 9995) . For all considered pilot design methods, we used Kalman filtering and prediction for the channel estimator. To evaluate the channel estimation performance, we computed the normalized mean square error (NMSE), given by 1 tr ( R h ) tr ( P k | k ) . The pilot symbol SNR was defined as ρ p /σ 2 w , the data symbol SNR was defined as ρ d /σ 2 w , and the two SNR values were the same throughout the simulation. The noise variance σ 2 w was determined according to the SNR value with ρ p = ρ d = 1 , and the received SNR is defined as (13), which incorporates the effect of beamforming gain and imperfect channel estimation. The channel estimation performance for each of the considered methods was averaged over 1 , 000 Monte Carlo runs.

First, we considered the exponential correlation model for channel spatial correlation, given by [ R t ] i,j = r 2 | i -j | t and [ R r ] i,j = r 2 | i -j | r , where r t and r r are the transmit and receive correlation coefficients between two adjacent antenna elements, respectively ( r t = r r = r for simplicity). Since the phase of r is irrelevant to the eigenvalues of R h , we assume without loss of generality that the phase of r is fixed to be zero (i.e., r ∈ R ). Fig. 3 shows the channel estimation performance of several pilot pattern design methods [49] for the exponential channel correlation model with r = 0 . 6 , N t = 32 , and N r = 2 . The performance of the M p dominant eigenvectors of R h as the M p pilot beam patterns for every pilot period is also shown.

Fig. 3. NMSE and a lower bound on achievable rate versus time index k : M = 10 , M p = 4 , σ 2 w = 10 -1 . 5 , N t = 32 , N r = 2 , r = 0 . 6 , and v = 3 km/h (The dotted rectangles denote pilot transmission periods.)

<!-- image -->

It is seen that the proposed algorithm tracks the channel state fast due to the ability of the proposed method's tracking the spectral distribution of the channel MSE. Thus, the proposed method converges more quickly. The use of orthogonal or random beam patterns (which span the overall space) yields reasonable performance with slightly increased convergence time compared to the proposed method. In the case of the fixed M p dominant eigenvectors of R h for the pilot beam pattern in every pilot period, one can only minimize the channel MSE along the fixed M p eigen-directions, and the coverage of only M p fi xed eigen-directions in the space is not enough for very large N t when M p is small. Hence, the channel estimation MSE performance of the fixed pilot beam pattern method is saturated quickly. By replacing the channel estimation error plus noise with independent additive Gaussian noise during the data transmission phase [44], we showed the training-based lower bound on achievable data rate in Fig. 3. The proposed method also guarantees a good (average) lower bound on achievable rate due to precise channel estimation.

Next, we considered the (more realistic) one-ring channel model which well models typical cellular configurations [21], [23]. The channel spatial correlation with a ULA is given by (3) and depends on AoA θ and AS ∆ , and this model can be extended to the 2-dimensional array case (See [21] for details.) Indeed, we considered a transmitter employing a 10 × 25 uniform planar array (UPA) on half-wavelength lattice, D = 1 2 with N r = 1 . In order to compute the vertical and horizontal channel covariance matrices R V , R H , we assume that the transmit antenna is located at an elevation of h = 60 m , the scattering ring of the receiver has radius r = 30 m , and the distance from the transmitter is s = 100 m . The path loss between the transmitter and the receiver is given by (1 + ( s d 0 ) α ) -1 , where the path loss exponent is set as α = 3 . 8 and the reference distance is set as d 0 = 30 m .

Fig. 5. NMSE versus time index k where M = 15 , M p = 10 , and v = 3 km/h

<!-- image -->

Then, the parameters for the channel covariance matrices R V and R H are given by ∆ V = 1 2 ( arctan( s + r h ) -arctan( s -r h ) ) , θ V = 1 2 ( arctan( s + r h ) + arctan( s -r h ) ) , ∆ H = arctan( r s ) , and θ H = π 6 . Finally, the channel covariance matrix is given by R h = R H ⊗ R V [23]. Fig. 4 shows the empirical cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the eigenvalues of R h obtained in the above, and exhibits rank-deficiency in the spatial channel covariance matrices due to local scattering around the receiver. Note that 70 % to 80% of the eigenvalues are zero.

Fig. 5 shows the performance of the two proposed algorithms for the considered one-ring channel model: one with fixed pilot power and the other with pilot power design. It is seen that proper power allocation can enhance the channel estimation performance especially both in low SNR and initial tracking periods, but the performance gain is small and the two methods yield almost the same performance at the steady state. Thus, simpler Algorithm 1 with fixed pilot power can be used without much performance loss.

Fig. 6 shows the channel estimation performance of several pilot pattern design methods for the considered onering model. It is seen that the proposed method (Algorithm 1) significantly outperforms other pilot design methods both in the transient and steady-state behaviors. Especially, the

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6. NMSE and received SNR versus time index k where M = 5 , M p = 1 , σ 2 w = 10 -1 . 5 , and v = 3 km/h

<!-- image -->

(b) 16-QAM modulation

Fig. 7. BER performance where M = 5 , M p = 1 , and v = 3 km/h

proposed method yields a received SNR loss of approximately 3dB compared to the perfect channel state information case during the transient tracking phase. Orthogonal and random pilot beam patterns are ineffective since they span all the N t -dimensional space and such patterns cannot capture the dominant channel uncertainty in space at each pilot symbol time [1]. The fixed M p eigen-direction method outperforms the random or orthogonal pilot design methods in the beginning. This is because the estimated channel from the fixed M p eigendirection pilot design is a linear combination of the fixed M p eigen-directions, and the use of this channel estimate as the beamforming direction yields a rough channel matching in the begining. However, as time goes, the channel estimation in the limited subspace is not enough for accurate channel estimation, and this yields the performance saturation. To assess the actual system performance loss due to channel estimation error, we investigated the bit error rate (BER) performance. Fig. 7 shows the BER performance based on the estimated channel corresponding to Fig. 6 for the same setup. It is seen that the proposed method significantly outperforms other methods. Note that the channel MSE performance directly affects on the BER performance.

We also investigated the performance variation due to the mobile speed. Fig. 8 shows the steady-state performance of several pilot beam pattern design methods and the corresponding Kalman filtering channel estimation channel as the mobile velocity v varies from 0 km/h to 30 km/h . Note that the proposed design yields much better performance in the case of fast-fading when compared to the other design methods.

Finally, we evaluated the proposed design in the considered one-ring model using the R t estimation method based on the DFT matrix and the Toeplitz distribution theorem (TDT) presented in Section IV. Fig. 9 shows the received SNR performance. (Here, we used the block-fading channel GaussMarkov model in Section III-C since this case was not covered so far, but the performance is not much different from the same for the symbol fading case.) We assumed that AoA and ∆ are known. It is seen that the DFT/TDT-based method yields almost the same performance as the proposed algorithm with perfectly known R h ! Thus, the simple practical estimation of R h based on the DFT and the TDT seems to work well. Here, to overcome the drawback of the method of using the fixed M p dominant eigenvectors of R h , we also considered a modified method that initially chooses L p ( &gt; M p ) dominant eigenvectors of 250 × 250 R h and uses M p patterns out of the chosen L p patterns in a round-robin manner. L p = 50 was used for Fig. 9. Note that up to the first 5 slots the modified method almost tracks the proposed method. This means that roughly 10 eigen-directions out of L p = 50 are most significant and contain most of the channel power. Hence, if L p were 10, the performance of the modified method should be very good and be comparable to that of the proposed method. However, the problem here is that one does not know the number of dominant eigen-directions containing most of the channel power a priori with a proper threshold level. One can view that the proposed algorithm exploits both the most significant eigen-direction and the channel power of each direction over time.

Fig. 8. NMSE and SNR versus the terminal velocity v where M = 2 , M p = 1 , and σ 2 w = 10 -1 . 5

<!-- image -->

Fig. 9. Received SNR versus slot index l where M = 5 , M p = 2 , σ 2 w = 10 -1 , and v = 3 km/h

<!-- image -->

## VI. CONCLUSIONS

We have considered the problem of pilot beam pattern design for massive MIMO systems, and proposed a new method for pilot beam pattern design for massive MIMO systems, based on the stationary Gauss-Markov channel model, by exploiting channel statistics such as temporal and spatial channel correlation that can be used for better system performance. The proposed method yields a greedy (i.e., sequentially optimal) sequence of pilot beam patterns with low computational complexity by exploiting the properties of the Kalman filtering and prediction error covariance matrices. Furthermore, we have considered the joint design problem of pilot beam pattern and pilot beam power and the extension of the proposed method to the case of the block GaussMarkov channel model. Numerical results have validated the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, and it is shown that the proposed pilot design method significantly outperforms other pilot design methods especially under the realistic one-ring channel correlation model.

## APPENDIX

## A. Proof of Proposition 1

̸

See [1] for the MISO case. We here prove the MIMO case. Case 1) k = lM + 1 : From (10), arg min s k tr ( P k | k ) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since tr ( ABC ) = tr ( BCA ) and S k = s k ⊗ I N r , the cost function in (33) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the Kalman prediction error covariance matrix P k | k -1 = ( U ⊗ V ) Λ ( U ⊗ V ) H by the assumption, where Λ = diag ( Λ 1 , · · · , Λ N t ) , U ∈ C N t × N t and V ∈ C N r × N r , and since the columns of U = [ u 1 , · · · , u N t ] span C N t , we have s k = ∑ N t i =1 c i u i , where ∑ i | c i | 2 = ρ p , and (34) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where e i is the i -th unit vector, and the last step (36) holds because

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p ∈ { 1 , 2 } and δ ij is the Kronecker delta. The cost function (36) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Λ i = diag ( λ i 1 , · · · , λ iN r ) . The Lagrangian of the optimization of (38) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ν is a Lagrange dual variable. The Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions of the optimization of (38) are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

It is easy to verify that c i ′ = ρ p e ιθ for some i ′ ∈ { 1 , 2 , · · · , N t } and c i = 0 for all i = i ′ with ν = -∑ j λ 2 i ′ j σ 2 w ( ρ p λ 2 i ′ j ) 2 satisfies the KKT conditions. Since (38) is not convex in terms of { c i } , the solution to the KKT conditions is not unique. However, all such solutions with only one nonzero c i are stationary points of the optimization, i.e., each of them is a local optimum. Among such solutions the best one is given by c i = √ ρ p for i = i k and c i = 0 for all i = i k , where

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and s k = √ ρ p u i k is a locally optimal solution to minimizing tr ( P k | k ) .

Case 2) k = lM +1 : In this case, we have M d prediction steps without a measurement update step before the first pilot symbol time k in the l -th slot. In this case, still the measurement update form (10) at k is valid with P k | k -1 replaced by the error covariance matrix P k | ( l -1) M + M p of the Kalman prediction for time k based on all the previous pilot beam patterns. Hence, the proof in Case 1) is applicable to this case just with P k | k -1 replaced by P k | ( l -1) M + M p . ■

## B.

where the equality ( a ) follows because

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the equality ( b ) follows because ( A 1 A 2 ) ⊗ ( B 1 B 2 ) = ( A 1 ⊗ B 1 )( A 2 ⊗ B 2 ) . The equality ( c ) holds because

## C. Proof of Proposition 3

For the l -th pilot transmission period with k = lM + m , let ρ = [ ρ lM +1 , . . . , ρ lM + M p ] T be a power allocation vector with the pilot beam pattern sequence determined by {K i , 1 ≤ i ≤ N t } . The channel estimation MSE at time lM + M p is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ¯ Λ ( k ) i ∈ R N r × N r is the i -th diagonal sub-block of ¯ Λ ( k ) defined (20). ( ¯ p i = M p + 1 , k i |K i | = lM when |K i | = 0 .) (42) holds because u i only affects the i -th subblock of the eigenvalue matrix and the MSE for the i -th block at the end of the pilot period is given by channel prediction from the last pilot use of u i at time k i |K i | . Combining Kalman prediction and measurement update steps, we have for each k i j ∈ K i

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

increasing function of tr ( ¯ Λ ( k i j ) i ) , we have the claim. ■

where f ( ¯ Λ ( k i j -1 ) i,ǫ ) and ¯ Λ ( k i j -1 ) i,ǫ are defined in (46, 47). (Here, we have slight abuse of notation. A / B means B -1 A for two matrices A and B .) Proof is by an iterative argument. We start from j = |K i | and j -1 = |K i | -1 for the original K i . By Lemma 1 and Remark 1, (43) is reduced by updating ˜ ρ k i j = ρ k i j + ρ k i j -1 and ˜ ρ k i j -1 = 0 , when we consider the two power values for j -1 and j . With this improvement, we construct a new K ′ i = { k i 1 , · · · , k i j -2 , k i |K i | } with |K ′ i | = |K i | -1 and a new power allocation [ ρ k i 1 , · · · , ρ k i |K i |-2 , ρ k i |K i |-1 + ρ k i |K i | ] T for K ′ i . Then, we apply the same argument to the last two power terms of the newly constructed K ′ i . In this way, (43) is minimized by allocating all the power for the i -th eigendirection to k i |K i | for the original K i . Since (42) is a monotone

Lemma 1: Given any ρ k i j -1 , ρ k i j ∈ R + , set ˜ ρ k i j -1 = ρ k i j -1 -ǫ and ˜ ρ k i j = ρ k i j + ǫ for any ǫ ∈ [0 , ρ k i j -1 ] . Then, the following holds:

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: For notational simplicity, we omit the upper index i of k i j and p i j when there is no ambiguity. Define ˜ D := a 2 p j ¯ Λ ( k j -1 ) i,ǫ +(1 -a 2 p j ) Λ (1) i and D := a 2 p j ¯ Λ ( k j -1 ) i +(1 -a 2 p j ) Λ (1) i with ¯ Λ ( k j -1 ) i := ¯ Λ ( k j -1 ) i,ǫ | ǫ =0 . Then, (45) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the denominator of the right-hand side (RHS) in (50) is obviously positive definite and the numerator is also positive semi-definite because each term on the RHS in (51) is positive semi-definite because

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that Λ (1) i ⪰ ¯ Λ ( k ) i for all k . (Remember that the channel is stationary and the measurement update only improves the channel estimation quality.) Hence, we have the claim. ■ Remark 1: In case that we control ρ k j -1 , ρ k j ∈ R + , f ( ¯ Λ ( k j -1 ) i,ǫ ) is minimized when ǫ = ǫ ′ := ρ k j -1 . This can easily be shown by f ( ¯ Λ ( k j -1 ) i,ǫ ) -f ( ¯ Λ ( k j -1 ) i,ǫ ′ ) ≥ 0 . One can write a similar equation to (50). Although the detail is not shown here, in this case the corresponding denominator is positive definite and the corresponding numerator includes obviously positive semi-definite term and the term

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is positive semi-definite.

## D. Proof of Proposition 4

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For orthogonal pilot signals, the objective function (52) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define P l,σ w := P l | l -1 + σ 2 w /ρ p I N t = P 1 / 2 l,σ w P H/ 2 l,σ w and F := P H/ 2 l,σ w S l . Then, (53) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where B := F ( F H F ) -1 / 2 . The equality (54) holds by the positive definiteness of F H F and tr ( ABC ) = tr ( BCA ) . Because B H B = I M p , the optimal B that maximizes (55) is given by the M p dominant eigenvectors of P -1 / 2 l,σ w P 2 l | l -1 P -H/ 2 l,σ w by Ky-Fan [53]. Let the ED of P l | l -1 be P l | l -1 = UΛ ( l ) U H , where the diagonal matrix Λ ( l ) contains the eigenvalues of P l | l -1 in a decreasing order. Then, P -1 / 2 l,σ w P 2 l | l -1 P -H/ 2 l,σ w is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from P l,σ w = U ( Λ ( l ) + σ 2 w /ρ p I N t ) U H . Since g ( x ) = x 2 x + σ 2 , x ≥ 0 is a monotone increasing function of x , B = U (: , 1 : M p ) , which is achieved by S l = √ ρ p U (: , 1 : M p ) . ■

## E. Power Allocation

The problem of (26) can be solved by the standard convex optimization method. The Lagrangian of the problem is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ξ k i and ν are the Lagrange multipliers associated to the constraints, and λ ( k i ) i = diag ( Λ ( k i ) i ) for k i ∈ K i . The Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions are then written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the above conditions, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If a 2( lM + Mp -k i ) σ 2 w ∑ N r j =1 ( λ ( k i ) ij ) 2 &gt; ν , (59) holds only if ρ k i &gt; 0 , and by (60) this implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If a 2( lM + Mp -k i ) σ 2 w ∑ N r j =1 ( λ ( k i ) ij ) 2 ≤ ν , then ρ k i = 0 because we have

(60) holds only if ρ k i = 0 .

When N r = 1 , the optimal power allocation is determined from (61) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where K i = { k i } and ν is determined by the power constraint (57), given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## F. Suboptimal Power Allocation

Consider the high SNR case first, i.e., ρ k i λ ( k i ) ij ≫ σ 2 w , where λ ( k i ) i = diag ( Λ ( k i ) i ) . The cost function (26) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This can be solved and the solution is given by (29).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the low SNR ( ρ k i λ ( k i ) ij ≪ σ 2 w ) , the cost function (26) can be written as

This can be solved and the solution is given by (30).

## REFERENCES

- [1] S. Noh, M. D. Zoltowski, Y. Sung, and D. J. Love, 'Optimal pilot beam pattern design for massive MIMO systems,' in Proc. IEEE ASILOMAR , Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2013.
- [2] T. L. Marzetta, 'Noncooperative cellular wireless with unlimited numbers of base station antennas,' IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 3590 - 3600, Nov. 2010.
- [3] F. Rusek, D. Persson, B. K. Lau, E. G. Larsson, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson, and T. L. Marzetta, 'Scaling up MIMO: Opportunities and challenges with very large arrays,' IEEE Signal Process. Mag. , vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 40 - 60, Jan. 2013.
- [4] C. Shepard, H. Yu, N. Anand, L. E. Li, T. L. Marzetta, R. Yang, and L. Zhong, 'Argos: Practical many-antenna base stations,' in Proc. MobiCom , Istanbul, Turkey, Aug. 2012.

- [5] X. Gao, F. Tufvesson, O. Edfors, and F. Rusek, 'Measured propagation characteristics for very-large MIMO at 2.6GHz,' in Proc. IEEE ASILOMAR , Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2012.
- [6] J. Jose, A. Ashikhmin, T. L. Marzetta, and S. Vishwanath, 'Pilot contamination and precoding in multi-cell TDD systems,' IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 2640 - 2651, Aug 2011.
- [7] H. Yin, D. Gesbert, M. Filippou, and Y. Liu, 'A coordinated approach to channel estimation in large-scale multiple-antenna systems,' IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. Special Issue on Large-Scale Multiple Antenna Wireless Systems , Feb. 2013.
- [8] H. Ngo and E. G. Larsson, 'EVD-based channel estimation in multi cell multiuser MIMO systems with very large antenna arrays,' in Proc. IEEE ICASSP , Kyoto, Japan, Mar. 2012.
- [9] J. Hoydis, S. ten Brink, and M. Debbah, 'Massive MIMO in the UL/DL of cellular networks: How many antennas do we need?,' IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 160 - 171, Feb. 2013.
- [10] K. T. Truong and R. W. Heath Jr., 'Effects of channel aging in massive MIMO systems,' IEEE J. Commun. Netw. (Special Issue on Massive MIMO) , vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 338 - 351, Aug. 2013.
- [11] P. H. Kuo, H. T. Kung, and P. A. Ting, 'Compressive sensing based channel feedback protocols for spatially-correlated massive antenna arrays,' in Proc. IEEE WCNC , Paris, France, Apr. 2012.
- [12] J. Choi, Z. Chance, D. J. Love, and U. Madhow, 'Noncoherent trellis coded quantization for massive MIMO limited feedback beamforming,' in Proc. IEEE ITA , San Diego, CA, Feb. 2013.
- [13] J. Choi, D. J. Love, and U. Madhow, 'Limited feedback in massive MIMO systems: Exploiting channel correlations via noncoherent trelliscoded quantization,' in Proc. IEEE CISS , Johns Hopkins Univ., Maryland, Mar. 2013.
- [14] J. Nam, J.-Y. Ahn, A. Adhikary, and G. Caire, 'Joint spatial division and multiplexing: Realizing massive MIMO gains with limited channel state information,' in Proc. IEEE ASILOMAR , Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2013.
- [15] R. Kudo, S. M. D. Armour, J. P. McGeehan, and M. Mizoguchi, 'CSI estimation method based on random beam forming for massive number of transmit antenna systems,' in Proc. IEEE ISWCS , Paris, France, Aug. 2012.
- [16] D. J. Love, J. Choi, and P. Bidigare, 'A closed-loop training approach for massive MIMO beamforming systems,' in Proc. IEEE CISS , Johns Hopkins Univ., Maryland, Mar. 2013.
- [17] K. E. Baddour and N. C. Beaulieu, 'Autoregressive modeling for fading channel simulation,' IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1650 - 1662, Jul. 2005.
- [18] L. Tong, B. M. Sadler, and M. Dong, 'Pilot-assisted wireless transmissions: General model, design criteria, and signal processing,' IEEE Signal Process. Mag. , vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 12 - 25, Nov. 2004.
- [19] H. Yu, Y. Sung, H. Kim, and Y. H. Lee, 'Beam tracking for interference alignment in slowly-fading MIMO interference channels: Perturbations approach under a linear framework,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 1910 - 1926, Apr. 2012.
- [20] A. M. Sayeed, 'Deconstructing multi antenna fading channels,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2563 - 2579, Oct. 2002.
- [21] D. Shiu and G. J. Foschini and M. J. Gans and J. M. Kahn, 'Fading correlation and its effect on the capacity of multi element antenna systems,' IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 502 - 513, Mar. 2000.
- [22] A. Forenza, D. J. Love, and R. W. Heath Jr., 'Simplified spatial correlation models for clustered MIMO channels with different array configurations,' IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1924 1934, Jul. 2007.
- [23] A. Adhikary, J. Nam, J.-Y. Ahn, and G. Caire, 'Joint spatial division and multiplexing: The large-scale array regime,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 6441 - 6463, Oct. 2013.
- [24] M. Dong, L. Tong, and B. M. Sadler, 'Optimal insertion of pilot symbols for transmissions over time-varying flat fading channels,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 1403 - 1418, May 2004.
- [25] S. Stein, 'Fading channel issues in system engineering,' IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 68 - 89, Feb. 1987.
- [26] A. F. Molisch, J. R. Foerster, and M. Pendergrass, 'Channel models for ultrawideband personal area networks,' IEEE Wireless Commun. , vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 14 - 21, Dec. 2003.
- [27] W. C. Jakes, Microwave Mobile Communication , Wiley, New York, NY, 1974.
- [28] D. Gerlach and A. Paulraj, 'Adaptive transmitting antenna methods for multi path environments,' in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM , San Francisco, CA, Nov. 1994, pp. 425 - 492.
- [29] A. M. Tulino, A. Lozano, and S. Verdu, 'Impact of antenna correlation on the capacity of multi antenna channels,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2491 - 2509, Jul. 2005.
- [30] A. Eriksson, P. Stoica, and T. Soderstrom, 'On-line subspace algorithms for tracking moving sources,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 42, no. 9, pp. 2319 - 2330, Sep. 1994.
- [31] L. Tong and S. Perreau, 'Multichannel blind channel estimation: From subspace to maximum likelihood methods,' in Proc. IEEE , Oct. 1998, vol. 86, pp. 1951 - 1968.
- [32] S. Noh, Y. Sung, and M. D. Zoltowski, 'A new precoder design for blind channel estimation in MIMO-OFDM systems,' IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. , submitted for publication.
- [33] Y.-C. Liang and F. P. S. Chin, 'Downlink channel covariance matrix (DCCM) estimation and its applications in wireless DS-CDMA systems,' IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. , vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 222 - 232, Feb. 2001.
- [34] B. M. Hochwald and T. L. Marzetta, 'Adapting a downlink array from uplink measurements,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 642 - 653, Mar. 2001.
- [35] G. C. Raleigh, S. N. Diggavi, V. K. Jones, and A. Paulraj, 'A blind adaptive transmit antenna algorithm for wireless communication,' in Proc. IEEE ICC , Seattle, WA, Jun. 1995.
- [36] R. A. Iltis, 'Joint estimation of PN code delay and multi path using the extended Kalman filter,' IEEE Trans. Commun. , vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 1677 - 1685, Oct. 1990.
- [37] M. K. Tsatsanis, G. B. Giannakis, and G. Zhou, 'Estimation and equalization of fading channels with random coefficients,' in Proc. IEEE ICASSP , Atlanta, GA, May 1996.
- [38] X. Dai, W. Zhang, J. Xu, J. E. Mitchell, and Y. Yang, 'Kalman interpolation filter for channel estimation of LTE downlink in highmobility environments,' EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. and Netw. , vol. 2012:232, Jul. 2012.
- [39] Z. Liu, A. Hansson, and L. Vandenberghe, 'Nuclear norm system identification with missing inputs and outputs,' Syst. and Control Lett. , vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 605 - 612, Mar. 2013.
- [40] Y. Sung, T. E. Sung, B. M. Sadler, and L. Tong, Training for MIMO communications , Space-Time Wireless Systems. 1st ed. Cambridge University Press, 2006.
- [41] D. J. Love, R. W. Heath Jr., W. Santipach, and M. L. Honig, 'What is the value of limited feedback for MIMO channels?,' IEEE Wireless Commun. Mag. , vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 54 - 59, Oct. 2004.
- [42] T. Kailath, A. H. Sayed, and B. Hassibi, Linear Estimation , PrenticeHall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2000.
- [43] E. Telatar, 'Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels,' Europ. Trans. Telecommun. , vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 585 - 595, Nov. 1999.
- [44] B. Hassibi and B. M. Hochwald, 'How much training is needed in multiple-antenna wireless links?,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 951 - 963, Apr. 2003.
- [45] D. P. Bertsekas, Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control, 3rd ed. , Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 2005.
- [46] A. Marshall and I. Olkin, Inequalities: Theory of Majorization and Its Applications , Academic Press, New York, NY, 1979.
- [47] T. Cover and J. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory , John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., New York, NY, 1991.
- [48] J. H. Kotecha and A. M. Sayeed, 'Transmit signal design for optimal estimation of correlated MIMO channels,' IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 546 - 557, Feb. 2004.
- [49] W. Santipach and M. L. Honig, 'Optimization of training and feedback overhead for beamforming over block fading channels,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 56, no. 12, pp. 6103 - 6115, Dec. 2010.
- [50] U. Grenander and G. Szeg¨ o, Toeplitz Forms and Their Applications , University of California Press, Berkeley, CA, 1958.
- [51] Y. Sung, H. V. Poor, and H. Yu, 'How much information can one get from a wireless ad hoc sensor network over a correlated random field?,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2827 - 2847, Jun. 2009.
- [52] P. J. Brockwell and R. A. Davis, Time Series: Theory and Methods , 2nd Edition, Springer, New York, 1991.
- [53] K. Fan, 'On a theorem of Weyl concerning the eigenvalues of linear transformations II,' in Proc. National Acad. Sci. , Jan. 1950, vol. 36, pp. 31 - 35.