Arthur M. Berd Lehman Brothers Inc.

## Dynamic Estimation of Credit Rating Transition Probabilities

We present a continuous-time maximum likelihood estimation methodology for credit rating transition  probabilities,  taking  into  account  the  presence  of  censored  data.  We  perform rolling  estimates  of  the  transition  matrices  with  exponential  time  weighting  with  varying horizons and discuss the underlying dynamics of transition generator matrices in the longterm and short-term estimation horizons.

## INTRODUCTION

Despite  the  advances  of  market-implied  models  of  credit  risk  such  as  those  developed  by Moody's KMV (Crosbie and Bohn [2001], Kealhofer [2003]) and RiskMetrics' CreditGrades (Finkelstein,  Pan,  Lardy,  Ta  and  Thierney  [2002]),  credit  ratings  remain  a  very  influential signal in both investment grade and high yield markets. While the rating changes may indeed lag the market developments, the information contained in the act of a downgrade or upgrade as  well  as  the  specific  language  used  to  characterize  its  reasons  and  further  credit  outlook remains at the forefront of investors' minds and retains some explanatory power even when combined with structural models of credit risk (see Sobehart, Stein, Mikityanskaya and Li [2000] and Sobehart, Stein and Keenan [2000]).

The  aggregate  market-wide  rating  transition  trends,  such  as  upgrade/downgrade  ratios,  as well as the realized default rates (we consider default as a particular form of rating transition), are widely followed by portfolio managers as a gauge of the credit cycle. Many long-term credit investors, including those managing bank loan portfolios, insurance assets and CDOs, often pose  a  question:  'what  is  the current estimate  of the  N-year  rating  transition probability?' (where the typical values of N can be 1, 5 or 10 years). Robust estimates, and, if possible, forecasts of rating transition risks are  important  ingredients  of  their  macro investment strategies. In this article we develop a methodology that addresses such needs.

The  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  First  we  formally  define  the  continuous-time  Markov description of the rating transition process. We give a brief overview of the commonly used cohort estimators that are reported by rating agencies and followed by many practitioners and explain  their  shortcomings.  Next,  following  the  ideas  developed  by  Lando et  al. (Lando [2000], Lando and Skodeberg [2004], Christensen, Hansen and Lando [2004] and Fidelius, Lando  and  Nielsen  [2004]),  we  define  a  maximum  likelihood  estimator  for  the  generator matrix  of  transitions.  We  then  extend  these  academic  models  to  allow  for  time-weighted estimation procedures and for parametric smoothing of the generator matrix, which provide a simultaneously dynamic and robust practical solution to the question above.

Finally,  we  present  the  results  of  the  rolling  estimation  of  the  transition  probabilities corresponding  to  different  levels  of  the  exponential  decay  rate,  and  examine  whether  such estimates  of  the  'recent'  transition  matrices  can  be  used  as  forecasts  of  the  future  rating transition  risk.  In  particular,  we  determine  the  optimal  choice  of  the  half-life  (decay) parameter,  which  maximizes  the  out-of-sample  forecasting  power  of  the  time-weighted estimates given the forecast horizon. Not surprisingly, we conclude that there is a significant degree of inertia in rating transitions, and that the shorter forecast horizons require a shorter half-life, whose optimal value is close to the target horizon.

## A CONTINUOUS-TIME MARKOV MODEL OF RATING TRANSITIONS

Let us assume that at any time the credit risk of each issuer is fully determined by its rating, belonging to a finite set with K ratings, for example an eight-state letter-grade rating system [Aaa, Aa, …, Caa, D] or a eighteen-state notched rating system [Aaa, Aa1, Aa2, …, Caa, D]. Note that we explicitly count default as the last K -th state.

The  period(0,t) transition  matrix  is  defined  as  the  set  of  probabilities  of  finding  the  final rating of a company at state q (possibly default) at time t , under the condition that the initial rating was r at time t=0 . The transition process is assumed to be Markov, but not necessarily stationary, i.e. the compound transition probability from time t=0 to time t=s is obtained by summation over all possible intermediate states at time t=u . This can be described as a matrix multiplication of the transition matrix for period (0,u) and for period (u,s) , respectively 1 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This  relationship  is  illustrated  in  Figure  1,  where  we  depict  various  paths,  which  must  be summed over to arrive at the transition probability from initial rating to the final one:

Figure 1. Markov dynamics of credit ratings

<!-- image -->

For  the  probabilistic  interpretation  of  the  transition  matrix rq T to  be  possible,  all  of  its elements must be positive, and each row must sum up to 1. One typically assumes that the default  is  absorbing  state,  i.e.  there  are  transitions  into  it  but  not  out  of  it.  In  terms  of transition  matrices,  this  means  that  the  elements  of  the  last  row  of  the  matrix  are  zero everywhere except for the diagonal, which is equal to one.

For stationary transition probabilities, one can introduce the so-called generator matrix, using the notions of matrix exponential and matrix logarithm:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider a limit of small time intervals:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

1 The order of matrix multiplication is related to the definition of the transition matrix. If the transition matrix is defined so that the initial rating corresponds to the rows and final to the columns (therefore the sum of probabilities along each row is 1), then the matrix multiplication should be done left-to-right. In the alternative case when the initial rating is  along the columns and final is along the rows, the matrix multiplication should be done right-to-left. We use the former convention is this paper.

Since  the  transition  matrix  must  have  non-negative  elements,  and  the  identity  matrix  I  has zeros off-diagonal, it follows that the generator matrix must have non-negative elements offdiagonal. Furthermore, since the rows of the transition matrix add up to 1, and the rows of the identity matrix also add up to 1, it follows that the rows of the generator matrix must add up to 0. In other words, the diagonal element of the generator matrix is equal to the negative of the sum of its off-diagonal elements.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under the absorbing default state assumption, all elements of the last row of the generator matrix are equal to zero.

Examples of a stationary transition probability  matrix and a generator matrix are shown in Figures 2 and 3. Figure 2 shows a smoothed 1-year transition probability matrix based on a long-term  (20+  years)  historical  Moody's  estimate,  as  used  in  the  popular  CreditMetrics model (see Gupton, Finger, Bhatia [1997]). The rows denote the initial ratings, the columns refer to the final ratings. Note that the last (default) row contains all zeros off-diagonal.

Figure 3 shows the generator matrix that was derived from the given transition probability matrix, assuming stationarity. We have taken the matrix log of the transition matrix, as in [2], and had to override a few entries (shown in bold) to avoid negative numbers. Note that the diagonal elements are all negative (highlighted in red) and that the last row is zero.

One can also  confirm  by  direct  computation  that  the  sum  of  elements  on  each  row  of  the transition  matrix  in  Figure  2  is  equal  to  1,  and  the  sum  of  elements  on  each  row  of  the generator matrix in Figure 3 is equal to zero, in accordance with eq. [4].

Figure 2. One-year rating transition probability matrix

| Rating  Aaa  Aa  A  Baa  Ba  B  Caa  D  Aaa  0.8812  0.1029  0.0102  0.0050  0.0003  0.0002  0.0001  0.0001  Aa  0.0108  0.8870  0.0955  0.0034  0.0015  0.0010  0.0004  0.0003  A  0.0006  0.0288  0.9011  0.0592  0.0074  0.0016  0.0006  0.0008  Baa  0.0005  0.0034  0.0707  0.8504  0.0605  0.0101  0.0028  0.0016  Ba  0.0003  0.0008  0.0056  0.0568  0.7957  0.0808  0.0454  0.0146  B  0.0001  0.0004  0.0017  0.0065  0.0659  0.8270  0.0276  0.0706  Caa  0.0001  0.0002  0.0064  0.0105  0.0305  0.0611  0.6296  0.2616  D  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  1   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Source: RiskMetrics Group and Lehman Brothers

Figure 3. Transition generator matrix derived from transition probability matrix

| Rating  Aaa  Aa  A  Baa  Ba  B  Caa  D  Aaa  -0.1272  0.1164  0.0050  0.0055  0.0001  0.0001  0.0001  0.0001  Aa  0.0122  -0.1223  0.1070  0.0002  0.0012  0.0010  0.0005  0.0002  A  0.0005  0.0321  -0.1086  0.0676  0.0062  0.0011  0.0005  0.0007  Baa  0.0006  0.0025  0.0807  -0.1674  0.0732  0.0084  0.0013  0.0008  Ba  0.0004  0.0007  0.0035  0.0685  -0.2363  0.0973  0.0622  0.0037  B  0.0001  0.0004  0.0015  0.0048  0.0807  -0.1952  0.0356  0.0721  Caa  0.0001  0.0001  0.0078  0.0124  0.0391  0.0825  -0.4657  0.3238  D  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Source: Lehman Brothers

In  a  special  case  when  the  rating  transitions  are  possible  only  directly  between  the  initial rating  and  the  default  state,  and  assuming  an  absorbing  default  state,  we  are  left  with  a generator matrix whose only non-zero elements are in its final (default) column and on its diagonal (with zero final row). The matrix exponential [2] in this case acquires a shape with non-zero elements on its diagonal, representing the survival probability for an issuer of rating q until time t, the last column representing the corresponding cumulative default probability, and  all  other  elements  being  zero.  Thus,  in  this  case  we  recover  the  usual  relationship between the survival and cumulative default probabilities and the forward hazard rate:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the hazard rate for the rating state r is equal to (note that we used eq. [4]):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  a  more  general  case  of  full-blown  transition  matrices,  where  intermediate  states  are possible,  the  instantaneous  forward  default  rates  depend  on  the  future  rating  state  of  the issuer, and the cumulative survival probability is given by an expected value of the integrated hazard rates over all possible paths ( ) s r of the rating transitions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the probability density of transitioning from one rating to another at future time s is governed by the generator matrix ( ) s Λ .

Equation  [8]  demonstrates  how  the  modeling  of  rating  transitions  via  a  continuous-time Markov process corresponds to a fairly rich dynamic of future hazard rates, even in the case of  a  stationary  generator  matrix,  where  the  changes  in  the  effective  future  hazard  rate  are driven  only  by  the  random  realization  of  the  rating  paths.  In  the  case  of  time-dependent generator matrix models, one would obtain even more complex hazard rate dynamics, where the  changes  in  the  effective  future  hazard  rate  are  also  modulated  by  the  time-dependent changes in the future rating-specific transition probabilities to a default state.

This is schematically illustrated in Figures 4 and 5. Figure 4 shows the evolution of hazard rates in a stationary transition generator model where the levels of default rates as functions of a current state are constant. Figure 5 shows the evolution of hazard rates when these levels themselves are  subject  to  change  along  with  the  generator  matrix.  For  simplicity,  we  have shown precisely the same timing of rating transitions and the ultimate default (transition to rating D). In reality, the transition timings will also be different under the two models.

Figure 4. Hazard rate dynamics under the stationary rating transitions model

<!-- image -->

Source: Lehman Brothers, simulation

Figure 5. Hazard rate dynamics under the non-stationary rating transitions model

<!-- image -->

Source: Lehman Brothers, simulation

## ESTIMATION OF TRANSITION MATRICES

Having defined the ratings-based credit risk model in the previous section, we now turn to the estimation  of  the  model  using  the  historical  data.  First  we  present  a  brief  overview  of  the commonly used cohort estimators that are reported by rating agencies and followed by many practitioners  and  explain  their  shortcomings.  Next,  following  the  ideas  of  Lando  and coworkers, we will define a continuous-time estimation procedure for the generator matrix of transitions.  Finally,  we  will  extend  these  academic  models  to  allow  for  time-weighted estimation procedures, which we believe provide a better practical solution to the often posed question 'what is the current estimate of the rating transition probability?'

## Cohort Estimator for the Transition Probability Matrix

The simplest  estimator  of  the  historical  transition  probabilities  is  obtained  by  counting  the number of times a particular type of transition ij N (from  rating i to  rating j )  has  actually

occurred  during  the  observation  period,  and  dividing  it  by  the  number  of  firms i N that entered  the  observation  period  with  that  particular  initial  rating i .  This  so-called  cohort estimator  is  regularly  published  by  major  credit  rating  agencies  such  as  Moody's  and Standard and Poor's (see for example Carty [1993] and Carty and Fons [1997]). The name 'cohort' comes from the particular implementation which tracks the transitions by the 'cohort year' in which they occurred - e.g. the transition matrices for the '1990-2000 cohort':

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that if there were no transitions from rating i to rating j in the chosen cohort, then the estimate of the corresponding transition probability is equal to 0.

This approach has several important pitfalls:

- Rating  migrations  are  rare  events,  therefore  a  long  history  is  needed  to  get  reliable estimates.  This  also  makes  it  difficult  to  incorporate  model  dynamics  since  we  cannot afford to divide the sample into smaller pieces.
- The choice of cohort time windows is somewhat artificial. Moody's convention for oneyear estimates is [Jan. 1 of year T ; Jan. 1 of year T+1 ].
- Censored data: the information about the survival time of an issuer in a given rating state both  prior  to  the  estimation  window  and  after  the  end  of  the  window  is  discarded. Namely, if an issuer were downgraded from A to Baa in February, we would not make use of the information about how long it had been rated A prior to the downgrade.
- Data grouping: if company X was rated A for 11 months before transition to Baa, while company Y was rated A for only 1 month, both will contribute the same to [9].

Carty  and  Fons  (1993)  suggest  a  remedy  to  the  censored  data  problem  using  Weibull distributions. However, even with this modification, the cohort estimator remains susceptible to influence by the choices regarding the inclusion rules for rare transition events.

The  cohort  estimator  is  also  generally  inconsistent  with  the  Markov  assumption  for  rating transitions.  The  estimators  for  two  adjacent  time  windows  [0,  u]  and  [u,  s]  and  for  the combined window [0, s] may not satisfy the condition [4]. While this may be taken as a signal of non-Markov behavior of ratings, we prefer to think of it as a deficiency of the estimator.

## Maximum Likelihood Estimator for the Transition Generator Matrix

Before  we  construct  the  likelihood  function  for  the  continuous-time  transition  generator matrix,  we  must  first  define  what  constitutes  an  observation.  In  this  context,  unlike  the previous subsection, we would like to emphasize not only the event of the transition itself, but also  the  timeline  of  the  rating  process,  starting  from  the  date  when  the  rating  was  first observed (either the date of the rating assignment or the first date of the observation period), followed by the time interval during which the rating has remained unchanged, and finishing on the date when the rating state ceased to be valid, which in turn could be due to transition to another rating, default, rating withdrawal, or the end of the observation period.

These various types of observations are illustrated in Figure 6, which mirrors the schema of the transition events table that we constructed using the Moody's default database. We show two examples of fully observed events (a ratings upgrade and a default), and three examples of  censored  events,  where  only  partial  information  was  observed  -  a  rating  withdrawal,  a rating surviving until the end of the observation window, and a rating observation starting at the beginning of the observation window. The last event is called 'left censored' because the censoring (incomplete information) is at the left (earlier) time boundary, while the preceding two cases are called 'right censored' because the incomplete information pertains to the right (latter) time boundary.

Figure 6. Transition events, observation window 1/1/1990 - 10/30/2004

| Event Type  Event #  Issuer  Start Date  Start State  End Date  End State  Fully Observed  1  A  1/1/1992  Baa1  2/15/1995  A3  Fully Observed  2  B  5/15/1994  Ba3  12/15/1998  D  Right Censored  3  C  4/10/1996  Aa2  6/15/2001  RW  Right Censored  4  D  10/10/2002  A1  10/30/2004  A1  Left Censored  5  E  1/1/1990  Ba2  6/30/1995  Baa1   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Source: Lehman Brothers, sample

In the continuous-time setting, each of these observations can be further decomposed into a series of mini-observations referring to consecutive short time periods, such that when strung together  these  mini-observations  constitute  the  chosen  line  in  Figure  6.  For  example,  the observation  that  issuer  A  started  in  rating  Baa1  on  1/1/1992  and  transited  to  rating  A3  on 2/15/1995 is reinterpreted as a mini-observation that it remained at rating Baa1 for the oneday  period  [1/1/1992,  1/2/1992],  followed  by  a  mini-observation  that  it  remained  at  rating Baa1 for the next period [1/2/1992, 1/3/1992], and so on until the final mini-observation that the issuer transited from rating Baa1 to rating A3 during the last one-day period [2/14/1995, 2/15/1995].

We will assume in what follows a strong independence between the observations of the rating transition process. Namely, we will assume that:

- The  rating transition process  is Markov,  i.e. all transition probabilities for  each infinitesimal time period depend only on the ratings at the beginning of the period. Thus we explicitly exclude the ratings momentum and other path-dependencies.
- Rating  transitions  across  issuers  for  each  infinitesimal  time  period  are  conditionally independent,  given  their  respective  rating  states  and  the  rating-dependent  transition probabilities at the beginning of the period.

The latter assumption is consistent with the recent empirical tests of conditional independence of  the  default  times  across  issuers  reported  by  Das,  Duffie  and  Kapadia  (2004),  who show that  after  including  the  contemporaneous  estimates  of  hazard  rates  and  macro  factors  as explanatory variables, there is only very mild evidence for excess clustering of default.

Under these conditional independence assumptions, the complete likelihood function for the entire set of observations can be written as a product of likelihood functions for each event row,  which  in  turn  can  be  written  as  a  product  of  mini-likelihood  functions  for  each infinitesimal time period. Therefore, the total log-likelihood function is simply a sum of minilog-likelihood functions across all observations.

Let us enumerate the observation rows by k, and denote the initial rating for the row by s k r , the  final  rating  for  the  row  by e k r .  With  these  notations,  we  can  write  down  the  mini-loglikelihood functions for small time intervals as follows (here ( ) s k t r k L , corresponds to a time period  when  no  change  is  observed, ( ) e k s k t r r k L , , corresponds  to  a  time  period  when  a transition was observed, and finally ( ) C r k L s k t , , corresponds to a time period when a rightcensored observation occurred.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking a sum of these mini-log-likelihood functions across the time periods corresponding to a given observation row, and them summing across rows, we obtain the following result:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, RC k I is  the  indicator for a right-censored event. Note that the left-censoring does not influence  the  log-likelihood  function  at  all.  We  denoted  by start k T and end k T the  effective starting and ending time for the row k, respectively. Note that both the start and end times incorporate the chosen observation window, and possibly differ from the starting start k t and ending end k t times  of  a  given  rating  transition  event  recorded  in  the  database  (this  will  be important for rolling estimates of the transition probabilities):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With these definitions, we can rewrite the right-censored indicator in eq. [11] explicitly using indicators for a rating withdrawal and for an incomplete observation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assuming  that  the  rating  transition  process  is  stationary,  i.e. const ij = λ ,  we  can  easily obtain the maximum likelihood estimator of the transition generator matrix (Lando [2000], Lando and Skodeberg [2004],  Christensen,  Hansen  and  Lando  [2004]  and  Fidelius,  Lando and Nielsen [2004]):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  other  words,  the  maximum  likelihood  estimator  for  the  element  of  the  generator  matrix corresponding to a transition from rating i to  rating j is  equal  to  the  count of  all  non-rightcensored transitions within the observation window, divided by the total time that any issuer spent in the state with rating i (whether the event was censored or not). Note that since the numerator  includes  a  condition  that  the  final  rating  state  is j, then  the  indicator  for  rating withdrawal will automatically drop out (we retained it in [14] for completeness).

## Time-Weighted Maximum Likelihood Estimator

In the previous section, following Lando et al. , we derived the maximum likelihood estimator for  the  transition  generator  matrix  assuming  that  it  is  constant  over  time.  However,  as mentioned earlier, the empirical studies as well as the fundamental understanding of the credit markets  suggest  that  one  must  account  for  time  variation  of  the  hazard  rates  in  order  to explain the observed patterns of rating transitions. Without allowing for such variation, there is a significant clustering of downgrades and defaults in times of market downturns, such as 1990-1992 and 2000-2002 (see Das, Duffie and Kapadia for detailed discussion of default risk clustering in particular).

Indeed, equation [14] implies that a company that was downgraded from Baa to Ba in 1996 having survived five years at Baa, is treated similarly to a company that was downgraded in 2002 having survived only a year at Baa. In doing so, the typically longer survival time of the companies during the  mid-1990s would  significantly  increase  the  denominator  of  [14]  and depress the estimate of the corresponding downgrade probability.

For many practitioners it is obvious that the benign credit risk environment in 1996 had little in common with the severe credit downturn during 2002. The shorter lifespan of a company in  a  given rating category during 2002 was not an exception but a rule. Hence, if we were trying  to  estimate  the  rating  transition  risk  in  2002,  it  might  not  have  been  meaningful  to dilute the information contained in the recent volatile history of transitions by adding to it a large number of much more tempered transition events from a long time ago.

The cohort estimator approach deals with this problem by imposing an observation window, such as the trailing three-year or a trailing five-year window. We already noted some of the drawbacks associated with the imposition of such windows. One additional comment is that sharp windows pose an even bigger problem when the observation falls off the back end of the window than when it enters from the front. Indeed, while the potentially large impact of a new  observation  may  seem  reasonable,  an  equally  large  impact  from  the  fact  that  an  old observation was, say 5.2 years ago compared with 4.9 years ago, in the case of a sharp 5-year window  does  not  seem  justified.  It  would  be  much  better  if  the  influence  of  all  old observations was gradually fading away, never quite dropping entirely out of consideration and never changing too much from one month to another as we move forward in time.

One of the simplest ways to account for time variation of transition intensities and to solve the problem  of  observation  window  selection  is  to  apply  a  time-weighting  scheme  to  the maximum  likelihood  estimator.  The  most  common  such  scheme  is  the  geometric  (or exponential) time-decay with half-life H T ,  which assigns the following weight to an event that occurred at time t being observed at later time T , e.g. the rolling estimation date:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The weight assigned to an event that occurred at time H T prior to observation date is 2 times less than for an even that occurred just an instant ago.

To estimate a weighted log-likelihood function, we remember that it was constructed from independent  mini-likelihood  functions  [10].  Assigning  each  mini-observation  a  weight corresponding to the time of the mini-event is the same as taking each of the mini-likelihood functions  to  the  power  of  the  corresponding  weight,  or  else  equivalently  multiplying  each mini-log-likelihood function by the chosen weight. Therefore, we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that we explicitly acknowledged the dependence of the transition generator estimate on the  rolling  observation  date  -  as  the  estimation  time end window T T = goes  on  the  maximum likelihood estimator will change both because of the new events being observed and because of the changing weights. The time-weighted analog of equation [14] is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting the specific form of the exponentially-decaying weights, we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We can see that in the limit → ∞ H T the estimate converges to the unweighted case [14]. We can also approximate the cohort estimate [9] in a special limiting case where the half-life parameter is much greater than the time to observed transitions, but still much smaller than all survival  periods start k end k H end k T T T T T -&lt;&lt; &lt;&lt; -for  all k .  Since  this  limit  is  very unlikely to be satisfied, we conclude that the cohort estimator is indeed not optimal.

## A Simple Example

To illustrate both the cohort and the continuous-time estimation procedure, consider a simple example, which is a modified version of the one suggested by Lando and Skodeberg (2004).

Let  us  assume  a  rating  system  with  two  non-default  rating  categories  A,  B  and  a  default category D.  Assume that we observe over one year the history of 20 firms, of which 10 start in category A and 10 in category B. Assume that over the year of observation, one A-rated firm changes its rating to category B after three months and stays there for the rest of the year. Assume  that  over  the  same  period,  one  B-rated  firm  is  upgraded  after  nine  months  and remains in A for the rest of the period, and a firm which started in B defaults after six months and stays there for the remaining part of the period (see Figure 7, where we have highlighted the rows with non-trivial transition activity. Dates are measured in months).

Figure 7. Example transition events table, observation period [0, 12] months

| Event #  Issuer  Start Date  Start State  End Date  End State  1  1  0  A  3  B  2  1  3  B  12  B  3  2  0  A  12  A  4  3  0  A  12  A  5  4  0  A  12  A  6  5  0  A  12  A  7  6  0  A  12  A  8  7  0  A  12  A  9  8  0  A  12  A  10  9  0  A  12  B  11  10  0  A  12  B  12  11  0  B  9  A  13  11  9  A  12  A  14  12  0  B  6  D  15  13  0  B  12  B  16  14  0  B  12  B  17  15  0  B  12  B  18  16  0  B  12  B  19  17  0  B  12  B  20  18  0  B  12  B  21  19  0  B  12  B  22  20  0  B  12  B   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Source: Lehman Brothers, simulated  example

By straightforward application of the formulas [9], [14] and [18] we can now calculate the cohort  estimator  of  the  1-year  transition  probability  matrix,  and  the  maximum  likelihood estimator  of  the  1-year  generator  matrix  under  a  stationary  assumption,  and  under  a  timeweighted  assumption  with  a  half-life  of  six  months.  Having  obtained  the  estimates  of  the generator matrices, we can also calculate, via a matrix exponential, the estimates of the 1-year transition  probability  matrices  for  the  latter  two  cases.  The  results  of  this  exercise  are presented in Figure 8. We show the estimates for the generator matrices on the left and the corresponding  estimates  for  the  transition  probability  matrices  on  the  right.  For  the  cohort method, the generator matrix is calculated from the transition matrix by taking a matrix log.

Figure 8. Estimates for transition matrices under various assumptions

| Transition Generator Matrix  Transition Probability Matrix  Cohort Estimator  A  B  D  bleft  mlog  A  B  D  A  -0.1121  0.1183  -0.0063  A  0.9000  0.1000  0  B  0.1183  -0.2304  0.1121  B  0.1000  0.8000  0.1000  D  0  0  0  D  0  0  1   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Stationary Continuous-Time Estimator

B

mexp

0.3158

-0.2000

0

D

0.0000

0.1000

0

bright

A

B

D

A

0.7412

0.0777

0

Time-Weighted Continuous-Time Estimator

B

mexp

0.4566

-0.2276

0

D

0.0000

0.0943

0

bright

A

B

D

A

0.6544

0.0959

0

A

B

D

A

B

A

-0.3158

0.1000

0

A

-0.4566

0.1333

D

0

Source: Lehman Brothers

There are several observations that can be made by comparing the results in Figure 8. First of all, we note that even in this simple example it becomes apparent that the cohort estimator is not  fully  consistent  with  a  continuous-time  Markov  description  of  the  rating  transition process. Indeed, the highlighted cells in the A-D transition rows show that the cohort estimate of direct 1-year default probability for category A being exactly zero could only be reconciled with the continuous-time framework if the transition hazard rate from A to D were negative .

We  can  understand  this  better  by  looking  at  the  case  of  the  stationary  continuous-time estimate. Here, the transition hazard rate from A to D actually is zero. However, it still leads to a non-zero 1-year transition probability from A to D, due to the possibility of multi-stage transitions  like  A-B-D,  A-B-A-B-D,  etc.  The  only  elements  of  the  1-year  transition  matrix that are exactly zero correspond to forbidden transitions from D to A or B. Consequently, it is impossible  to  find  a  generator  matrix  with  non-negative  transition  probabilities  that  would produce a zero probability for the 1-year transition A-D.

Finally, comparing the stationary and the time-weighted continuous-time generator matrices and  their  corresponding  1-year  transition  probabilities,  we  can  see  that  the  impact  of  the weighting  scheme  can  be  quite  substantial.  Moreover,  the  way  it  affects  the  estimates  is driven  by  a  complex  interplay  between  the  time  of  the  transition  event  (more  recent transitions increase the corresponding hazard rate) and the duration of the stay in the initial rating (longer survival times decrease the corresponding hazard rate). For example, the A-B transition probability went up by a much larger factor than the B-D transition probability went down, even though both are driven by a single event, because the survival time length (three months vs. six months) had a bigger impact on the hazard rate estimates than the event timing (nine months ago vs. six months ago) for these two transition events.

B

0.2454

0.8312

0

B

0.3283

0.8190

0

D

0.0134

0.0911

1

D

0.0173

0.0851

1

## Parametric Smoothing of the Transition Generator Matrix

The main difficulty in the empirical estimation of the rating transition process is the rarity of the observed events, coupled with a relatively large number of the model parameters that need estimating. For a notched rating transition generator matrix (with rating states Aaa, Aa1, Aa2, …, B3, Caa, D) we have 17x18 non-zero entries with 17 constraints, requiring us to estimate as many as 289 parameters. This is a lot by any measure, even if the events were not so rare. To  reliably  estimate  so  many  parameters,  some  of  which  are  expected  to  be  very  small numbers, one would need perhaps 100 times as many (or more) transition events, which is roughly the same order of magnitude as the entire size of Moody's transition database. Since we  are  interested  primarily  in  the  'dynamic'  estimates  of  transition  probabilities  over relatively short time horizons using the exponentially weighted approach introduced earlier, we would likely face a severe problem with the number of 'effective' observations in the sample being much less than required for the desired accuracy.

Even for a much more parsimonious letter-grade matrix (with rating states Aaa, Aa, A, Baa, Ba, B, Caa, D) we have 7x8 non-zero entries, with 7 constraints, leaving us with 49 model parameters. The reduction in the model complexity is deceptive, however, since by turning to a  coarse-grained picture of rating transitions we simultaneously lose the lion's share of the observations - for example, we can no longer derive much from a transition from Baa1 to Baa3 and must wait until the corresponding issuer gets downgraded to the next letter level until it contributes to the (observed event component of the) likelihood function.

The natural solution for this problem is to impose more structure on the model and to reduce the number of independent model parameters, so that fewer observations would be sufficient to reliably estimate them. Some of the commonly cited guiding principles for doing this are:

- The transition probabilities must be monotonic, i.e. a transition to a farther state must be less probable than a transition to a nearer state.
- An exception is made for default probabilities, since the default is an absorbing state and accumulates the probabilities over time. However, this exception is not necessary when considering continuous-time transition generating matrices.
- The  shape  of  the  monotonically  decreasing  transition  probabilities  for  upgrades  and downgrades  need  not  be  the  same,  e.g.  a  one-notch  upgrade  need  not  have  the  same probability as a one-notch downgrade.

Arguably, the  best  way  to  define  a  meaningful  parameterization  is  by  using  an  underlying model that 'explains' the rating transitions  with  fewer  model parameters.  The  well  known CreditMetrics model (see Gupton, Finger and Bhatia [1997]) uses an underlying Merton-like structural model as a guiding tool for smoothing the transition probability matrix. They also discuss a variety of purely statistical fitting techniques. A completely different perspective is taken  by  Keenan  and  Sobehart  (2002),  who  derive  the  parameterization  of  the  transition probability  matrix  from  a  behavioral  model  of  analyst  decisions.  Both  of  these  studies  are focused  on  the  finite-horizon  transition  probability  matrices,  and  the  resulting  smooth estimates  are  not  guaranteed  to  correspond  to  a  well-defined  transition  generating  matrix, although the discrepancies are usually quite small.

We would like to propose yet another parameterization that is particularly well suited to the continuous-time  estimation  framework.  It  is  motivated  by  an  observation  made  earlier  that agency rating actions often lag the news about the issuer's financial health. This lag, which is partly maintained by the agencies to ensure that only the reliable and material changes to a company's long-term creditworthiness get reflected in the rating upgrades or downgrades, has a side-effect that sometimes the required action is unusually strong. Indeed, one could argue that if the rating analysts had kept up with every bit of news and market sentiment they would perhaps change the ratings much more frequently but only by the smallest amount possible, i.e. by one notch. Such behavior would be, in a sense, in the spirit of the market-driven credit risk assessment advocated by Moody's KMV (Kealhofer [2003]).

We can adopt a slightly less demanding view of the rating assignment process by assuming that there is an underlying unobservable continuous-time 'shadow' rating process which can only proceed by single-notch upgrades or downgrades, but that the outcomes of this shadow process  are  revealed  at  random  lag  times,  which  are  exponentially  distributed  with  some characteristic time scale θ .  As a result, there will be some probability that by the time the outcome  is  observed  the  rating  has  actually  drifted  by  more  than  a  single  notch.  Because multiple-notch upgrades and downgrades in this model correspond to compounded probabilities of single-notch rating changes (which are presumably small to begin with), and the bigger the rating change the more compounding is required, then we might expect that the model would naturally predict the desired monotonic behavior for transition probabilities.

The formal definition of the transition generator matrix in our parametric model is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, G is the generator matrix for the 'shadow' rating process which, by assumption, has a tri-diagonal form allowing only nearest neighbor rating transitions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The integral in our definition corresponds to summing over all possible 'revelation' times, which are  exponentially  distributed  with  characteristic  time  scale θ .  The  matrix  exponent under  the  integral  provides  the  outcome  probabilities  for  the  compounded  single-notch transition processes. Since the matrix exponents give manifestly valid transition probabilities, and since we are averaging them with positive weights that sum up to 1, then the integral in equation [19] has the properties of a nice transition probability matrix. Correspondingly, by subtracting an identity matrix from it, we obtain a generator matrix that is guaranteed to have positive off-diagonal elements and rows that sum up to zero, and is therefore a valid transition generator matrix. In a sense, the matrix G acts as a generator matrix for the generator matrix Λ (we call it a 'gengen' matrix).

The integral  itself  is  easy  to  take,  and  results  in  a  simple  matrix  inverse,  as  shown  on  the right-hand  side  of  eq.  [19].  As  expected,  in  the  limit  of  very  small  characteristic  times 0 θ → while  holding G constant,  the  rating  transition  generator  matrix  becomes  tridiagonal as well, being simply proportional to the gengen matrix G ⋅ Λ→θ .

With the parameterization defined by eqs. [19] and [20], we have only 2*(K-1) variables for a K-state rating system (one variable is the characteristic time, and the other variables are the K-1  elements  of  the  upper  diagonal  and  K-2  elements  of  the  lower  diagonal).  There  is, however, a residual scaling freedom that needs to be fixed, namely the simultaneous change of θ α θ ⋅ → and G G ⋅ → -1 α leaves  the  transition  generator  matrix Λ unchanged. Therefore, we can simply arbitrarily fix the value 1 θ = and only consider the off-diagonal elements  of  the  gengen  matrix  to  be  independent.  Thus,  for  a  full  18-state  notched  rating system we have to estimate only 2*K - 3 = 33 parameters as opposed to 289 values in the unconstrained  generator  matrix.  With  this  few  parameters  we  can  indeed  hope  to  have sufficient number of observations even for relatively short estimation horizons such as one, three  or  five  years.  Of  course,  for  any  number  of  model  parameters,  the  shorter  horizons correspond  to  fewer  'effective'  observations  and  less  accurate  estimates,  and  one  must balance this against the benefits derived from capturing the time-varying dynamics.

Even though we derived the parametric form of the generator matrix [19] by assuming an existence of the unobservable 'shadow' rating process, we still interpret the observed rating transitions in accordance with the continuous-time inhomogeneous Markov process governed by eqs. [5] and [6]. Therefore, the time-weighted log-likelihood function is still given by the same expression [16] as before, except the elements of the transition generator matrix ij λ are now treated as explicit functions of the gengen matrix G (remember that we fixed the time scale 1 θ = ), which in turn is a function of the estimation time end window T T = . Substituting the standard constraint [4] and the exponentially decaying weights [15] into eq. [16] we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since  the  dependence  of ij λ on  the  model  parameters ij g is  non-linear  [19],  we  are  no longer able to derive an explicit solution for the maximum likelihood estimators like eq. [18]. Instead, one has to perform the maximization numerically. However, this complication is a small price to pay for the increased robustness and accuracy of the model.

## THE DYNAMICS OF RATING TRANSITIONS

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  historical  data.  We  have  implemented  the  maximum  likelihood estimation methodology with parametric smoothing described in the previous section (with adjustments for partial censoring of data discussed in the Appendix A) for a set of half-life parameters including 1, 3, 5, 10, and 20 years.

We  treat  the  20-year  half-life  estimate  as  the  long-term  transition  probabilities  that  are unconditional on the business cycle. The 10-year half-life corresponds to an average over a single business cycle, which in recent history lasted roughly ten years.

The shorter half-lives of 1, 3, and 5 years correspond to conditional estimates and are much more sensitive to the point in the business cycle at which the estimate is made. We feel that a 1-year  half-life  estimate  is  only  marginally  useful  since  the  effective  number  of  transition events is very low and the accuracy of the estimate is poor - we produce it for completeness and for comparison with often cited 1-year cohort estimates. However, the 3- and 5-year half- life  estimates  are  actually  quite  robust  and  reflect  a  meaningful  difference  in  conditioning information in comparison with long-term estimates as well as in comparison with each other.

There are many uses of such transition matrix estimates. Depending on the context, either the longer-term,  unconditional  matrices,  or  the  shorter-term,  conditional  matrices  may  be appropriate.  For  example,  if  an  investor  is  interested  in  the  analysis  of  credit  losses  for  a hypothetical 10-year CLO backed by a diversified pool of loans about which she knows only their ratings distribution, then applying the through-the-cycle average estimate such as the 10year half-life generator matrix and deriving the corresponding cumulative default probabilities  for  a  10-year  horizon  would  seem  reasonable.  On  the  other  hand,  if  an  asset manager is inquiring  about the  upgrade-to-downgrade ratio  in  the  next  year,  then  using  an estimate based on a short 3-year half-life is more likely to yield a useful answer (again, we caution against a 1-year half-life because of less accuracy of the estimates).

In this section we discuss the dynamics of the estimated transition probabilities obtained from our model, and highlight the degree to which it can impact the frequently used values such as long-horizon  default  probabilities.  We  then  briefly  consider  some  stylized  facts  about  the predictability of rating transitions.

## Rolling Estimates of Historical Transition Probabilities

The simplest and most common use of the credit rating transition models is to obtain various cumulative  probabilities  for  a  given  time  horizon  such  as  1,  5  or  10  years,  under  the assumption  that  the  present  estimate  of  the  transition  matrix  (or  the  generator  matrix  in continuous-time formalism) will remain intact. However, this does not prevent one changing the  present  estimate  as  time  goes  on  and  new  observations  accrue  in  the  database.  In  this subsection we show the results of such rolling estimates and discuss their dynamics.

We begin with the estimation of the long-term unconditional transition  matrices,  i.e.  those estimated with a half-life of 20  years,  as  of  1/1/2005.  Figure  9a  shows  the  estimate  of  the gengen matrix, 9b shows the corresponding transition generator matrix, 9c shows the 1-year transition probability matrix and 9d shows the 10-year transition probability matrix.

For comparison, we show a similar set of estimates as of 1/1/2003 with a 3-year half-life in Figures 10a-d. As we can see, the greater downgrade risk of the period 2000-2003 has been captured in these estimates. While the differences for the generator matrices may seem small, one  can  see  from  the  comparison  of  the  transition  probabilities  (Figures  9c  and  10c),  and especially  from  comparison  of  the  10-year  transition  probability  matrices  (Figures  9d  and 10d), that estimates for both downgrade and default risk in 2003 were markedly higher than the corresponding unconditional ones.

In  Figure  11a  we  show  the  often  cited  Moody's  idealized  cumulative  default  probabilities, and  widely  used  weighted  average  rating  factor  (WARF)  values  for  each  rating  which  are numerically  equal  to  10-year  cumulative  default  probability  measured  in  basis  points.  For comparison, in Figure 11b we show the same numbers obtained from our unconditional longterm model. As we can see, our estimates are higher (see the WARF column for comparison). Figure 11c demonstrates the same calculation for a short-term estimate as of 1/1/2003, and we see that the 10-year cumulative default estimates in our model at that time would have been several times higher than Moody's WARF numbers would suggest. Even for shorter horizons such as 5 or 3 years, the differences are quite dramatic. This is, of course, not surprising market practitioners were well aware of the much higher credit risk during the early 2000s. However, it is notable that our model correctly captures this effect.

Figure 9a. Gengen matrix estimated as of 1/1/2005 with 20-year half-life

Figure 9b. Transition generator matrix as of 1/1/2005 with 20-year half-life

Figure 9c. 1-year transition probability matrix as of 1/1/2005 with 20-year half-life

Figure 9d. 10-year transition probability matrix as of 1/1/2005 with 20-year half-life

Figure 10a. Gengen matrix estimated as of 1/1/2003 with 3-year half-life

## Figure 10b. Transition generator matrix as of 1/1/2003 with 3-year half-life

Figure 10c. 1-year transition probability matrix as of 1/1/2003 with 3-year half-life

Figure 10d. 10-year transition probability matrix as of 1/1/2003 with 3-year half-life

Figure 11a. Moody's idealized cumulative default probabilities and WARFs

Figure 11b. Model-based cumulative default probabilities, estimated as of 1/1/2005 with 20-year half-life

Figure 11c. Model-based cumulative default probabilities, estimated as of 1/1/2003 with 3-year half-life

Figure 12. Model-based cumulative probabilities of downgrade to high yield, estimated as of 1/1/2003 with 3-year half-life

Finally, in Figure 12 we show the cumulative downgrade probabilities for various horizons based on the short-term estimate as of 1/1/2003. To obtain the downgrade estimate, we first must  modify  the  transition  generator  matrix,  trimming  it  down  to  investment-grade-only ratings,  and  adding  an  additional  row  and  column  that  stands  for  'High  Yield  or  default' state. We then designate this state an absorbing state by setting its corresponding row of the downgrade generator matrix to zero.

This corresponds to counting a 'first passage time' of the downgrade to high yield. Indeed, although  a  company  can  of  course  be  downgraded  to  high  yield  and  then  subsequently upgraded back to investment grade, there can be many situations when the downgrade would trigger certain contingent events, such as a call of the company's bonds, or drawdown on a revolver  loan  facility,  or  a  substantial  increase  in  margin  requirements.  The  cumulative downgrade probabilities calculated in a manner described above will be particularly useful in valuation and risk management of such ratings-contingent claims.

## Forecasting Transition Probabilities

Ultimately, investors are rarely interested in description of the past. Even when the question is 'what  was  the  downgrade  probability  in  the  past  three  years'  it  is  often  implicit  that  the investor will proceed to use such an estimate for some sort of forecast. Strictly speaking, there is no basis for such use, unless one can indeed prove that the historically estimated transition probabilities have explanatory power for future observations. We will discuss these questions briefly  in  the  latter  part  of  this  section,  after  presenting  the  results  of  rolling  estimates  of historical transition probabilities.

In an earlier paper (Berd and Voronov [2002]) we investigated the continuous-time estimation of credit rating transition matrices and considered multi-factor forecasting models using both macro and industry variables. Our results, summarized in Figure 13 (which were obtained in a setting with a sharp window cut-off and without the parametric smoothing introduced in this paper) indicate that macro-economic variables such as capacity utilization (which reflects the business cycle) and swap spread (which is meant to reflect the liquidity crises), do carry a substantial explanatory power for observed rating transitions. Even more explanatory power is associated with industry factors - the improvement of the fit due to distinguishing between broad  industry  sectors  such  as  telecoms-media-technology,  basic  industries,  banks-andbrokerages and utilities is substantially greater than the improvement achieved by one or even two macro factors. Finally, combining the industry indicative factors with the business cycle macro factor produces the best fit among the considered models.

Figure 13. Comparative performance of explanatory variables

| Model Specification  Constant  Macro Factors  Industry Factors  Log-Likelihood  C  -  -22016  C  1-factor: Capacity Utilization  -21836  C  2-factor: Capacity Utilization,  5-yr Swap Spread  -21626  C  -  9 Indicative Factors  -21475  C  1-factor: Capacity Utilization  9 Indicative Factors  -21305   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Source: Lehman Brothers

We expect that these stylized facts about the predictability of rating transitions will remain in effect  after  we  update  these  results  using  the  time-weighted  parametrically  smoothed estimation technique introduced here. The results of that investigation will be reported in a forthcoming paper.

The importance of time variation of hazard rates as functions of a firm's distance to default (which in our case is approximated by the rating process itself) and macro-economic variables such  as  U.S.  income  growth  (which  is  similar  in  properties  to  our  choice  of  capacity utilization)  was  recently  investigated  by  Duffie  and  Wang  (2004).  They  conclude  that  the macro-economic variables are important even after the issuer-specific information (distance to default) has been taken into account. Interestingly enough, while the evidence of such timevarying  systemic  credit  risk  is  strong,  the  resulting  pattern  of  defaults  does  not  provide compelling  evidence  for  default  clustering  (i.e.  correlation  between  defaults)  beyond  that which can be ascribed to higher hazard rates with independent arrival times, as shown by Das, Duffie and Kapadia (2004).

## CONCLUSIONS

In this paper we have developed a consistent and robust methodology for estimation of credit rating  transition  probabilities.  Building  on  the  earlier  work  by  Lando  et  al.  and  others,  we have further extended the continuous-time Markov rating transition formalism by adopting a time-weighted  estimation  technique  for  the  log-likelihood  function  and  the  parametric smoothing  of  transition  generator  matrix  using  the  'hidden  rating  process'  approximation. This allowed us to reduce the number of model parameters and achieve a higher accuracy in empirical estimation even for 3- and 5-year half-life estimates. Appendix B presents a simple technique for coarse-graining our notched-rating transition probability estimates in order to produce letter-grade transition matrices.

Some of the uses of transition matrix models include:

- Credit portfolio loss estimates for diversified portfolios pooled by rating. As a particular example, many CLOs report the rating composition of the collateral portfolios but not the specific issuers, in which case our model can be used for estimating the (real-world, not implied) loss rates for the collateral and the tranches.
- Valuation  and  risk  management  of  rating-contingent  obligations,  such  as  bonds  with step-up coupon provisions.
- Risk management of revolver loan commitments. It is often assumed that a credit line will be drawn if an issuer is downgraded to high yield and is no longer able to access the capital markets at advantageous rates. Our cumulative downgrade probability estimates can be used for scenario-based risk management of revolvers.
- Counterparty  risk  management.  Many  smaller  trading  counterparties  do  not  have  any outstanding public debt or CDS (or even equity) on which to base the estimates of their credit risk and margin requirements. Given credit analyst assessment of 'shadow' rating of such counterparties, one can use the transition matrix model for setting and monitoring margin requirements and lines of credit.

We hope that our model will be useful for investors in these and other applications.

Acknowledgments: I would like to thank Artem Voronov (NYU) for research assistance, and Lea Carty, Roy Mashal and Marco Naldi for valuable comments and discussions.

## REFERENCES

Berd,  A.  and  A.  Voronov  (2002): Consistent  Empirical  Models  for  Forecasting  of  Rating Transition Matrices, working paper, Lehman Brothers

Carty,  L.  (1997): Moody's  Rating  Migration  and  Credit  Quality  Correlation  1920-1996 , special comment, Moody's Investor Services

Carty,  L.  and  J.  Fons  (1993): Measuring  Changes  in  Corporate  Credit  Quality ,  special comment, Moody's Investor Services

Christensen,  J.,  E.  Hansen  and  D.  Lando  (2004):  'Confidence  Sets  for  Continuous-Time Rating Transition Probabilities', Journal of Banking and Finance , vol. 28 (11), p. 2575

Crosbie, P. and J. Bohn (2001): Modeling Default Risk , working paper, KMV

Das, S., D. Duffie, and N. Kapadia (2004): Common Failings: How Corporate Default are Correlated , working paper, Stanford University and University of Santa Clara

Duffie, D. and K. Wang (2004): Multi-Period Corporate Failure Prediction with Stochastic Covariates , working paper, Stanford University

Finkelstein, V., G. Pan, J.-P. Lardy, T. Ta and J. Thierney (2002): CreditGrades: Technical Document , RiskMetrics Group

Fiedelius,  P.,  D.  Lando  and  J.  P.  Nielsen  (2004):  'Non-Parametric  Analysis  of  Rating Transition and Default Data', Journal of Investment Management , vol. 2 (2), p. 71

Gupton, G., C. Finger and M. Bhatia (1997): CreditMetrics: Technical  Document , RiskMetrics Group

Jarrow, R., D. Lando and S. Turnbull (1997): 'A Markov Model for the Term Structure of Credit Risk Spreads', Review of Financial Studies , vol. 10, p. 481

Kavvathas D. (2000): Estimating Credit Rating Transition Probabilities for Corporate Bonds, working paper, University of Chicago

Kealhofer  S.  (2003):  'Quantifying  Credit  Risk  I:  Default  Prediction', Financial  Analyst Journal , vol. 59, no. 1 (January/February), p. 30

Keenan S. and J. Sobehart (2002): 'A Behavioural Model of Rating Assignment', in Credit Ratings: Methodology, Rationale and Default Risk , ed. M. Ong, Risk Books

Lando,  D.  (2000):  'Some  Elements  of  Rating-Based  Credit  Risk  Modeling',  in Advanced Fixed Income Valuation Tools (N. Jegadeesh and B. Tuckman, eds.), Wiley &amp; Sons, p. 193

Lando, D. and T. M. Skodeberg (2002): 'Analyzing Rating Transitions and Rating Drift with Continuous Observations', Journal of Banking and Finance , vol. 26, p. 423

Sobehart, J., R. Stein, V. Mikityanskaya and L. Li (2000): Moody's Public Firm Risk Model: a  Hybrid  Approach  to  Modeling  Short-Term  Default  Risk ,  special  comment,  Moody's Investor Services

Sobehart,  J.,  S.  Keenan  and  R.  Stein  (2000): Benchmarking  Quantitative  Default  Risk Models: a Validation Methodology , special comment, Moody's Investor Services

## APPENDIX A: LETTER-GRADE RATINGS AND PARTIAL CENSORING

Prior  to  1992,  Moody's  assigned  only  letter-grade  credit  ratings  (Aaa,  Aa,  A,  Baa,  Ba,  B, Caa) to issuers. In January 1992, the agency switched to a notched rating system, by splitting each of the letter grade ratings (except Aaa) into three alpha-numeric ratings (for example, the Baa category was split into Baa1, Baa2 and Baa3).

This  change  of  rating  denominations  presents  a  challenge  for  empirical  estimation.  We confront it by regarding the pre-1992 letter-grade ratings as partially censored versions of the full 'unobservable' notched rating system.

For  any  transition  from  a  letter-grade  rating  R  to  a  notched  rating r ,  we  set  the  mini-loglikelihood  function  to  equally  weighted  average  of  the  values  corresponding  to  transitions from 'unobserved' notched ratings R1, R2, and R3 to the final rating, which is consistent with  having  no  information  on  the  unobserved  notch  state  prior  to  transition.  Similarly,  a transition from a notched rating to a letter-grade rating (if such is ever observed) is treated as a  partially  censored  observation  corresponding  to  either  one  of  the  'unobserved'  final notched ratings. Finally, the pre-1992 transitions from letter-grade to letter-grade rating are treated as partially censored both in the beginning and at the end of the observation.

These rules are summarized in the following set of equations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that in a situation when the observed transition is from a letter grade to one of its subset notched ratings (such as from Ba to Ba2) then one of the possible 'unobserved' initial states is  the  same  as  the  final  state,  and  therefore  corresponds  to  a  'no-transition'  event.  This  is automatically taken into account by properly calculating the mini-log-likelihood function for such events, which does not contain the second non-integral part [16]. A similar statement is valid for a transition from a notched rating to a letter-grade rating.

We have also made a simplification by grouping all Caa1 or below ratings into a single Caa designation.  We  do  not  make  any  adjustments  for  censored  observations  corresponding  to transitions between these states.

Substituting  these  terms  into  the  log-likelihood  function  [21]  we  obtain  the  necessary objective function that covers the entire period available in the Moody's database.

## APPENDIX B: COARSE-GRAINING THE TRANSITION MATRICES

Investors often ask for transition probability estimates on a coarse-grained, letter-grade scale spanning  eight  rating  states  [Aaa,  Aa,  A,  Baa,  Ba,  B,  Caa,  D].  This  can  be  useful  when addressing  macro  trends  in  credit  markets  or  broad  asset  allocations  strategies,  where  it  is impractical to maintain very fine classification with 18 notched rating states [Aaa, Aa1, Aa2, Aa3, A1, A2, A3, Baa1, Baa2, Baa3, Ba1, Ba2, Ba3, B1, B2, B3, Caa, D].

One  could  potentially  answer  this  question  by  re-mapping  all  transition  events  to  their corresponding  letter-grade  ratings  and  then  applying  the  same  estimation  methodology  as described in this paper with a smaller set of ratings. The problem with this approach is that it would lead to a dramatic reduction in the number of observed transitions and potentially less robust estimation of the model parameters.

The  alternative  is  to  start  with  the  already  estimated  transition  generator  matrix  for  the notched  ratings  and  derive  a  generator  matrix  for  a  coarse-grained  rating  variable  that continues to satisfy the Markov property.

s

Let R denote  the  coarse-grained  initial  rating  state  which  has  three  notched  sub-ratings s s s R R R 3 , 2 , 1 . Let also e r denote a final state which has no sub-ratings, i.e. one of [Aaa, Caa, D]. Assuming equally probable initial sub-ratings, the transition intensity from s R to e r is equal to the average of transition intensities from initial sub-ratings to the final state.

Let now e R denote the coarse-grained final rating state and s r denote a initial state which has  no  sub-ratings.  Since  the  final  notched  states  are  mutually  exclusive,  the  transition intensity from s r to e R is equal to the sum of transition intensities from the initial state to the final sub-ratings.

Finally,  the  transition  intensity  between  two  coarse-grained  states  can  be  obtained  by applying the above rules iteratively. These rules are summarized as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

One  can  see  from  these  equations  that  the  rows  of  the  resulting  coarse-grained  transition generator  matrix  sum  up  to  zero,  and  that  its  off-diagonal  elements  are  positive,  which  is sufficient to ensure that the coarse-grained transition generator matrix corresponds to a valid Markov  process.  Once  this  generator  matrix  is  constructed,  the  corresponding  transition probability matrices for various horizons can be calculated by the standard matrix exponentiation rules [2].

The results of this coarse-graining procedure for the 20-year half-life transition generator and probability matrices, estimated as of 1/1/2005 are shown in Figure 14.

Figure 14a. Letter-grade transition generator matrix as of 1/1/2005 with 20-year half-life

Figure 14b. Letter-grade 1-year transition probability matrix as of 1/1/2005 with 20year half-life