## Towards Automated Biometric Identification of Sea Turtles (Chelonia mydas)

Irwandi Hipiny 1 , Hamimah Ujir 1 , Aazani Mujahid 2  &amp; Nurhartini Kamalia Yahya 3

1 Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, UNIMAS, 94300 Kota Samarahan, Sarawak, Malaysia. 2 Faculty of Resource Science and Technology, UNIMAS, 94300 Kota Samarahan, Sarawak, Malaysia. 3 Danau Girang Field Centre, Sabah, Malaysia.

Email: mhihipni@unimas.my

Abstract. Passive  biometric  identification  enables  wildlife  monitoring  with minimal  disturbance.  Using  a  motion-activated  camera  placed  at  an  elevated position and facing downwards, we collected images of sea turtle carapace, each belonging to one of sixteen Chelonia mydas juveniles. We then learned co-variant and robust image descriptors from these images, enabling indexing and retrieval. In  this  work,  we  presented  several  classification  results  of  sea  turtle  carapaces using the learned image descriptors. We found that a template-based descriptor, i.e., Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) performed exceedingly better during classification than keypoint-based descriptors. For our dataset, a high-dimensional descriptor is a must due to the minimal gradient and color information inside the carapace images. Using HOG, we obtained an average classification accuracy of 65%.

Keywords:

visual animal biometrics; template matching.

## 1 Introduction

Biometric  identification  of  sea  turtles  within  a  population  is  essential  for behavioral and ecological study, allowing researchers to estimate vital statistics such  as  growth  rate,  survivorship,  foraging  patterns  and  population  size. Traditional methods of permanent marking and artificial tagging induce stress and possibly harm the animals. Furthermore, tag loss is common due to various factors,  namely  elapsed  time  after  tagging,  study  area,  target  species,  size  of animal, piercing site and tag's properties (e.g., material, colour and design) [1, 2, 3,  4,  5].  Individual  sea  turtles  can  also  be  recognised  via  photographic identification of their natural marks, for example, based on coloration patterns around the head area [6], facial profiles [7] and facial scute patterns [8]. Still, the mark-recapture process puts a considerable amount of stress to the animal.

We propose a passive  biometric  identification  system  of  sea  turtles  based  on robust and co-variant image descriptor matching, see Figure 1. A distant camera remotely captures aerial images of sea turtles at their nesting site. These images

Figure 1 Our proposed framework. Matching is a minimising function, ω"#$, # &amp; ' .

<!-- image -->

Figure 2 Left  to  right.  An  outline  drawing  of  a  Chelonia  mydas's  carapace, sourced from [10], and an actual image of a juvenile Chelonia mydas kept in a private breeding farm in Lundu, Sarawak.

<!-- image -->

are each learned as a robust and co-variant image descriptor, enabling indexing and retrieval. The setup is non-invasive i.e., using a remote camera and no flash photography.  Using  this  setup,  we  collected  images  of  sixteen  juveniles  at  a private breeding farm in Lundu, Sarawak. The images were taken at night (since female nest at night) inside a perimeter to imitate an actual nesting site. The image descriptor is learned from the most visible part of the sea turtle, as seen aerially, i.e., its carapace. A Chelonia mydas' carapace, see Figure 2, contains a distinctive scute pattern that can be used to identify individuals [9].

## 2 Related Work

Recent works on biometric identification of animals, not limited to sea turtles, are motivated  by  the  use  of  Computer  Vision's  pattern  matching  algorithms.  An automated approach is a natural progression from manual inspection by human experts. Burghardt et al. [11] used an extended version of Belongie et al.'s Shape Contexts [12] to encode unique phase singularities of spot patterns on individual African penguins. In a more recent work [13], they proposed the detection of shape  curls  to  represent  individual  Turing-patterned  animals.  Dababera  and Rodrigo  [14]  implemented  an  eigenface-based  identification  mechanism  to recognise individual African elephants using their frontal-view face images. Loos and Pfiter [15] combined global and local facial features for visual identification of primates. Taha et al. [16] learned SIFT [17] features from individual horse's muzzle images, later using RANSAC to remove outliers during matching. Also using  muzzle  images,  Monteiro  [18]  combined  graph  matching  and  local invariant features to recognise individual cattle. Li et al. [19] learned Zernike moments from tailhead images of Holstein dairy cows to recognise individuals. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to develop a passive biometric identification system for recognising individual sea turtles.

## 2.1 Linear Deformation of Scute Pattern

Matching sea turtle individuals based on images captured by a stationary camera is  non-trivial  due  to  the  linear  deformation  of  salient  image  features.  In  such settings, deformation may consist of scale change and in-plane translation and rotation. Dorai et al. [20] suggested several pre-emptive strategies to limit the impact  of  image  deformation  when  collecting  biometric  data.  Their  approach requires multiple measurements to be taken concurrently, later sorted according to the severity of deformity.

Building on a different strategy, image feature descriptors such as [17, 21, 22] and [23], provide a better way to match scute patterns. The gradient-based feature descriptors are co-variant or at least, robust to various image transformations. When paired together with the bag-of-words framework, the setup enables partial matching of models, i.e., using probability to find the nearest match. Due to the low-light image capturing resulting to almost zero colour information, plus the minimal  texture  on  sea  turtle  carapaces,  we  theorise  that  keypoint-based descriptors  such  as  SIFT  [17]  will  not  fare  well  against  our  dataset.  As  for template-based descriptors, such as HOG [23], the higher dimensionality should provide a more robust description of the scute pattern. Nevertheless, templatebased descriptors are not co-variant to rotation.

## 2.2 Matching of Scute Patterns

Between unique landings, it is probable for an individual sea turtle's carapace to acquire  new  permanent  markings,  for  example,  predation  marks,  scarring  and barnacles. It may also acquire new ephemeral markings, for example, algae, sand particles and dirt. Our feature descriptor must be robust against such noise when matching  scute  patterns.  Existing  keypoint-based  and  template-based  feature descriptors should solve this problem by providing a degree of robustness against noise  during  matching.  However,  the  degree  of  robustness  depends  on  the properties of the captured images.

## 3 Our Dataset

Table 1 PANDAN-CHELOMY dataset.

| No  Number of  Images  No  Number  of Images  1  3  9  4  2  3  10  6  3  6  11  3  4  3  12  6  5  7  13  3  6  11  14  2  7  4  15  3  8  3  16  3   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

We collected between two to eleven RGB images (of 3,264 × 2,448 resolution) each for sixteen Chelonia mydas juveniles, see Table 1. A total of 70 images were taken sans flash (as turtles are very sensitive to light). The complete dataset (CCBY-4.0), see Figure 3, is available on the corresponding author's website. The juvenile sea turtles were kept in captivity inside a private breeding farm in Lundu, Sarawak. During data capture, each individual was placed inside a perimeter and was allowed to move around freely for 3 to 5 minutes. The setup aims to replicate the environment similar to a sea turtle's nesting site. All sixteen individuals, as part of a larger group, were released back to the sea in December 2015 [24].

The dataset was pre-processed prior to classification. Images were converted to greyscale and manually rotated to position the carapace in an upright pose, see Figure 4. The pose correction is required to enable the matching of template- based image descriptors. Inside each image, we manually set an ROI window to exclude most of the background. The remaining background elements inside the ROI are later removed via a smoothing function. The rotated images and ROI information are both included inside our PANDAN-CHELOMY dataset.

Figure 3 A  From  left  to  right,  top  to  bottom.  A  sample  raw  image  of  each Chelonia mydas juvenile, Turtle 1 to Turtle 16, taken from our dataset PANDANCHELOMY.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4 Rotated images from PANDAN-CHELOMY, each with a visualised ROI.

<!-- image -->

The dataset was pre-processed prior to classification. Images were converted to greyscale and manually rotated to position the carapace in an upright pose, see Figure 4. The pose correction is required to enable the matching of templatebased image descriptors. Inside each image, we manually set an ROI window, see Figure 4, to exclude most of the background. The remaining background elements inside the ROI are later removed via a smoothing function. The rotated images and ROI information are both included inside our PANDAN-CHELOMY dataset.

## 4 Matching of Carapace Images

## 4.1 Classification

The  PANDAN-CHELOMY  dataset  contains  70  images  belonging  to  sixteen juveniles.  Prior  to  matching,  the  ROIs  are  smoothed  using  a Gaussian kernel to suppress the remaining background elements. We found the kernel size to be optimal for removing sand features. A larger kernel erodes more gradient, resulting to a higher loss of discriminative features inside the ROI. A smaller kernel retains more noise, which reduces the classification's accuracy. 4 × 4

Using -fold cross-validation, we obtain matching score for each ROI of the test set against other ROIs of the training set based on the nearest-neighbour distance ratio  (NNDR)  scheme.  The  threshold  values  are  varied  from  0.0  to  1.0.  We calculate the score, , as, k β

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where is  the  distance  between the template descriptor, ,  and the bestmatching target descriptor, , and is the distance between and , i.e., the second best-matching target descriptor. ω top d x d m ω 2 nd d x d n

If both and belongs to the same individual, the classification function, , returns two possible values, d x d m ξ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Otherwise,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  the  event  of  the  classification  function  returning  multiple  top  matches,  we count the result as a False Negative. Based on the total number of True Positives (TP),  False  Positives  (FP),  True  Negatives  (TN)  and  False  Negatives  (FN), obtained from our classification exercise, the True Positive Rate, and  the  False  Positive  Rate, , for each threshold value are estimated. TPR = TP TP + FN ( ) FPR = FP FP + TN ( )

## 4.2 Image Descriptors

We selected Scale-invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) [17], Speeded Up Robust Features (SURF) [21] and Oriented FAST and Rotated BRIEF (ORB) [22], as our  keypoint-based  descriptors.  Histogram  of  Oriented  Gradients  (HOG)  [23] was chosen as our sole template-based descriptor. All parameters were set to the default values as suggested in the original publications [17] [21] [22] except for HOG.

For HOG, we rescale each ROI to 96 × 128 resolution,  which  translates  to  a descriptor length of . /0 1 -1	 × 451 1 -16 × (2 × 2) ×= 5,940 , with 8 × 8 pixel cells, blocks of 2 × 2 cells,  and a 9-bin orientation histogram (0 ° -  180 ° ).  Our ROIs are  larger  than  the 64 × 128 resolution  used  in  [23]  due  to  the  typical dimension of a sea turtle carapace being almost equal in width and height.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5 An example of a SIFT matching result (acceptance threshold of 0.8) between Turtle 8a and Turtle 6d. The number of positive matches is 5. Image brightness was increased to improve visual clarity.

Figure 6 Visualised HOG descriptor for Turtle 8a (left) and Turtle 6d (right). The L2-norm value is 6.82. Image brightness was increased to improve visual clarity.

<!-- image -->

Additionally, for SIFT, SURF and ORB, we vary the acceptance threshold during keypoint matching, from 0.2 to 0.8. We plot the classification result for each acceptance threshold separately. See Figure 5 for an example of a SIFT matching result and Figure 6 for an example of visualised HOG descriptors for two paired carapace images.

## 5 Results and Discussion

<!-- image -->

Actual	Classes Predicted	classes

Figure 7 ROC curve plots obtained from all classification results.

Figure 8 Confusion matrix obtained from the classification results using HOG [23], with threshold value for NNDR scheme set to 0.9.

<!-- image -->

Our  classification  of  70  sea  turtle  carapaces,  using &gt; -fold  cross-validation, produced the ROC curve plots shown in Figure 7. As predicted, all keypointbased descriptors, with acceptance threshold values ranging from 0.2 to 0.8, had failed spectacularly with worse performance than random guessing. Only HOG had performed better (than random guessing) with an average accuracy of 65%. Classification accuracy of this dataset via random guessing is 6.25%. Evidently, the  nature  of  our  ROI  images,  i.e.,  minimal  colour  information  and  lack  of textures, contributes to the failure of SIFT, SURF and ORB. Our implementation of HOG produces a descriptor length of 5,940, which is a far greater number than SIFT's 128, making it more discriminative and robust.

The optimal threshold value for HOG is 0.9. This reveals that with HOG, even though  we  managed  to  obtain  an  average  classification  accuracy  of  65%,  the distance  between  the  top  match  and  the  second-best  match  is  nominal.  The confusion matrix using the optimal configuration is shown in Figure 3(b). We have  16  actual  classes  and predicted  classes.  The  additional  predicted class, i.e., class MANY, represents cases where our classification function returns multiple top matches. We consider such cases as a False Negative to penalise the configuration. 16 + 1

## 6 Conclusion

Based  on  our  results,  we  conclude  that  the  recognition  of  Chelonia  mydas individuals using aerial images of their carapace is possible. By learning these ROI images as HOG descriptors, we managed to obtain an average classification

Predicted	Classes accuracy of 65%, with certain individuals managing 75% or higher. By dealing with cases where multiple top matches are returned from a single classification instance,  we  should  be  able  to  improve  the  average  classification  accuracy further.  Solutions  such  as  cumulative  voting  scheme  [25]  [26]  and  modular classification [27] shall be explored in the future. Another potential solution is to use 3D features captured using an RGB-D sensor to represent the scutes, such as surface normal [28].

Constrained by our grant's limitation, we admittedly ignored the effect of scute deformations over time. The dataset contains images captured during a single landing. In future, we plan to collect images of multiple landings at an actual nesting site over a longer period of time.

## 7 References

- [1] G. H. Balazs, Factors affecting the retention of metal tags on sea turtles , Marine Turtle Newsletter, vol. 20, pp. 11--14, 1982.
- [2] N. Mrosovsky and S. J. Shettleworth, What double tagging studies can tell us , Marine Turtle Newsletter, vol. 22, pp. 11--15, 1982.
- [3] C. J. Limpus, Estimation of tag loss in marine turtle research , Wildlife Research, vol. 19, pp. 457--469, 1992.
- [4] R.  P.  van  Dam  and  D.  C.  E., Differential  tag  retention  in  Caribbean hawksbill turtles , Chelonian Conservation and Biology, vol. 3, pp. 225-229, 1999.
- [5] C.  Bellini,  M.  H.  Godfrey  and  T.  M.  Sanches, Metal  tag  loss  in  wild juvenile hawksbill sea turtles (Eretmochelys imbricata) ,  Herpetological review, vol. 32, pp. 172--173, 2001.
- [6] D. L. McDonald and P. H. Dutton, Use of PIT Tags and Photoidentification  to  Revise  Remigration  Estimates  of  Leatherback Turtles (Dermochelys coriacea) Nesting in St. Croix, U. S. Virgin Islands, 1979-1995 ,  Chelonian Conservation and Biology, vol. 2, pp. 148--152, 1996.
- [7] P. Bennett, U. Keuper-Bennett and G. H. Balazs, Photographic evidence for the regression of fibropapillomas afflicting green turtles at Honokowai,  Maui,  in  the  Hawaiian  Islands ,  in  Proceedings  of  the Nineteenth Annual Symposium on Sea Turtle Biology and Conservation. NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-SEFSC-443, 2000.
- [8] J. W. Reisser, M. C. Proietti, P. G. Kinas and I. Sazima, Photographic identification of sea turtles: method description and validation, with an estimation of tag loss ,' Endangered Species Research 5: 73-82, 2008.
- [9] J. Wyneken and D. Witherington, The anatomy of sea turtles ,  National Marine Fisheries Service, 2001.
- [10] G. A. Boulenger, Fauna of British India , Amphibia and Reptilia, 1890.
- [11] T. Burghardt, P. J. Barham, N. Campbell, I. C. Cuthill, R. B. Sherley and T.  M.  Leshoro, A  fully  automated  computer  vision  system  for  the biometric  identification  of  African  penguins  (Spheniscus  demersus)  on Robben Island , in 6th International Penguin Conference (IPC07), Hobart, Tasmania, Australia., EJ Woehler, Ed, 2007.
- [12] S. Belongie, J. Malik and J. Puzicha, Shape context: A new descriptor for shape matching and object recognition , in Advances in neural information processing systems, 2001.
- [13] T. Burghardt and N. Campbell, Generic phase curl localisation for an individual identification of Turing-patterned animals , Visual Observation and Analysis of Animal and Insect Behavior, pp. 17--21, 2010.
- [14] R.  Dabarera  and  R.  Rodrigo, Vision  based  elephant  recognition  for management  and  conservation ,  in  5th  International  Conference  on Information and Automation for Sustainability, 2010.
- [15] A.  Loos  and  M.  Pfitzer, Towards  automated  visual  identification  of primates  using  face  recognition ,  in  19th  International  Conference  on Systems, Signals and Image Processing, 2012.
- [16] A. Taha, A. Darwish and A. E. Hassanien, Arabian Horse Identification System  Based  on  Live  Captured  Muzzle  Print  Images ,  in  International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Systems and Informatics, 2017.
- [17] D. G. Lowe, Object recognition from local scale-invariant features , in the proceedings  of  the  7th  IEEE  international  conference  on  Computer Vision, 1999.
- [18] F. C. Monteiro, Automatic Cattle Identification Using Graph Matching Based on Local Invariant Features ,  in  International  Conference  Image Analysis and Recognition, 2016.
- [19] W.  Li,  Z.  Ji,  L.  Wang,  C.  Sun  and  X.  Yang, Automatic  individual identification of Holstein dairy cows using tailhead images ,  Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, vol. 142, pp. 622--631, 2017.
- [20] C. Dorai, N. K. Ratha and R. M. Bolle, Detecting dynamic behavior in compressed  fingerprint  videos:  Distortion ,  in  IEEE  conference  on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2000.
- [21] H. Bay, T. Tuytelaars and L. Van Gool, Surf: Speeded up robust features , in ECCV, 404-417, 2006.
- [22] E. Rublee, V. Rabaud, K. Konolige and G. Bradski, ORB: An efficient alternative  to  SIFT  or  SURF ,  in  IEEE  international  conference  on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2011.
- [23] N.  Dalal  and  B.  Triggs, Histograms  of  oriented  gradients  for  human detection ,  in  IEEE  Computer  Society  Conference  on  Computer  Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2005.
- [24] R. R. Ting, Nurhartini bids farewell to her turtles , 5 Dec 2016. [Online]. [Accessed 10/1/18].
- [25] I. Hipiny and W. Mayol-Cuevas, Recognising Egocentric Activities from Gaze  Regions  with  Multiple-Voting  Bag  of  Words ,  Technical  Report CSTR12-003, University of Bristol, 2012.
- [26] I.  Hipiny, Egocentric  activity  recognition  using  gaze ,  PhD  thesis, University of Bristol, 2013.
- [27] H. Ujir, L. C. Sing and I. Hipiny, A modular approach and voting scheme on 3D face recognition , in International Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing and Communication Systems (ISPACS), 2014, 2014.
- [28] H.  Ujir,  M.  Spann  and  I.  Hipiny, 3D Facial Expression Classification using 3D Facial Surface Normals , The 8th International Conference on Robotic, Vision, Signal Processing &amp; Power Applications, pp. 245-253, 2014.