## Mean-variance hybrid portfolio optimization with quantile-based risk measure ∗

Weiping Wu

† ‡ § ¶

Jianjun Gao

## Abstract

This paper addresses the importance of incorporating various risk measures in portfolio management and proposes a dynamic hybrid portfolio optimization model that combines the spectral risk measure and the Value-at-Risk in the mean-variance formulation. By utilizing the quantile optimization technique and martingale representation, we offer a solution framework for these issues and also develop a closed-form portfolio policy when all market parameters are deterministic. Our hybrid model outperforms the classical continuous-time mean-variance portfolio policy by allocating a higher position of the risky asset in favorable market states and a less risky asset in unfavorable market states. This desirable property leads to promising numerical experiment results, including improved Sortino ratio and reduced downside risk compared to the benchmark models.

Keywords: Portfolio optimization; Dynamic mean-variance portfolio selection; Multiple risk measures; Spectral risk measure; Value-at-risk

JEL Classification: C61, G11

∗ This research is partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under the grants 71971132, 72201067, 71801088 and 72192832. This research is funded/supported by Shanghai Research Center for Data Science and Decision Technology.

† School of Economics and Management, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China. Email: wu.weiping@fzu.edu.cn

‡ School of Economics and Management, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou, Fujian, China. Email: 210710020@fzu.edu.cn

§ Corresponding author. School of Information Management and Engineering, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Shanghai, China. Email: gao.jianjun@shufe.edu.cn

¶ Business School, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan , China. Email: kzhou@hnu.edu.cn

Yu Lin Ke Zhou

## 1 Introduction

The mean-variance (MV) portfolio selection model, introduced by Markowitz (1952), is widely used in academic research and investment practice. However, the symmetric nature of the variance term penalizes both gains and losses, making it a drawback of the MV formulation. To deal with this issue, various risk measures have been introduced in the portfolio optimization model. The concept of coherent risk measure (Artzner et al., 1999) and its extension, the convex risk measure (F¨ ollmer and Schied, 2002) set up the basic principles for defining reasonable risk measures. Along with the development of modern risk measures, the mean-risk portfolio decision models have been extensively studied under the frameworks of static and dynamic portfolio optimizations (e.g., see Kolm et al., 2014; Gao et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2017; He and Zhou, 2015; Ortobelli et al., 2008; Adam et al., 2008; Steuer and Na, 2003; Roman and Mitra, 2009). Among these researches, one particular direction focuses on the portfolio optimization model with multiple risk measures (e.g., see Gao et al., 2016; Steuer and Na, 2003; Roman et al., 2007; Roman and Mitra, 2009). This paper follows similar spirits to study the dynamic mean-risk portfolio decision model with both MV formulation and the quantile-based risk measure.

We combine two types of quantile-based risk measures in the continuous-time MV formulation, namely, the Spectral Risk Measure (SRM) and the Value-at-Risk (VaR). SRM, proposed by Acerbi (2002), calculates risk as a weighted average of the quantiles of the return distribution (wealth). When the weighting function (also called the Spectrum) satisfies certain mild conditions, SRM becomes a coherent risk measure (e.g., see Adam et al., 2008; Acerbi, 2002). Despite being a special case of the distortion risk measure Adam et al. (2008), SRM's convexity and flexibility in choosing the spectrum function make it a useful choice for constructing the portfolio optimization model. Besides SRM, this work also considers the dynamic MV formulation together with the VaR as the additional risk measure. VaR is traditionally considered a standard downside risk measure since it measures the quantile of the loss distribution. However, VaR has some drawbacks in portfolio optimization, such as its inability to diversify risk and nonconvexity of the problem. To overcome these limitations, Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000, 2002) propose a Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR)-based portfolio decision model and develop an LP-based solution scheme. However, recent studies such as Lim et al. (2011) indicate that the CVaR-based portfolio optimization model is highly sensitive to estimation errors. On the other hand, VaR is shown to be more robust than convex risk measures like CVaR by Cont et al. (2010, 2013); Kou et al. (2013). Additionally, Kou et al. (2013) demonstrate that VaR is a more appropriate risk measure for imposing trading book capital requirements.

Based on the continuous-time MV formulation, we propose two novel portfolio optimization models with multiple risk measures, namely, the dynamic mean-variance-Spectral Risk Measure (SRM-MV) and mean-variance-Value-at-Risk (VaR-MV) models. Incorporating these risk measures in the MV formulation is highly meaningful as it allows for better shaping of the probability distribution of the terminal wealth. In particular, the introduction of these risk measures strengthens the management of downside risk in the loss domain. A recent study by van Staden et al. (2021a) indicates that the distribution of terminal wealth generated by the dynamic MV policy may have a long tail in the loss domain. This phenomenon is further illustrated in our example presented in Figure 5a. As a result, it becomes crucial to incorporate the downside risk in the MV formulation. On the other side, these downside risk measures reduce the relative importance of the variance in the objective function, which helps to mitigate the conservatism caused by the variance in the domain of gain. Another advantage of incorporating MV formulation with downside risk is that it can overcome some ill-posedness issues. Numerous research including Jin et al. (2005); He and Zhou (2015); Gao et al. (2017)) have pointed out that a large class of continuous-time mean-downside risk portfolio optimization (including CVaR,VaR, Weighted-VaR) is ill-posed in sense that the wealth becomes unbounded. However, when the variance is included in such a model, the variance term will naturally prevent the wealth to go to infinity.

This paper not only presents innovations in portfolio optimization modeling through the introduction of two dynamic portfolio optimization models with multiple risk measures but also makes several other significant contributions. Firstly, we propose a solution scheme that combines the martingale representation with the quantile-based optimization technique to solve these problems. This approach broadens the scope of these methods, which were originally developed for the behavioral portfolio model (e.g., see Jin and Zhou, 2008; He and Zhou, 2011b,a). Furthermore, we derive closed-form solutions for these models in a Black-Scholes-type market setting. The explicit expression of such a portfolio policy enables us to examine the key difference brought by the downside risk measure in comparison to the MV portfolio policy. For a more general market setting with stochastic returns rate or volatility, we propose a partial differential equation-based approach. Thirdly, we conduct numerical tests to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed portfolio models in controlling downside risk and improving the Sortino Ratio (Sortino and Satchell, 2001). As a byproduct, we also develop the solution scheme for the static SRM-MV and VaR-MV portfolio optimization problem, which is provided in A.4. These models serve as benchmarks in the numerical test.

## 1.1 Related Literature and paper structure

This research is related to the search for a mean-multiple-risks portfolio optimization model. In the context of static portfolio optimization, Roman et al. (2007) study a model that combined variance and CVaR as risk measures. By using the parametric representation of CVaR (see Rockafellar and Uryasev, 2000), this problem can be reformulated as a convex QP. Cesarone et al. (2021) investigate VaR-MV portfolio optimization and demonstrated that its out-of-sample performance is better than the equally weighted portfolio and MV-CVaR portfolio. Utz et al. (2014) study the inverse fund optimization problem with a multi-objective function. However, there are few reports in the literature on the dynamic version of this type of portfolio model. In the continuous-time market setting, Gao et al. (2016) examined portfolio optimization models that incorporated both MV formulation with CVaR or the safety-first principle. Using the martingale approach, this work provided a solution scheme for these problems. In addition to the mean-risk formulation, some research has studied the continuous-time utility maximization problem with additional risk constraints, such as the VaR, Safety-First-Principle, or the variance (see, e.g., Basak and Shapiro, 2001; Bensoussan et al., 2022; Chiu et al., 2018).

The static SRM-based portfolio optimization model has been studied by Acerbi (2002), who showed that such a problem could be formulated as a linear programming problem when uncertainty was represented by discrete scenarios. Adam et al. (2008) evaluate the performance of the SRM-based model, while Abad and Iyengar (2015) consider a portfolio model with multiple SRMs. Recently, Guo and Xu (2022) extended these models to the robust SRM formulation and developed a tractable solution scheme. In terms of SRM-based continuous-time portfolio optimization, our work is the first to study such a problem. Current research is also related to VaR-based portfolio optimization. Zhou et al. (2017) is the first to investigate mean-VaR portfolio optimization in a continuous-time setting. As the problem has an ill-posed issue, they introduced an artificial upper bound for the wealth. A similar approach was adopted to solve the mean-Safety-First portfolio optimization (Chiu et al., 2012) and the Weighted-VaR-based model (He and Zhou, 2015). Additionally, another strand of research attempts to extend the static SRM to continuous-time dynamic spectral risk measure (Madan et al., 2017).

Our research also advances the research on the continuous-time MV (CTMV) portfolio selection. Since the publication of seminar works by Zhou and Li (2000), the CTMV portfolio optimization model has been extensively explored, with notable studies including Bielecki et al. (2005); Chiu and Wong (2012); van Staden et al. (2021b,a). Given that variance may lead to time-inconsistent issues, a significant portion of research has focused on developing time-consistent policies for CTMV portfolio optimization (e.g., see Wang and Forsyth, 2011; Basak and Chabakauri, 2010; Dang and Forsyth, 2016). Notably, the dynamic SRM (or VaR)-based portfolio optimization model also has time-consistency issue, and hence the policy derived in this work falls under the category of pre-committed policy. Developing time-consistent policies for SRM-MV and VaR-MV portfolio optimization is beyond the scope of our current paper.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the market model and the hybrid portfolio decision models. The solutions for these hybrid portfolio models are developed in Section 3. In Section 4, we study the properties of the hybrid portfolio policies and evaluate the performance of different models. We conclude the paper in Section 5. Throughout the paper, we use 1 A to denote the indicator function, which equals 1 if the condition A holds and 0 otherwise. The notation B ⊤ represents the transpose of matrix (or vector) B . The probability density function and the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of a standard normal variable are denoted as φ ( · ) and Φ( · ), respectively. The solution scheme for static SRM-based model is provided in in A.4.

## 2 Market model and problem formulations

## 2.1 Quantile-based risk measure

A broad class of quantile-based risk measures can be represented by the integration of some weighted quantile functions defined for the random loss (e.g., see Acerbi, 2002; Adam et al., 2008; Dowd et al., 2008). This formulation of risk measures encompasses popular measures such as Value-at-Risk (VaR) and Expected Shortfall (ES or CVaR) as special cases. For ease of illustration, we define the quantilebased risk measure as follows. Suppose the investment horizon is T , and the terminal wealth of the investment is denoted by x ( T ). Given a probability space with probability measure P ( · ), we use F ( y ) ≜ P ( x ( T ) ≤ y ) and G ( s ) ≜ inf { y ∈ R | F ( y ) &gt; s } to denote the cumulative distribution function and the upper quantile function of x ( T ), respectively. Following a similar definition in Acerbi (2002) 1 , the quantile-based risk measure is defined as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ψ ( · ) : [0 , 1] → R + is a user-defined weighting function satisfying ∫ 1 0 ψ ( s ) ds = 1. By choosing different weighting functions ψ ( · ), the quantile-based formulation in Eq. (2.1) can represent various commonly used risk measures. In this work, we focus on two types of risk measures: the Spectral Risk Measure and the Value-at-Risk .

Spectral Risk Measure: In formulation (2.1), if the weighting functions ψ ( · ) is non-negative, non-increasing and right-continuous, then risk measure M ψ [ x ( T )] becomes the Spectral Risk Measure (SRM). The SRM plays an important role in the modern risk measures theory, as it is a coherent, comonotonic additive and low-invariant risk measure (see Kusuoka, 2001; Acerbi, 2002; Brandtner, 2016). In SRM, the weighting function ψ ( · ) is commonly referred to as the spectrum. If we set the spectrum as a step function, i.e., ψ ( s ) = 1 γ 1 0 ≤ s ≤ γ in (2.1), the resulting risk measure becomes M ψ [ x ( T )] = -1 γ ∫ γ 0 G ( s ) ds , which is known as the γ -level Expected Shortfall (ES). Besides the ES, there are other ways to specify the spectrum. Based on the utility theory 2 , it is possible to define the exponential and power functions-based spectrum (Dowd et al., 2008) as ψ ( s ) ≜ k e · e -ke · s 1 -e -ke and ψ ( s ) ≜ k p · s k p -1 where k e ∈ (0 , ∞ ) and k p ∈ (0 , 1] are the parameters (see, e.g., Brandtner, 2013; Dowd et al., 2008). Figure 1 displays the typical shapes of the exponential, power, and step-functionbased spectra. One crucial characteristic of these spectral functions is that they assign more weight to smaller probabilities than larger ones.

Figure 1: The spectrum function ψ ( s ) in Spectral Risk Measure

<!-- image -->

Value-at-Risk: Given a confidence level γ ∈ (0 , 1), the γ -VaR of the terminal wealth x ( T ) is usually defined as (F¨ ollmer and Schied, 2004), VaR γ [ x ( T )] ≜ inf { y ∈ R | P ( -x ( T ) ≤ y ) ≥ 1 -γ } which measures the maximal value of the 'loss' (i.e., -x ( T )) with a given probability 1 -γ . 3 VaR is also a special case of the formulation (2.1), if we set the weighting function as the Dirac delta function 4 as ψ ( s ) = δ ( s -γ ), then it has

1 Note that, in this work, we consider the loss of investment as -x ( T ).

2 Bertsimas et al. (2004) reveal that we may use the utility function to design the suitable spectrum functions in SRM.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last equality is from the property of the Dirac delta function.

Although VaR and SRM share a similar quantile-based formulation (2.1), they are fundamentally distinct. The primary difference lies in the requirement of the spectrum function ψ ( · ) in SRM to be non-increasing and right-continuous. As VaR does not possess these properties, it fails to satisfy sub-additivity, and hence, it is not a coherent risk measure. Consequently, the resulting portfolio optimization problem is not a convex optimization problem. Due to this crucial difference, we need to treat SRM-based and VaR-based portfolio optimization problems separately using different methods in the subsequent sections.

## 2.2 Continuous-time market and dynamic portfolio optimization models

̸

We consider a financial market with one risk-free asset and n risky assets, which are traded continuously within a finite horizon [0 , T ]. All randomness of the market is modeled by a complete filtrated probability space (Ω , F , P , {F t } t ≥ 0 ). On this space, we introduce n -dimensional Brownian motion W ( t ) = ( W 1 ( t ) , · · · , W n ( t )) ⊤ and assume that W i ( t ) and W j ( t ) are mutually independent for all i = j . We use F t to denote the information set available at time t ∈ [0 , T ]. 5 Let S 0 ( · ) be the price process of the risk-free asset which satisfies the differential equation, dS 0 ( t ) = r ( t ) S 0 ( t ) dt with S 0 (0) = s 0 &gt; 0, where r ( · ) is the risk-free return rate. Let S i ( · ) be the price process of the i -th risky asset, which is governed by the following stochastic differential equation,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with S i (0) = s i &gt; 0 for t ∈ [0 , T ] where µ i ( · ) ∈ R and σ ij ( · ) ∈ R are the appreciation rate and volatility, respectively, for i = 1 , · · · , n . We assume that the volatility matrix σ ( t ) ≜ { σ ij ( t ) } n i,j =1 } satisfies the nondegeneracy condition, i.e., σ ( t ) σ ( t ) ⊤ is positive definite almost surely for t ∈ [0 , T ]. Furthermore, we assume that r ( t ), { µ i ( t ) } n i =1 and { σ ij ( t ) } n,n i,j =1 are scalar-valued F t -measurable and uniformly bounded stochastic processes for any t ∈ [0 , T ].

An investor enters the market with initial wealth x 0 &gt; 0 and allocates his/her wealth continuously on these assets. For t ∈ [0 , T ], let x ( t ) be the total wealth level at time t and u ( t ) ≜ ( u 1 ( t ) , · · · , u n ( t ) ) ⊤ be the portfolio allocation at time t where u i ( t ) represents the wealth allocated on i -th risky asset at

3 Note that the confidence level γ is usually set at small values as γ = 1%, 5%, 10%.

̸

-∞ δ ( s ) ds = 1. One important property is that, given f ( x ) : R : → R , it has -∞ f ( s ) δ ( t -s ) ds = f ( t ).

4 Function δ ( x ) is called the Dirac delta function, if it satisfies: δ ( x ) = 0 when x = 0; δ ( x ) = + ∞ when x = 0, and ∫ + ∞ ∫ ∞

5 Formally, the F t is called the filtration, which is the augmented σ -algebra generated by the paths of W ( t ).

time t . Under the self-financing portfolio policy, the wealth dynamics satisfy the following dynamics,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x (0) = x 0 and b ( t ) ≜ µ ( t ) -r ( t ) = ( µ 1 ( t ) -r ( t ) , · · · , µ n ( t ) -r ( t )) ⊤ denotes the excess return rate for t ∈ [0 , T ].

We use E[ x ( T )] and V [ x ( T )] ≜ E[( x ( T ) -E [ x ( T )]) 2 ] to denote the unconditional expected value and the variance of the terminal wealth x ( T ). To control both spectral risk and the variance of the terminal wealth, the investor considers the following SRM-MV hybrid portfolio optimization model,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x d &gt; 0 is the expected terminal wealth level, M ψ [ · ] is the spectral risk measure and ω srmv ≥ 0 is the weighting parameter controlling the importance of SRM. To ensure tractability, we assume the risk spectrum function ψ ( · ) satisfies the following condition.

Assumption 2.1. The spectrum function ψ ( · ) : [0 , 1] : → R satisfies: (i) ψ ( s ) ≥ 0 , (ii) ψ ( s ) is differentiable, (iii) dψ ( s ) /ds ≤ 0 for all s ∈ [0 , 1] , and (iv) ∫ 1 0 ψ ( s ) ds = 1 .

Besides the model ( P srmv ), we are also interested in integrating the VaR in the dynamic MV portfolio optimization model, i.e., we consider the following VaR-MV hybrid portfolio optimization model,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ω vrmv ≥ 0 is the weighting parameter that balances the importance of the variance and VaR. Problem ( P srmv ) and ( P vrmv ) are an extension of the conventional dynamic MV portfolio decision model (e.g., see Bielecki et al. (2005), Zhou and Li (2000)) where additional risk measures are included. The VaR-MV portfolio optimization problem ( P vrmv ) is also an extension of the model studied in Zhou et al. (2017) in which only the VaR is included as the risk measure. 6

6 It is worthwhile to mention that solely using the VaR as a risk measure in a continuous-time portfolio model may have an ill-posedness issue (see, e.g., Jin et al. (2005), He and Zhou (2015), Zhou et al. (2017)). To deal with this issue, Zhou et al. (2017) and Gao et al. (2017) propose to add the artificial upper bound on the terminal wealth. However, in formulation, ( P vrmv ), this artificial bound is no longer needed since the variance term tames the terminal wealth to take the finite value.

In the consequent sections, if it is necessary, we add a subscript to distinguish solutions for different models, i.e., { x ∗ srmv ( t ) , u ∗ srmv ( t ) }| T t =0 and { x ∗ vrmv ( t ) , u ∗ vrmv ( t ) }| T t =0 denote the optimal wealth and portfolio for model ( P srmv ) and ( P vrmv ), respectively.

## 3 Optimal solution of hybrid portfolio model

In this section, we develop the solutions for models ( P srmv ) and ( P vrmv ). Although these problems can be viewed as stochastic optimal control problems (Yong and Zhou, 1999; Pham, 2009), due to the complicated constraints and quantile-based objective function, it is hard to apply the classical optimal control approach directly. Instead, we take advantage of the completeness of the market model and adopt the martingale method (e.g., see Karatzas and Shreve, 1998; Jin and Zhou, 2008; Bielecki et al., 2005) to solve these problems. Specifically, we take two steps to solve these problems: (i) characterizing the optimal terminal wealth x ∗ ( T ) by identifying its optimal quantile function (e.g. see Jin and Zhou (2008); He and Zhou (2011a, 2015)); (ii) and developing the optimal portfolio policy to replicate such an optimal terminal wealth.

## 3.1 Optimal terminal wealth

Due to the complete market model, we may define the state price density process (SPD) z ( t ) as z ( t ) = -z ( t ) ( r ( t ) dt + θ ( t ) ⊤ dW ( t ) ) with z (0) = 1, where θ ( t ) ≜ σ ( t ) -1 b ( t ) is risk premium process for t ∈ [0 , T ] (see Karatzas and Shreve (1998)). 7 Equivalently, z ( t ) can be expressed as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the SPD, the discounted wealth process z ( t ) x ( t ) becomes a martingale (Karatzas and Shreve (1998); Duffie (2001)), i.e., it has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any 0 ≤ t ≤ τ ≤ T . Without loss of generality, we assume the following condition is true. 8

Assumption 3.1. The random variable z ( T ) admits no atom, i.e., P ( z ( T ) = a ) = 0 for any a ∈ (0 , ∞ ] .

To solve the terminal wealth of problem ( P srmv ), we define the distribution function of z ( T ) as K 0 ( y ) ≜ E[ 1 { z ( T ) ≤ y } ] = P ( z ( T ) ≤ y ) for some y ∈ R . Since z ( T ) ≥ 0, it has K 0 ( y ) = 0 when y &lt; 0. Under the Assumption 3.1, we may define the inverse function of K 0 ( · ) as K -1 0 ( s ) ≜ inf { z ∈ R | K 0 ( z ) &gt; s } for s ∈ [0 , 1]. Using the embedding method (e.g., see Li and Ng, 2000; Zhou and Li, 2000; Bielecki et al., 2005), we may rewrite the variance term in problem ( P srmv ) as V [ x ( T )] = E[( x ( T ) -x d ) 2 ]

7 The stochastic discount factor z ( t ) is also called the state-price deflator process in Duffie (2001).

8 Imposing this condition guarantees the monotonicity property of the quantile function. A similar condition is also imposed Jin et al. (2005).

where x d = E[ x ( T )] is a parameter. Such a formulation provides a quadratic objective function in the MV-based portfolio optimization. Then, using the martingale property, we may solve the following auxiliary problem for the optimal terminal wealth x ∗ ( T ) of the problem ( P srmv ), 9

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the constraint (3.4) is from (3.2).

As the objective function of problem ( A srmv ) involves SRM, it is more convenient to adopt the quantile formulation (e.g., see Jin and Zhou, 2008; He and Zhou, 2011a, 2015) to solve such a problem. We will utilize the notation introduced earlier, where F ( · ) and G ( · ) represent the distribution function and quantile function, respectively, of the random terminal wealth x ( T ). In the quantile approach, the main idea is to replace the decision variable x ( T ) by its quantile function G ( · ). Specifically, the expected value and the second-order moment of x ( T ) can be expressed as E[ x ( T )]= ∫ ∞ -∞ udF ( u )= ∫ 1 0 G ( s ) ds and E[ x ( T ) 2 ] = ∫ ∞ -∞ u 2 dF ( u ) = ∫ 1 0 G 2 ( s ) ds . The constraint (3.5) is equivalent to G ( s ) ≥ 0 for 0 ≤ s ≤ 1. As for constraint (3.4), we may employ Theorem B.1 in Jin and Zhou (2008) (under Assumption 3.1), which can be expressed as E[ x ( T ) z ( T )] = E[ G (1 -K 0 ( z ( T ))) z ( T )]. Note that, z ( T ) can be expressed as z ( T ) = K -1 0 (1 -s ) with s = 1 -K 0 ( z ( T )), we further obtain E[ x ( T ) z ( T )] = E[ G ( s ) K -1 0 (1 -s )]. Since K 0 ( · ) is the CDF of z ( T ), we know that s = 1 -K 0 ( z ( T )) follows the uniform distribution in [0 , 1], which further yields,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the quantile function-based formulation of problem ( A srmv ) is as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the set G denotes the feasible set of the quantile functions,

G ≜ { G ( · ) :[0 , 1] → [0 , ∞ ] | G ( · ) is nondecreasing and right-continuous function } .

9 Notation L 2 F T (Ω; R ) means the set of all R -valued F T -measurable random variables.

Problem ( G srmv ) is a convex functional optimization problem that can be solved analytically. The following result characterizes the optimal solution of problem ( G srmv ) and problem ( A srmv ).

Theorem 3.2. The optimal solution of problem ( G srmv ) is G ∗ srmv ( s ) = 1 2 ( ρ ∗ -η ∗ K -1 0 (1 -s ) + ω srmv ψ ( s ) ) 1 { s † ≤ s ≤ 1 } , and the optimal terminal wealth of problem ( A srmv ) is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where s † is the solution of the following equation,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and ρ ∗ and η ∗ &gt; 0 are the solution of the following system of two equations,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In Theorem 3.2, the optimal solution of problem ( G srmv ) is represented by the quantile function G ∗ srmv ( · ) which is further translated to the optimal wealth as given in Eq. (3.9) through the relationship x ∗ ( T ) = G ∗ (1 -K 0 ( z ( T ))) (see, e.g., Theorem B1 in Jin and Zhou (2008)).

The formulation (3.9) indicates that the optimal wealth generated from the classical dynamic MV portfolio selection model is just a special case (see Theorem 4.1 in Bielecki et al. (2005)) of (3.9). Indeed, if we set ω srmv = 0 in (3.11), (3.12) and (3.13), then it yields the optimal terminal wealth of dynamic MV model as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˆ ρ ∗ and ˆ η ∗ are the parameters for the case ω srmv = 0. Comparing x ∗ mv ( T ) and x ∗ srmv ( T ), we have the following decomposition,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Such a decomposition means that the optimal terminal wealth of the SRM-MV model is the weighted summation of the MV model's optimal wealth and the spectrum function nested by the distribution function of z ( T ).

We then turn to the VaR-MV hybrid portfolio model ( P vrmv ). Before we go forward, we want to point out that VaR γ [ x ( T )] has some lower bound, β ≤ VaR γ [ x ( T )] ≤ 0, where β ≜ -x 0 ( K 1 ( K -1 0 (1 -γ )) with K 1 ( y ) ≜ E[ z ( T ) 1 { z ( T ) ≤ y } ]. In the above formulation, the lower bound is given in Proposition 3.2 in Zhou et al. (2017) and the upper bound is from the fact x ( T ) ≥ 0 in problem ( P vrmv ). These bounds mean that, no matter what portfolio policy u ( · ) is chosen, the VaR value VaR γ [ x ( T )] generated in problem ( P vrmv ) is always in the interval [ β, 0].

Using the martingale property, we may characterize the optimal terminal wealth for problem ( P vrmv ) from the following auxiliary problem ( A vrmv ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to problem ( G srmv ), it is more convenient to reformulate the problem ( A vrmv ) in quantile formulation as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the term VaR γ [ x ( T )] is represented by (2.2). Solving problem ( G vrmv ) gives the optimal quantile function 10 which can be further translated to the corresponding optimal terminal wealth for the problem ( A vrmv ).

Theorem 3.3. The optimal solution of problem ( A vrmv ) is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C 1 and C 2 are defined as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and ρ ∗ and η ∗ &gt; 0 are the solution of the following two equations,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

10 The optimal quantile function of problem ( G vrmv ) is given in A.2

and β ∗ can be characterized by,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To examine the impacts of SRM and VaR in the hybrid portfolio models, Figure 2 compares the terminal wealth resulted from model ( P srmv ) and model ( P vrmv ) with the one generated from pure dynamic MV model (e.g., Eq.(3.14)). The model parameters is from Berkelaar et al. (2004) where a Black-Scholes type of market with one risky asset is considered. The parameters are µ ( t ) = 0 . 1068, σ ( t ) = 0 . 22, and r ( t ) = 0 . 00408 for t ∈ [0 , T = 1] (year). Figure 2a and 2b plot the wealth x ∗ srmv ( T ) for the cases of the exponential spectrum (denoted by x ∗ srmv ( T ) | exp with ω srmv = 0 . 5) and the power spectrum (denoted by x ∗ srmv ( T ) | pow with ω srmv = 1 . 5) defined in Section 2.1. and Clearly, Eq.(3.14) implies that the terminal wealth of the pure dynamic MV model is a piecewise linear function of z ( t ) (denoted by x ∗ mv ( T ) and indicated by the dotted line in all these figures. Figure 2a shows that the exponential spectrum twists the terminal wealth x ∗ mv ( T ), i.e., x ∗ srmv ( T ) | exp is significantly higher than x ∗ mv ( T ) in both good market condition (in the region z ( T ) &lt; 0 . 8) and bad market condition ( z ( T ) &gt; 1 . 4). However, x ∗ srmv ( T ) | exp is in a lower position than the MV model in the mediate market condition (i.e., the region z ( T ) ∈ (0 . 8 , 1 . 4)). Similar pattern can be also observed from portfolio model (see Figure 2c). Such a pattern of the wealth profile is desirable. First, a higher wealth level than x ∗ mv ( T ) means a higher average profit in the good market condition ( z ( T ) &lt; 0 . 8). Second, keeping the wealth above a positive level in relatively bad market condition (i.e. z ( T ) ∈ (1 , 2)) is known as the gambling strategy which may help to control the downside risk. Similar pattern is also reported in Basak and Shapiro (2001) in which the authors study the utility-based portfolio model combined with VaR constraint. As for the wealth profile of the power spectrum-based model (Figure 2b), it behaves similar to x ∗ mv ( T ), i.e., x ∗ srmv ( T ) | pow only enhances the wealth level in the good market condition. In this sense, the SRM-MV model with the exponential spectrum and VaR-MV model are the more ideal models which better shape the terminal wealth.

## 3.2 Optimal portfolio policy

This section focuses on determining the optimal portfolio policy for problems ( P srmv ) and ( P vrmv ). If we know the optimal terminal wealth x ∗ ( T ), which is a random variable, we can find the portfolio policy u ∗ ( t ) that generates the contingent claim x ( T ). To achieve this, we can treat the wealth process (2.4) as a backward stochastic differential equation (BSDE), where the unknown processes are x ∗ ( t ) and u ∗ ( t ), and the terminal condition is (3.9) or (3.17). Although the solution to such a linear BSDE (i.e., the hedging policy) can be represented by the abstract martingale representation (as shown in Theorem 1.1 in Karoui et al. (1997)) in a general market setting, our focus is on characterizing the structure of the solutions (or at least numerically) for specific markets. We consider three types of market models commonly used in academic research and practical applications: (i) the Black-Scholes market, where all market parameters have deterministic values, (ii) the market with mean-reverting returns, and (iii) the market with stochastic volatility.

Figure 2: Terminal wealth x ∗ ( T ) from models ( P srmv ) and ( P vrmv )

<!-- image -->

## 3.2.1 Black-Scholes Market

In this section, we consider the Black-Scholes type of market model, i.e., we impose the following assumption.

Assumption 3.4. All the market parameters, r ( t ) , { µ i ( t ) }| n i =1 and { σ ij ( t ) }| n,n i =1 ,j =1 are deterministic functions of t for all t ∈ [0 , T ] .

Under the Assumption 3.4, we may characterize the closed-form solution of problems ( P srmv ) and ( P vrmv ). Recall the definition of the deflator process z ( t ) in Eq. (3.1), which is equivalent to ln ( z ( T ) z ( t ) ) = -∫ T t ( r ( τ ) + 1 2 || θ ( τ ) || 2 ) dτ + ∫ T t θ ( τ ) ′ dW ( τ ). The above expression and the Assumption 3.4

imply that, the random variable ln ( z ( T ) /z ( t ) ) follows a normal distribution N ( m ( t ) , v 2 ( t ) ) where the associated mean and variance are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for t ∈ [0 , T ], respectively. For the convenience of presentation, we introduce the following functions of t ∈ [0 , T ], A ( t ) ≜ e m ( t )+ v ( t ) 2 2 and B ( t ) ≜ e 2 m ( t )+2 v ( t ) 2 .

Note that, at time t = 0, since z (0) = 1, the mean and variance of ln( z ( T )) are m (0) and v 2 (0), respectively. Since ln ( z ( T ) /z ( t ) ) follows log-normal distribution, we may get the closed-form expression of the expectation (3.2). As for the timet portfolio policy u ∗ ( t ), it can be computed by (see e.g., Karatzas and Shreve (1998)) the following equation,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for t ∈ [0 , T ].

We first focus on the model ( P srmv ). Substituting (3.9) to (3.2) yields, 11

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where κ 1 ( t ) ≜ ln( z † /z ( t )) -m ( t ) v ( t ) -v ( t ), κ 2 ( t ) ≜ κ 1 ( t ) -v ( t ) and K 0 ( y ) = Φ ( ln( y ) -m (0) v (0) ) .

In Theorem 3.2, we need solve systems of three equations (3.11), (3.13) and (3.12) to compute the unknown parameters s † , ρ ∗ and η ∗ . Under the Assumption 3.4, we may write out the closed-form expression of these equations. Indeed, the equation (3.10) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The equations (3.12) and (3.13) can be reformulated as 12

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

11 Detail on the computation (3.21) is provided in A.3.

12 The right hand side of equation (3.12) is just the equation (3.21) by setting t = 0.

Combining Eq. (3.20) with Eq. (3.21), we have the optimal portfolio policy u ∗ srmv ( t ) as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ψ ′ ( · ) and K ′ 0 ( · ) are the first-order derivatives of functions ψ ( · ) and K 0 ( · ) respectively. Following the decomposition of the terminal wealth (3.15), SRM-MV hybrid policy (3.25) also can be also decomposed as a weighted summation of the dynamic MV portfolio policy u 1 srmv ( t ) and the SRM spectrum related policy u 2 srmv ( t ).

We then turn to the VaR-MV hybrid model ( P vrmv ). To express the solution in a more compact formulation, we first introduce three functions of z ( t ) for any t ∈ [0 , T ] as ι 1 ( t ) ≜ ln ( ( C 2 ) + /z ( t ) ) -m ( t ) v ( t ) -2 v ( t ), ι 2 ( t ) ≜ Φ -1 (1 -γ ) · v (0)+ m (0) -ln z ( t ) -m ( t ) v ( t ) -2 v ( t ), and ι 3 ( t ) ≜ ln ( ( C 1 ) + /z ( t ) ) -m ( t ) v ( t ) -2 v ( t ), for t ∈ [0 , T ]. Then, we may compute the optimal wealth process x ∗ vrmv ( t ) and portfolio policy u ∗ vrmv ( t ) by (3.2), (3.17) and (3.20), i.e., it has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the Lagrangian multipliers ρ ∗ and η ∗ &gt; 0 are the solution of the following equations,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the parameter β ∗ can be characterized by,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The detail of deriving equations (3.26) and (3.27) are given in A.3.

Next, we present a numerical example to examine the characteristics of the SRM-MV and VaRMV hybrid portfolio policies. As a benchmark, we use the dynamic MV portfolio optimization model (with no bankruptcy restrictions, x ( T ) ≥ 0). Using Eqs. (3.14), (3.2), and (3.20), we can express the dynamic MV portfolio policy (referred to as u ∗ mv ( t )) as follows: 13

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where η mv and ρ mv are the solution of the equations (3.23) and (3.24) when ω srmv = 0.

We used the same parameters as shown in Figure 2, specifically, µ ( t ) = 0 . 1068, σ ( t ) = 0 . 22, and r ( t ) = 0 . 00408 for t ∈ [0 , T ] with T = 1. We also set k e = 10 and k p = 0 . 6. For the weighting parameters, we used ω srmv = 0 . 5 for the exponential spectrum-based model, ω srmv = 1 . 5 for the power spectrum-based model, and ω vrmv = 0 . 8. Figure 3a plots the portfolio policies u ∗ srmv ( t ) and u ∗ vrmv ( t ) as a function of the SPD z ( t ) at intermediate time t = T/ 2. To distinguish different portfolio policies, we use u ∗ srmv ( t ) | exp and u ∗ srmv ( t ) | pow to denote the SRM-MV hybrid portfolio policies resulting from the exponential spectrum and the power spectrum, respectively. In Figure 3a, the policies u ∗ srmv ( t ) | exp , u ∗ srmv ( t ) | pow and u ∗ mv ( t ) are indicated by the solid line, the dashed line and the dashed line, respectively. Since the SPD z ( t ) is a random variable, we also plot the probability density function of z ( t ) in the second Y-axis. Then, the shaded area indicates the probability distribution of the z ( t ). Consistent with the wealth profile of these models (e.g., see Figure 2a), the policy u ∗ srmv ( t ) | exp behaves differently from the benchmark policy u ∗ mv ( t ). In both good market condition ( z ( t ) &lt; 0 . 8) and bad market condition ( z ( T ) &gt; 1 . 7), u ∗ srmv ( t ) | exp has a much higher position than u ∗ mv ( t ). However, in the moderate market condition (e.g., z ( t ) ∈ (0 . 8 , 1 . 7)), u ∗ srmv ( t ) | exp is significantly lower than u ∗ mv ( t ). On the other hand, the power spectrum-based portfolio u ∗ srmv ( t ) | pow does not seem to have a similar pattern as the exponential spectrum-based counterpart. It appears more likely to the MV portfolio u ∗ mv ( t ), which only has a single peak in the region z ( t ) ∈ [0 . 4 , 0 . 8]. Figure 3b compares the VaR-MV portfolio u ∗ vrmv ( t ) with the MV portfolio u ∗ mv ( t ) when the confidence level is γ = 0 . 05 and γ = 0 . 1. We can observe that the basic pattern of u ∗ vrmv ( t ) is almost as same as u ∗ srmv ( t ) | exp .

13 In the literature, Bielecki et al. (2005) provides the solution of the dynamic MV portfolio optimization model with no-bankruptcy constraint. However, in their model, the policy is represented by a fictitious asset. Different from their solution, we express the MV policy as a function of z ( t ). The detail is provided in the Appendix.

Figure 3: Portfolios u ∗ srmv and u ∗ vrmv in response to SPD z ( t )

<!-- image -->

While the previous figures compared different portfolios as a function of the market state at a fixed time, we will now examine the time series of various portfolio policies. A straightforward approach is to observe how the portfolio reacts to changes in the stock price. 14 In this test, we only consider the exponential spectrum based model. Figure 4 illustrates the portfolio allocations u ∗ srmv ( t ) | exp , u ∗ vrmv ( t ), and u ∗ mv ( t ) against the stock price S ( t ) resulting from one simulation path of the stock price (the red line with values marked by the second Y-axis in Figure 4). It is apparent that the MV portfolio u ∗ mv ( t ) and the stock price S ( t ) are strongly negatively correlated, as the investment target minimizes the variance of the cumulative wealth. However, the hybrid portfolio policies u ∗ srmv ( t ) | exp and u ∗ vrmv ( t ) are noticeably different from the MV policy. Specifically, u ∗ srmv ( t ) | exp displays a certain degree of trend-following behavior. This pattern may help to increase gains during uptrends and mitigate losses during downtrends. Interestingly, the VaR-MV policy exhibits an asymmetrical pattern, where u ∗ vrmv ( t ) behaves like the MV policy (negative-feedback trading) when the stock price goes up, and behaves like the SRM-MV policy (trend-following) when the stock price goes down. Such a pattern helps to control both the variance and the downside risk.

## 3.2.2 Market with mean-reverting return and stochastic volatility

In this section, we examine the case when the market parameters are stochastic processes. We focus on one commonly used cases in academic study, namely, the market with mean-reverting return (Wachter, 2002; Kim and Omberg, 1996). We adopt a similar setting in Wachter (2002), i.e., this simple market has one risky asset and a risk-free asset. The risk-free rate is a constant r ( t ) = r ≥ 0 for t ∈ [0 , T ] and the price process of risky asset is dS ( t ) = S ( t ) ( µ ( t ) dt + σdW ( t ) ) with a given S (0) = s 0 where σ &gt; 0 is the constant volatility, µ ( t ) ≜ θ ( t ) σ + r is the return rate and θ ( t ) is the instantaneous Sharpe ratio which satisfies the following Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process, dθ ( t ) = λ ( ¯ θ -θ ( t ) ) dt + γdW ( t ) where θ (0) = θ 0 and ¯ θ , λ ≥ 0 and γ ∈ R are the constant parameters. As the return rate µ ( t ) is an affine function of θ ( t ), this setting implies that µ ( t ) satisfies OU process. 15

14 In Black-Scholes model, the asset price S ( t ) and SPD z ( t ) are a one-to-one mapping for a fixed sample path. In this example, as µ ( t ) = µ , r ( t ) = r and σ ( t ) = σ for t ∈ [0 , T ], from (2.3) and (3.1), it has ln( S ( t )) = ( µ -σ 2 2 -rσ θ -θσ 2 ) t -σ θ ln( z ( t )) when S 0 = 1.

Figure 4: Portfolio u ∗ ( t ) in response to z ( t )

<!-- image -->

Under the above setting, the deflator process z ( t ) and the optimal wealth x ∗ ( T ) still take the similar form as in (3 . 1) and (3.9) or (3.17), respectively. However, as the market state θ ( t ) follows the OU process, the random variable z ( T ) /z ( t ) does not follow Log-Normal distribution any more. 16 That is to say, we can not compute the expectation (3.2) analytically any more. As for the numerical method, we may adopt the Monte Carlo-based method to compute the expectation in (3.2). Specifically, at any time t ∈ [0 , T ), given the state variables (i.e., z ( t )), we generate the sample paths of the z ( τ ) for τ ∈ [ t, T ]. For any sample of z ( T ), we then compute the correspondent sample of x ∗ ( T ) by (3.9) and further compute the sample average as an approximation of (3.2). Besides the Monte Carlo method, we may characterize x ∗ ( t ) by solving the partial differential equation (PDE). This method is based on the Feynman-Kac formula (see, e.g., Pham (2009) and Yong and Zhou (1999)), i.e., computing the conditional expectation (3.2) is equivalent to solving the associated PDE. Since x ∗ ( t ) is related to two state variables z ( t ) and θ ( t ) at time t , we use X ( t, z, θ ) to denote the optimal wealth process x ∗ ( t ). 17 It can be verified that X ( t, z, θ ) satisfies the following PDE (see Wachter (2002); Gao et al. (2018)),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the terminal condition is X ( T, z, θ ) = x ∗ srmv ( T ) or x ∗ vrmv ( T ) (i.e., Eq. (3.9) or Eq.(3.17)).

15 The return rate µ ( t ) satisfies dµ ( t ) = λ µ (¯ µ -µ ( t )) dt + γ µ dW ( t ) where λ µ = λ , γ µ = σγ and ¯ µ = ¯ θσ + r .

16 Indeed, there does not exist the closed-form expression of the probability density function of z ( T ).

17 When there is no ambiguity, we ignore the argument t in z ( t ) and θ ( t ) to simplify the notations.

Moreover, the optimal portfolio policy can be computed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Although the PDE (3.31) is similar to the one given in Wachter (2002) or Gao et al. (2018), due to the terminal condition, it does admit a closed form solution. Thus, we need to use the numerical method to solve the PDE (3.31). Once we achieve the optimal wealth process X ( t, z, θ ), we can derive the optimal portfolio policy u ∗ srmv ( t ) or u ∗ vrmv ( t ) from the formula (3.32). We then another popular market setting, which is also known as the Heston's model (Kraft (2005)), models the stochastic volatility. In this model, the price of risky asset S ( t ) ∈ R follows the following process: dS ( t ) = S ( t ) ( µdt + √ ν ( t ) dW ( t ) ) and ν ( t ) = ι (¯ ν -ν ( t )) dt + ξ √ ν ( t ) d ˆ W ( t ), where ˆ W ( t ) is standard Brownian motion, ν ( t ) is the instantaneous variance, ¯ ν &gt; 0 is the long-run average variance of the price, ι &gt; 0 is the rate at which ν ( t ) reverts to ¯ ν and ξ &gt; 0 is the volatility of the volatility which determines the variance of ν ( t ). Similarly, we may use the PDE approach to characterize optimal wealth. We use X ( t, z, ν ) to denote the optimal wealth process x ∗ ( t ) at time t . Then X ( t, z, ν ) satisfies the following PDE,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the terminal condition X ( T, z, ν ) = x ∗ srmv ( T ) or x ∗ vrmv ( T ). Moreover, the optimal portfolio policy can be computed by,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Besides the above two special cases, Duffie et al. (2003) have shown that the pricing problem of the contingent claim can be solved semi-analytically by the inverse Fourier Transformation for the market modeled by the affine jump-defusions. That is to say, the optimal wealth x ∗ srmv ( t ) or x ∗ vrmv ( t ) can be also computed numerically by their method for a more general market setting.

## 4 Performance Analysis

In this section, we present numerical experiments that evaluate the performance of the proposed dynamic and static hybrid portfolio optimization models. To do this, we apply these models to a practical scenario of constructing a pension fund comprising of three risky assets: the S&amp;P 500 index (SPI), the Emerging Market Index (EMI), and the Small Capital Index (SCI). To calibrate the basic annual statistics of these assets, we utilize historical data provided by Cui et al. (2017). The expected value and covariance matrix of the annual returns are presented in Table 1, while the risk-free return rate is based on a long-term bond at 3%. Based on this data, we construct the continuous-time market model by assuming that the asset prices follow the Multidimensional Geometrical Brownian Motion (GBM) with constant parameters. Specifically, we set n = 3, µ ( t ) = µ , and σ ( t ) = σ for t ∈ [0 , T ]

in the asset price model (2.3). We use R i ( t ) = S i ( t ) /S i (0) to represent the total return of the i -th asset in the horizon [0 , t ]. As the price S i ( t ) is generated from the GBM, the log-return follows the Log-normal distribution, i.e., ln( R i ( t )) ∼ N ( E[ R i ( t )] , V [ R i ( t )] ) , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the Eq. (4.1) and the annual statistics of the returns in Table 1, we may retrieve the parameters µ and σ in the assets' price model (2.3) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Table 1: The statistics of the annual returns of the assets

| SPI  EMI  SCI  Expected Return Rate  0.121  0.130  0.151  Covariance Matrix  SPI  EMI  SCI  SPI  0.0342  0.0355  0.0351  EMI  0.0522  0.0028  0.0540  SCI  0.1645  0.0504  0.0576   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

To evaluate the effectiveness of different portfolio policies, we will generate 10 , 000 sample paths of the asset prices using the model (2.3). These price paths will then be used to implement various portfolio policies and record the resulting terminal wealth for each sample path. For the model ( P srmv ) and the model ( P vrmv ), we will use the results from Section 3.2.1 to compute the dynamic policies. Specifically, we will solve Eqs. (3.23) and (3.24) for the SRM-MV policy (3.25), and Eqs. (3.28) and (3.29) for the VaR-MV policy (3.27). For the static counterparts of these models ( P static srmv ) and ( P static vrmv ), we will use a discrete scenario approach outlined in the supplementary file to solve the associated mathematical programming problems for the policies. 18

Once we have the samples of terminal wealth for each of these policies, we plot the empirical probability density (PDF) of x ∗ ( T ). Figure 5 compares the PDF of various policies with parameters set to ω srmv = ω vrmv = 0 . 3, k e = 10, k p = 0 . 6, γ = 10%, and initial wealth and target wealth of x 0 = 1 and x d = 1 . 2, respectively. In all figures, we use the PDF of wealth generated by the dynamic MV policy as the benchmark (indicated by the red dashed line). In Figure 5a, the shaded area represents the PDF generated by the model ( P srmv | exp), which deviates significantly from the PDF of the dynamic MV model. This deviation is desirable for investment. In the domain of gain, the model ( P srmv | exp ) has a higher probability of achieving a better gain, while in the domain of loss, it lowers the probability of loss compared to the MV model (i.e., see the area x ( T ) &lt; 0 . 7). The static SRM-MV policy produces a Gaussian-type distribution with a significantly larger variance than the dynamic SRM-MV model. However, in Figure 5b, the power spectrum-based model ( P srmv | pow ) shows a different pattern than the exponential spectrum-based model. It only increases the probability in the domain of gain but does not lower the probability of loss. 19 Figure 5c indicates that the VaR-MV model reduces the probability of loss as well, but it performs similarly to the dynamic MV model in the domain of gain.

18 The static SRM-MV problem ( P static srmv ) is written as a convex quadratic programming problem and the static VaR-MV problem ( P static vrmv ) is reformulated as a mixed-integer QP problem. All these problems are solved by calling commercial solver GUROBI Gurobi Optimization (2023).

The basic pattern illustrated in Figure 5 can be more accurately quantified using several performance measures. We present the variance, semivariance, Sharpe Ratio, Sortino Ratio (Sortino and Satchell (2001)), 10%-VaR, 5%-VaR, and the Rachev ratio (Biglova et al., 2004) for terminal wealth being x d = 1 . 2 and x d = 1 . 3 in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. For each performance measure (column), we use a color scale to indicate the rank, with green representing the best performance, red representing the worst, and yellow representing the middle-level. Of these measures, we place particular emphasis on the Sortino Ratio and Rachev Ratio. The Sortino Ratio measures risk-adjusted return using downside standard deviation, and is recognized as an improved version of the Sharpe Ratio for portfolio performance. The Rachev Ratio measures the ratio between the mean of the best α % values and the worst α % values of the terminal wealth, with a higher value being preferred. Tables 2 and 3 show that the dynamic SRM-MV model ( P srmv ) | exp provides the best Sortino Ratio, the best 10%-Rachev Ratio, and the lowest semivariance. It also offers relatively good performance on other measures. Note that, even when using similar objective functions, the dynamic SRM-MV model ( P srmv ) | exp performs significantly better than its static counterpart model P static srmv | exp . Additionally, if we only consider downside risk measures, the dynamic model ( P vrmv) has the best performance with respect to 5%-VaR and 10%-VaR compared to the other models. Tables 2 and 3 also demonstrate that the SRM-MV model ( P srmv ) | pow performs poorly. This observation indicates that designing a suitable spectrum in the SRM-MV model is crucial to achieving good performance.

Table 2: The performance of the different portfolio policies with a target expected return r = 20% ( x d = 1 . 2)

| Row  Variance  Semi Vari  Sharpe  Sortino  VaR  5%  VaR  10%  Rach  5%  Rach  10%  P  mv  0.091  0.073  0.564  0.628  -0.601  -0.801  0.810  1.051  P  static  srmv  &#124;  exp  0.200  0.053  0.482  0.938  -0.577  -0.703  2.161  2.226  P  srmv  &#124;  exp  0.117  0.028  0.499  1.015  -0.826  -0.835  2.064  2.528  P  static  srmv  &#124;  pow  0.273  0.072  0.486  0.946  -0.503  -0.650  2.170  2.237  P  srmv  &#124;  pow  0.115  0.077  0.529  0.648  -0.536  -0.738  0.913  1.119  P  static  vrmv  0.122  0.031  0.496  0.980  -0.687  -0.782  2.258  2.323  P  vrmv  0.096  0.078  0.549  0.609  -0.950  -0.950  0.725  1.242   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

We found that the dynamic model ( P srmv ) | exp performed the best in our tests. However, it is crucial to note that the choice of the weighting parameter ω srmv significantly affects the results. Figure 6a shows the Sortino ratio plotted against different values of ω srmv generated by the ( P srmv | exp ) model. The plot indicates that the Sortino ratio has a unimodal relationship with ω srmv , suggesting an optimal value that maximizes the Sortino ratio. Furthermore, Figure 6b displays both the Sharpe Ratio and Sortino Ratio for various values of ω srmv . It is important to note that these two measures are not consistent with each other, and the Sortino ratio decreases when the Sharpe ratio surpasses a specific threshold. Hence, it is crucial to carefully consider the choice of ω srmv to obtain reliable results.

19 The pattern of the power-spectrum based model is robust to changes in the model parameters. In an experiment that was not reported, we tested different parameter values and found that the basic pattern remained consistent.

Figure 5: Empirical PDF of terminal wealth generated by different models

<!-- image -->

Table 3: The performance of the different portfolio policies with a target expected return r = 30% ( x d = 1 . 3)

| Row  Variance  Semi Vari  Sharpe  Sortino  VaR  5%  VaR  10%  Rach  5%  Rach  10%  P  mv  0.242  0.153  0.544  0.683  -0.217  -0.579  0.953  1.116  P  static  srmv  &#124;  exp  0.287  0.074  0.503  0.990  -0.506  -0.652  2.060  2.130  P  srmv  &#124;  exp  0.282  0.069  0.504  1.016  -0.658  -0.700  2.119  2.256  P  static  srmv  &#124;  pow  0.287  0.074  0.503  0.990  -0.504  -0.652  2.254  2.326  P  srmv  &#124;  pow  0.255  0.133  0.511  0.733  -0.301  -0.582  1.084  1.256  P  static  vrmv  0.269  0.069  0.501  0.988  -0.523  -0.665  2.266  2.332  P  vrmv  0.295  0.091  0.494  0.889  0.000  -0.920  1.275  2.110   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Figure 6: Impact of weighting parameter in model ( P srmv )

<!-- image -->

## 5 Conclusion

This paper investigates the continuous-time dynamic hybrid mean-variance (MV) portfolio optimization with spectral risk measure (SRM) and VaR. By utilizing the martingale approach with quantile formulation, we have successfully developed a solution to these problems. In contrast to the traditional dynamic MV model, the optimal portfolio policy generated by our hybrid model exhibits a distinct pattern. Specifically, it tends to hold more risky assets in both favorable and adverse market conditions, while holding less in the intermediate condition compared to the dynamic MV policy. This pattern leads to a desired distribution of terminal wealth. Our numerical test shows that the SRM-MV model with the exponential spectrum outperforms the benchmark model in terms of the Sortino ratio and downside risk measures. However, our current results are still insufficient in several aspects. First, these models need to be evaluated in real-world applications. To achieve this, the continuous-time policy must be translated into an implementable policy in a discrete-time setting. Second, since the variance and SRM or VaR are not separable in terms of dynamic programming, the current approach develops a pre-committed policy that is not time-consistent. Developing a time-consistent policy for these hybrid portfolio optimization models is a challenging future research task.

## A Proofs of Main Results

## A.1 Proof of Theorem 3.2

To solve problem ( G srmv ), we introduce the Lagrange multipliers ρ ∈ R and η ∈ R for the constraints (3.6) and (3.7), respectively, which yields the following Lagrangian relaxation problem,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If there is no additional constraint except G ( · ) ∈ G , checkin the first-order derivative of problem ( ˆ G srmv ( ρ, η )) yields the optimal solution, G † ( s ) = ρ -ηK -1 0 (1 -s )+ ω srmv ψ ( s ) 2 for all s ∈ [0 , 1]. To insure the constraint, G ( s ) ≥ 0, we may compare G † ( s ) with 0. Suppose s † is solution of the equation ρ -ηK -1 0 (1 -s † ) + ω srmv ψ ( s † ) = 0, which implies G † ( s † ) = 0. Under Assumption 3.1, the function G † ( s ) is a non-decreasing function with respect to s . Thus it has G † ( s ) &lt; 0 for any s ∈ [0 , s † ). Then we can conclude that the optimal solution of problem ( ˆ G srmv ( ρ, η )) is G ∗ ( s ) = 0 for any s ∈ [0 , s † ) and G ∗ ( s ) = G † ( s ) for any s ∈ [ s † , 1].

We then show that the Eq. (3.13) admits no solution when η ∗ ≤ 0. Since ρ ∗ = η ∗ z † -ω srmv ψ ( 1 -K 0 ( z † ) ) , Eq. (3.13) can be written as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the fact that K 0 ( · ) is a non-decreasing function and ψ ( · ) is a non-increasing function, the righthand side of the above equation is always non-positive since z ( T ) ≤ z † and η ∗ ≤ 0. Thus, Eq. (3.13) has no solution when η ∗ ≤ 0 which further implies η ∗ &gt; 0. Once we have the optimal quantile function G ∗ ( · ) for the problem ( G srmv ), we can identify the optimal wealth x ∗ srmv ( T ) by using Theorem B1 in Jin and Zhou (2008), i.e., it has x ∗ srmv ( T ) = G ∗ (1 -K 0 ( z ( T ))) which leads to the result (3.9).

## A.2 Proof of Theorem 3.3

We first solve the problem ( G vrmv ). We introduce the quantile function,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for η, ρ ∈ R and β ∈ [ β, 0], where L 1 and L 2 are defined as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then we show that G ∗ ( s ; η ∗ , ρ ∗ , β ∗ ) is the optimal solution of problem ( G vrmv ), if the following two equations,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

admit the solution ρ ∗ and η ∗ &gt; 0, and β ∗ is the minimizer of the following problem,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the objective function (3.16) is the summation of a functional term ∫ 1 0 G 2 ( s ) ds and a function value G ( γ ), we may solve this problem by a two-step scheme, i.e., we first solve the problem by setting G ( γ ) = -β for some fixed value β ∈ [ β, 0] and then we identify the optimal β which minimizes the objective function. 20 For given β , the problem ( G vrmv ) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Introducing the Lagrange multipliers η ∈ R and ρ ∈ R for the constraints (3.6) and (3.7), respectively, yields the following partially relaxed problem (after ignoring the constant ω vrmv β ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the convenience of illustration, we first assume η &gt; 0. 21 Clearly, the optimal solution of problem ˆ G ( β ) is a feasible solution of problem L ( η, ρ, β ). Thus, the weak duality property holds. On the other hand, if the optimal solution of the relaxed problem L ( η, ρ, β ) is also feasible to problem ˆ G ( β ), then such a solution is also the optimal solution of problem ˆ G ( β ). To employ such a duality relationship, we first solve problem L ( η, ρ, β ) by the decomposition approach. 22 Notice that G ( · ) is a right-continuous and nondecreasing function which implies that G ( s ) &lt; G ( γ ) for s ∈ [0 , γ ) and G ( γ ) ≤ G ( s ) for s ∈ [ γ, 1].

20 Note that, β has the feasible range as β ∈ ( β, 0).

21 The case of η ≤ 0 can never hold true, which can be verified by using the similar method of the problem ( P srmv ).

22 As problem L ( η, ρ, β ) is a functional optimization problem, the typical solution method is the classical calculus of variation. However, due to its special structure, we may characterize the solution directly by decomposition.

This property motivates us to decompose problem ( L ( η, ρ, β )) into the following two subproblems,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the integral kernel in the objective functions of these two subproblems can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The above completion of the square implies that, if there are no additional constraints except G ( · ) ∈ G , both of the two subproblems admit the optimal solution G ‡ ( s, ρ, η ) ≜ ρ -ηK -1 0 (1 -s ) 2 . When the constraints exist, we may identify the optimal solution by comparing G ‡ ( s, ρ, η ) with the boundaries of G ( s ), i.e., 0 and -β . Under the Assumption 3.1, the function G ‡ ( s, ρ, η ) is a non-decreasing function with respect to s , thus it has two threshold points,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which satisfy G ‡ ( h 1 , ρ, η ) = 0 and G ‡ ( h 2 , ρ, η ) = -β . As β &lt; 0, it always has 0 ≤ h 1 &lt; h 2 ≤ 1. Moreover, the solutions of the above subproblems also depend on the position of γ in the interval [0 , 1]. Without loss of generality, we first assume γ ∈ ( h 1 , h 2 ). The other cases, i.e., γ ∈ [0 , h 1 ] or γ ∈ [ h 2 , 1], will be examined at the end of the proof.

As for subproblem ( L 1 ( η, ρ, β )), under this assumption γ ∈ ( h 1 , h 2 ), it has G ‡ ( s, ρ, η ) &lt; 0 for s ∈ [0 , h 1 ) and G ‡ ( s, ρ, η ) ≥ 0 for s ∈ [ h 1 , γ ). Thus, the optimal solution of problem ( L 1 ( η, ρ, β )) is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We then check subproblem ( L 2 ( η, ρ, β )). Similarly, it has G ‡ ( s, ρ, η ) &lt; -β if s ∈ [ γ, h 2 ) and G ‡ ( s, ρ, η ) ≥ -β if s ∈ [ h 2 , 1 ] which implies that, the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is the optimal solution of problem ( L 2 ( η, ρ, β )). Combining the above two solutions (A.7) and (A.8)

gives the solution of problem L ( ρ, η, β ) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Due to the weak-duality, if there exist ρ ∗ and η ∗ such that the solution (A.9) is feasible to constraints (3.6) and (3.7), then the solution (A.9) is the optimal solution of problem ( ˆ G ( β )). Substituting (A.9) to constraints (3.6) and (3.7) gives the equations for ρ ∗ and η ∗ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Clearly, the above two equations are just special cases of equations (A.3) and (A.4) when γ ∈ ( h 1 , h 2 ). Recall that the above solution scheme solves the problem ( ˆ G ( β )) for fixed β ∈ [ β, 0]. To identify the optimal β , we may vary β and solve the problem ( ˆ G ( β )), i.e., the optimal β ∗ can be identified by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where G ∗ ( s, ρ ∗ , η ∗ ) is optimal solution of problem ( ˆ G ( β )).

In the previous analysis, we have assumed that γ ∈ ( h 1 , h 2 ). We then consider the other two cases: (i) γ ∈ [0 , h 1 ] and (ii) γ ∈ [ h 2 , 1]. For case (i), it has G ‡ ( s, ρ, η ) &lt; 0 for s ∈ [0 , γ ), which implies that the optimal solution of problem ( L 1 ( η, ρ, β )) is G ∗ ( s, ρ, η ) = 0 for s ∈ [0 , γ ). As for the problem ( L 2 ( η, ρ, β )), since G ‡ ( s, ρ, η ) &lt; -β if s ∈ [ γ, h 2 ] and G ‡ ( s, ρ, η ) ≥ -β if s ∈ ( h 2 , 1], the optimal solution is G ∗ ( s, ρ, η ) = -β for s ∈ [ γ, h 2 ) and G ∗ ( s, ρ, η ) = G ‡ ( s, ρ, η ) if s ∈ ( h 2 , 1]. As a summary, if γ ∈ [0 , h 1 ], the optimal solution of problem L ( η, ρ, β ) is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Clearly, the solution (A.11) is a degenerated case of (A.1). Indeed, since γ &lt; h 1 , the second piece of function in (A.1) does not exist. For the second degenerated case, γ &gt; h 2 , we may conduct a similar analysis. We omit the detail. The optimal solution of problem L ( η, ρ, β ) is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The above solution is a special case of (A.1), i.e., when γ &gt; h 2 , the last three cases in (A.1) merge into one piece. In both of the above two special cases, after we solve G ∗ ( s ; η, ρ, β ), we may identify η and ρ by solving equations (A.3) and (A.4), and identify β ∗ by similar method given in (A.10). Once we have the optimal quantile G ∗ ( s ; η ∗ , ρ ∗ , β ∗ ) for problem ( G vrmv ), similar to problem ( A srmv ), we can translate the optimal quantile function to the correspondent optimal terminal wealth x ∗ vrmv ( T )

by using Theorem B1 in Jin and Zhou (2008). This procedure leads to the result (3.17).

## A.3 Detail in deriving solutions under Black-Scholes Market

Under the Assumption 3.4, the SPD process z ( t ) has the following result.

Lemma A.1. Considering z ( t ) defined in (3.1), given a, b ∈ R , q 1 , q 2 ∈ R + with q 1 ≤ q 2 , it has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the parameters m ( t ) , v ( t ) , A ( t ) and B ( t ) are defined in Section 3.2.1, respectively; and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof of Lemma A.1 is similar to the one in Proposition 7.1 in Gao et al. (2016). Thus, we omit the detail.

We then derive the optimal wealth process for the problem ( P srmv ). Substituting (3.9) into (3.2) gives,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the above equation, we apply Lemma A.1 to the first term and write out the integration with respect to ln( z ( T ) /z ( t )) ∼ N ( m ( t ) , v 2 ( t )) in the second term, which gives Eq. (3.21). Similarly, using Lemma A.1, the three equations (3.11), (3.13) and (3.12) can be written as (3.22), (3.24) and (3.23), respectively.

For model ( P vrmv ), combining the terminal wealth (3.17) in (3.2) gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By applying lemma A.1 to each term of expression (A.15), we obtain the optimal wealth process x ∗ vrmv ( t ) given in (3.26). Once we obtain the analytical expression of x ∗ srmv ( t ) and x ∗ vrmv ( t ), the correspondent optimal portfolio policies can be computed by Eq. (3.20).

## A.4 The solution for the static hybrid portfolio optimization model

This section reports the solution schemes for the static counterpart problems of the hybrid portfolio optimization models ( P srmv ) and ( P vrmv ). In the static model, as the policy is kept unchange in horizon [0 , T ], we only need to introduce the decision variables at time t = 0, i.e., we use u = ( u 1 , . . . , u n ) ⊤ ∈ R n and u f ∈ R to denote the wealth allocation on n risky assets and risk-free asset, respectively. We then use

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to denote the random return vector of the risky assets and use R f ≜ S 0 ( T ) S 0 (0) to denote the risk-free for the time period 0 to T , respectively. Then the terminal wealth x st ( T ) resulted from this static portfolio policy is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Clearly, the wealth x st ( T ) is a random variable depending on the portfolio decision u and u f . To construct the static SRM-MV and VaR-MV portfolio optimization models, it is more convenient to use the discrete scenario-based approach (see Acerbi and Simonetti (2002); Benati and Rizzi (2007)). We assume there are totally N discrete scenarios of the random return R and use R ( i ) ∈ R n to denote the i -th scenario (realization) of the random return vector for i = 1 , 2 , . . . , N . These discrete scenarios of the returns can be achieved either by random sampling from the empirical distribution or by using the historical data of returns directly. Given portfolio policy u and u f , the correspondent discrete scenarios of the terminal wealth is x st ( i ) ( T ) = ( R ( i ) ) ⊤ u + R f u f for i = 1 , . . . , N . Let E[ R ] and Q = E[( R -E[ R ])( R -E[ R ]) ⊤ ] be the expected value and covariance matrix of the random return R , respectively. The expected value and variance of the terminal wealth are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively.

We then focus on reformulating the SRM in a linear functional form. Similar to Acerbi and Simonetti (2002); Benati and Rizzi (2007), we discretize the interval [0 , 1] by taking N + 1 points evenly as s i = i -1 N for i = 1 , . . . , N +1. For given spectrum function φ ( s ), we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for i = 1 , . . . , N as the discretization of φ ( · ), which also satisfies ∑ N i =1 φ i = 1. Following the similar method by Acerbi and Simonetti (2002), for given u and u f , the discretized SRM can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x st ( i : N ) ( T ) denotes the i -th smallest element of x st ( i ) ( T ) for i = 1 , . . . , N . In formulation (A.17), we need to sort the realizations of x st ( i ) ( T ) for i = 1 , . . . , N in an ascending order. However, as the terminal wealth is a random variable affected by the decision variable u and u f , the order of { x st ( i ) ( T ) }| N i =1 is also affected by the portfolio decision, which prevents us from using the formulation (A.17) directly. Fortunately, this difficulty can be conquered by formulating the sorting procedure as an optimization problem with auxiliary variables (see the detail in Proposition 3 . 1 in Acerbi and Simonetti (2002)). Specifically, we introduce the auxiliary variables ν = ( ν 1 , ν 2 , . . . , ν N ) and define the following function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ ψ i ≜ ψ i +1 -ψ i for i = 1 , . . . , N -1 and ∆ ψ N ≜ -ψ N . Then the SRM (A.17) can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that, in (A.19), we do not need to sort the realizations of x st ( i ) ( T ). Using this formulation, the static MV-SRM portfolio optimization problem can be written as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x d &gt; x 0 e r f T is the target wealth level, ω st srmv ≥ 0 is the weighting parameter balancing the importance between the variance and SRM. The last constraint is due to the no bankruptcy constraint in (10)(see the main text). In problem ( P static srmv ), the objective function (i.e., Y ( ν, u, u f )) involves the piece-wise linear term ( ν j -x st ( i ) ( T ) ) + , which can be represented by auxiliary variables y i,j for i, j = 1 , . . . , N and linear constraints. Using this reformulation, problem ( P static srmv ) can be written as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The above formulation is a convex quadratic programming (QP) problem which can be solved by a convex QP solver such as Gurobi Optimization (2023).

For the static counterpart problem of the dynamic MV-VaR portfolio optimization ( P vrmv ), we utilize a similar method proposed by Benati and Rizzi (2007); Cesarone et al. (2021). It is important to note that, to compute the VaR of the portfolio, we still need to address the ordered statistics of the terminal wealth. However, the VaR's risk spectrum is a Dirac delta function, which does not satisfy the non-increasing property. Therefore, it does not admit a representation formula similar to SRM (i.e., Eq. (A.19)).To tackle this, we adopt a discrete-scenario-based setting similar to the approach taken in problem ( P static srmv ). This enables us to reformulate the static counterpart of the MV-VaR portfolio optimization problem as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Formulation ( P static vrmv ) is a mixed-integer quadratic programming problem.

## References

- Abad, C., Iyengar, G., 2015. Portfolio selection with multiple spectral risk constraints. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics 6, 467-486.
- Acerbi, C., 2002. Spectral measures of risk: A coherent representation of subjective risk aversion. Journal of Banking &amp; Finance 26, 1505-1518. URL: http://www.gloriamundi.org/var/wps.html .
- Acerbi, C., Simonetti, P., 2002. Portfolio optimization with spectral measure of risk. Working paper .
- Adam, A., Houkari, M., Laurent, J.P., 2008. Spectral risk measures and portfolio selection. Journal of Banking &amp; Finance 32, 1870-1882.
- Artzner, P., Delbaen, F., Eber, J.M., Heath, D., 1999. Coherent measure of risk. Mathematical Finance 9, 203-228.
- Basak, S., Chabakauri, G., 2010. Dynamic mean-variance asset allocation. The Review of Financial Studies 23, 2970-3016.
- Basak, S., Shapiro, A., 2001. Value-at-risk-based risk management: Optimal policies and asset prices. Review Financial Studies 14, 371-405.

- Benati, S., Rizzi, R., 2007. A mixed integer linear programming formulation of the optimal mean/value-at-risk portfolio problem. European Journal of Operational Research 176, 423-434.
- Bensoussan, A., Hoe, S.R., Kim, J., Yan, Z.F., 2022. A risk extended version of merton's optimal consumption and portfolio selection. European Journal of Operational Research 70, 815-829.
- Berkelaar, A., Roy, K., Thierry, P., 2004. Optimal portfolio choice under loss aversion. The Review of Economics and Statistics 86, 973-987.
- Bertsimas, D., Lasuprete, G.J., Samarov, A., 2004. Shortfall as a risk measure: properties, optimization and applications. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 28, 1353-1381.
- Bielecki, T., Jin, H.Q., Pliska, S.R., Zhou, X.Y., 2005. Continuous-time mean-variance portolio selection with bankrupcy prohibition. Mathematical Finance 15, 213-244.
- Biglova, A., Ortobelli, S., Rachev, S.T., Stoyanov, S., 2004. Different approaches to risk estimation in portfolio theory. Journal of Portfolio Management 31, 103-112.
- Brandtner, M., 2013. Conditional value-at-risk, spectral risk measures and (non-) diversification in portfolio selection problems-a comparison with mean-variance analysis. Journal of Banking &amp; Finance 37, 5526-5537.
- Brandtner, M., 2016. 'spectral risk measures: Properties and limitation': Comment on dowd, cotter, and sorwar. Journal of Financial Services Research 49, 121-131.
- Cesarone, F., Martino, M.L., Tardella, F., 2021. Mean-variance-var portfolios: Miqp formulation and performance analysis.
- Chiu, M.C., Wong, H.Y., 2012. Mean-variance asset-liability management: Cointegrated assets and insurance liability. European Journal of Operational Research 223, 785-793.
- Chiu, M.C., Wong, H.Y., Li, D., 2012. Roy's safety-first portfolio principle in financial risk management of disastrous events. Risk Analysis 32, 1856-1872.
- Chiu, M.C., Wong, H.Y., Zhao, J., 2018. Dynamic safety first expected utility model. European Journal of Operational Research 271, 141-154.
- Cont, R., Deguest, R., He, X.D., 2013. Loss-based risk measures. Statistics &amp; Risk Modeling 30, 133-167.
- Cont, R., Deguest, R., Scandolo, G., 2010. Robustness and sensitivity analysis of risk measurement procedures. Quantitative Finance 10, 593-606.
- Cui, X.Y., Li, D., Li, X., 2017. Mean-variance policy for discrete-time cone constrained markets: The consistency in efficiency and minimum-variance signed supermartingale measure. Mathematical Finance 27, 471-504.

- Dang, D.M., Forsyth, P.A., 2016. Better than pre-commitment mean-variance portfolio allocation strategies: a semi-self-financing hamilton-jacobi-bellman equation approach. European Journal of Operational Research 250, 827-841.
- Dowd, K., Cotter, J., Sorwar, G., 2008. Spectral risk measures: Properties and limitations. Journal of Financial Services Research 34, 61-75.
- Duffie, D., 2001. Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory. 3rd ed., Princeton University Press.
- Duffie, D., Pan, J., Sngleton, K., 2003. Transform analysis and asset pricing for affine jump-diffusions. Econometrica 68, 1343-1376.
- F¨ ollmer, H., Schied, A., 2002. Convex measures od risk and trading contraints. Finance and Stochastics 6, 429-447.
- F¨ ollmer, H., Schied, A., 2004. Stochastic finance: An introduction in discrete time. De Gruyter Studies in Mathematics, Walter De Gruyter, Berlin.
- Gao, J.J., Li, D., Yao, J., 2018. When prospect theory preference meets mean-reverting asset returns: A dynamic asset allocation model URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract\_ id=3040517 .
- Gao, J.J., Xiong, Y., Li, D., 2016. Dynamic mean-risk portfolio selection with multiple risk measures in continuous-time. European Journal of Operational Research 249, 647-656.
- Gao, J.J., Zhou, K., Li, D., Cao, X.R., 2017. Dynamic mean-lpm and mean-cvar portfolio optimization in continuous-time. SIAM Journal On Control and Optimization 55, 1377-1397.
- Guo, S.Y., Xu, H.F., 2022. Robust spectral risk optimization when the subjective riskaversion is ambiguous: a moment-type approach. Mathematical Programming 194, 305-340.
- Gurobi Optimization, L., 2023. Gurobi optimizer reference manual.
- He, X.D., Zhou, X.Y., 2011a. Portfolio choice under cumulative prospect theory: An analytical treatment. Management Science 57, 315-331.
- He, X.D., Zhou, X.Y., 2011b. Portfolio choice via quantile. Mathematical Finance 21, 203-231.
- He, X.D., Zhou, X.Y., 2015. Dynamic portfolio choice when risk is measured by weighted var. Mathematics of Operations Research 40, 773-796.
- Jin, H.Q., Yan, J.A., Zhou, X.Y., 2005. Continuous-time mean-risk portfolio selection. Annales Henri Poincare 41, 559-580.
- Jin, H.Q., Zhou, X.Y., 2008. Behavioral portfolio selection in continuous time. Mathematical Finance 18, 385-426.
- Karatzas, I., Shreve, S.E., 1998. Methods of Mathematical Finance. Springer-Verlag, New York.

- Karoui, N.E., Peng, S., Quenez, M.C., 1997. Backward stochastic differential equations in finance. Mathematical Finance 7.
- Kim, T.S., Omberg, E., 1996. Dynamic nonmyopic portfolio behavior. Review of Financial Studies 9, 141-161.
- Kolm, P.N., T¨ ut¨ unc¨ u, R., Fabozzi, F.J., 2014. 60 years of portfolio optimization: Practical challenges and current trends. European Journal of Operational Research 234, 356-371.
- Kou, S.G., Peng, X.H., Heyde, C.C., 2013. External risk measures and basel accords. Mathematics of Operations Research 38, 393-417.
- Kraft, H., 2005. Optimal portfolio and heston's stochastic volatility model: an explicit solution for power utility. Quantitative Finance 5, 303-313.
- Kusuoka, S., 2001. On law invariant coherent risk measures. Advances in Mathematical Economics 3, 83-95.
- Li, D., Ng, W.L., 2000. Optimial dynamic portfolio selection: multiperiod mean-variance formulation. Mathematical Finance 10, 387-406.
- Lim, A.E.B., Shanthikumar, J.G., Vahn, G.Y., 2011. Conditional valueat-risk in portfolio optimization: Coherent but fragile. Operations Research Letters 39, 163-171.
- Madan, D., Pistorius, M., Stadje, M., 2017. On dynamic spectral risk measures, a limit theorem and optimal portfolio allocation. Finance and Stochastics 21, 1073-1102.
- Markowitz, H.M., 1952. Portfolio selection. Journal of Finance 7, 1063-1070.
- Ortobelli, S., Rachev, S., Stoyanov, S., Fabozzi, F., Biglova, A., 2008. The proper use of risk measures in portfolio theory. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 8, 1107-1133.
- Pham, H., 2009. Continuous-time Stochastic Control and Optimization withFinancial Applications. Springer, Berlin.
- Rockafellar, R.T., Uryasev, S., 2000. Optimization of conditional value-at-risk. Journal of Risk 2, 21-41.
- Rockafellar, R.T., Uryasev, S., 2002. Conditional value-at-risk for general loss distributions. Journal of Banking and Finance 26, 1443-1471.
- Roman, D., Darby-Dowman, K., Mitra, G., 2007. Mean-risk models using two risk measures: a multi-objective approach. Quantitative Finance 7, 443-458.
- Roman, D., Mitra, G., 2009. Portfolio selection models: a review and new directions. Wilmott Journal 1, 69-85.

- Sortino, F.A., Satchell, S. (Eds.), 2001. Managing Downside Risk in Financial Markets. Butterworth Heinemann.
- van Staden, P.M., Dang, D.M., Forsyth, P.A., 2021a. On the distribution of terminal wealth under dynamic mean-variance optimal investment strategies. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics 12.
- van Staden, P.M., Dang, D.M., Forsyth, P.A., 2021b. The surprising robustness of dynamic meanvariance portfolio optimization to model misspecification errors. European Journal of Operational Research 289, 774-792.
- Steuer, R.E., Na, P., 2003. Multiple criteria decison making combined with finance: A categorized bibliographic study. European Journal of Operational Research 150, 496-515.
- Utz, S., Wimmer, M., Hirschberger, M., Steuer, R.E., 2014. Tri-criterion inverse portfolio optimization with application to socially responsible mutual funds. European Journal of Operational Research 234.
- Wachter, J.A., 2002. Portfolio and consumption decisions under mean-reverting returns: an exact solution for complete market. Journal of Financial and Quantitative analysis 37, 63-91.
- Wang, J., Forsyth, P.A., 2011. Continuous-time mean variance asset allocation: A time-consistent strategy. European Journal of Operational Research 209, 184-201.
- Yong, J.M., Zhou, X.Y., 1999. Stochastic controls: Hamiltonian systems and HJB equations. Springer, New York.
- Zhou, K., Gao, J.J., Li, D., Cui, X.Y., 2017. Dynamic mean-var portfolio selection in continuous time. Quantitative Finance 17, 1631-1643.
- Zhou, X.Y., Li, D., 2000. Continuous-time mean-variance portfolio selection: A stochastic LQ framework. Applied Mathematics and Optimization 42, 19-33.