## Invariance properties of maximal extractable value

## Alan Guo

∗

April 24, 2023

## Abstract

We develop a formalism for reasoning about trading on decentralized exchanges on blockchains and a formulation of a particular form of maximal extractable value (MEV) that represents the total arbitrage opportunity extractable from on-chain liquidity. We use this formalism to prove that for blockchains with deterministic block times whose liquidity pools satisfy some natural properties that are satisfied by pools in practice, this form of MEV is invariant under changes to the ordering mechanism of the blockchain and distribution of block times. We do this by characterizing the MEV as the profit of a particularly simple arbitrage strategy when left uncontested. These results can inform design of blockchain protocols by ruling out designs aiming to increase trading opportunity by changing the ordering mechanism or shortening block times.

## 1 Introduction

## 1.1 Background

Blockchain systems originated with Bitcoin as simply distributed ledgers, but have since evolved into distributed universal computers starting with Ethereum. Such Turing-complete blockchains enable decentralized finance (DeFi) via programs, dubbed 'smart contracts', which facilitate financial transactions between parties without intermediaries.

One of the most common types of protocols in decentralized finance are decentralized exchanges. The dominant model for a decentralized exchange is an automated market maker (AMM). AMMs are typically smart contracts that have passive liquidity providers add assets to the contract. Active traders may trade with the AMM by making 'swaps' against the contract, trading one asset for another, and pay a fee on each swap to the liquidity providers to compensate them. What distinguishes an AMM from any other is the logic it uses to govern what swaps are valid from any given state of the AMM. A constant function market maker (CFMM) is a prototypical example of an AMM. A CFMM is specified by an invariant function of its asset reserves, such that a swap is only valid if it maintains the invariant. One of the simplest and still most popular forms of CFMM is constant product market makers, where the invariant is the product of the asset reserves. AMMs generally rely on arbitrageurs to bring prices in line with external prices. Therefore, the available liquidity in an AMM has option value to arbitrageurs.

∗ Jump Crypto. aguo@jumptrading.com

MEV is a phenomenon inherent to blockchains that support decentralized finance. The acronym was coined by [DGK + 19] and originally stood for 'miner extractable value', and is traditionally defined as the value that can be extracted by a miner by reordering, adding, or censoring transactions from blocks. It was so named because at the time Ethereum, the blockchain with the first and most mature DeFi ecosystem, used a proof-ofwork (PoW) consensus protocol in which miners had absolute control over the transactions that were ultimately included in blocks. Prominent examples of malignant MEV include front running and sandwich attacks, which extract profits at the expense of other users. However, there are also benign forms of MEV such as cross-exchange arbitrage.

More recently, DeFi-capable blockchains typically do not use PoW for consensus - even Ethereum has since switched to a proof-of-stake (PoS) consensus protocol. As such, miners no longer play a role in the network, and MEV is now referred to as 'maximal extractable value', which is a less well-defined concept. What is clear is that users assign value to on-chain execution and are willing to pay fees to network operators such as validators to include their transactions in blocks. So there is clearly value that users wish to extract from the network, a portion of which accrues to validators as fees.

An active area of research in the blockchain and DeFi community is designing protocols to minimize malignant MEV and to maximize benign MEV, the former to encourage adoption and the latter to increase the value of the network and incentivize network operators. One challenge in this research is determining whether a proposed design actually increases the overall extractable value or merely redistributes it. It is difficult to assess the impact of a design if the objective to optimize is not clearly, precisely defined.

## 1.2 Our results

The goal of this work is to formalize an intuitive notion of benign, arbitragecentric MEV, and to prove some invariance properties of this notion of MEV, showing that certain changes to a blockchain design do not increase the overall extractable value. We emphatically do not consider the malignant redistributive MEV in this work.

Our work introduces a formalism for reasoning about trading strategies that have access to a liquid external market, such as a centralized exchange, as well as decentralized exchanges on blockchains with discrete block times. At the core is the formalization of liquidity pools as abstract state machines satisfying natural axioms, which abstracts properties of not only CFMMs, but other AMMs such as Uniswap v3 as well, and even compositions of AMMs. Within this formalism, we define MEV as the maximum net amount of profit that can be extracted from the network before gas fees. This quantity represents an upper bound on the amount traders would be willing to pay in fees to network operators. We define competitive and noncompetitive versions of MEV. The former represents the extractable value if at each block traders leave no arbitrage opportunity behind, while the latter represents the same quantity without this constraint. We also define a particular simple arbitrage strategy that is a greedy locally optimal strategy. We show that when the asset price is a martingale, then the competitive MEV is equal to the expected profit of this simple strategy when given exclusive access to the liquidity, while the noncompetitive MEV is equal to the expected profit of a related family of strategies. Since the expected profit of a strategy left uncontested is independent of the blockchain's ordering mechanism and distribution of block times, this shows the independence of the corresponding notions of MEV to these same factors.

In Section 2, we lay out our formalism for on-chain trading, including liquidity pools, blockchain markets, trading strategies, PNL, and MEV. Our notion of liquidity pool is significantly more abstract and general than a single AMM so that our results may apply more broadly. In Section 3, we state our main invariance results. In Section 4, we develop some theory around our formalism and leverage it to prove the main results. In Section 5, we show how some of our simplifying assumptions can be relaxed and how our results extend to more general settings. In Section 6, we show how many decentralized exchanges in the wild satisfy the axioms of our formalism.

## 1.3 Prior work

MEVwas introduced by the seminal paper [DGK + 19]. The work of [KDC22] develops a theoretical framework for analyzing the redistributive notion of MEV, which is orthogonal to the notion of MEV studied in this work. The constant product market maker model was formalized as a state transition system in [ZCP18]. Constant product market makers and CFMMs were analyzed in [AKC + 19] and [AC20] respectively. The idea that holding a passive liquidity position is equivalent to a short option position is not new. [Cla20] shows that the payoff of a constant product market can be replicated by a static portfolio of European call and put options. [MMRZ22] quantifies the 'loss-versus-rebalancing' (LVR) of passive liquidity in a CFMM, which represents the optionality captured by arbitrageurs.

## 2 Formalism

In this section we develop the formalism for analyzing on-chain trading and MEV. We give definitions and state our assumptions. Some of the assumptions are purely for the sake of simplifying the exposition and do not result in the loss of any generality. We explore how these assumptions can be relaxed in Section 5.

Assumption 1 (Single risky asset) . There are just two assets: a risky asset x and a num´ eraire y . In Section 5.2 we show how to generalize our results to multiple risky assets.

Assumption 2 (Frictionless external market) . There is a external market where x and y may be exchanged frictionlessly (instantly without fees) at a market price P t which is assumed to be a semimartingale.

## 2.1 Liquidity pools

In an effort to capture as large a class of on-chain markets as we can, we model them as abstractly as possible, only requiring as many assumptions as are necessary (all of which are natural and satisfied by real world examples) to prove our main results. Note that throughout this work, we are assuming that liquidity is static - no liquidity is added or removed from a pool.

Definition 1 (Liquidity pool) . A liquidity pool is an abstract deterministic state machine, represented by the tuple

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

- Σ is the state space , the set of possible states the pool can be in. An element of Σ is called a (pool) state
- A is the atomic action space , the set of possible atomic actions one can take interacting with the pool.
- Given A , we define A ∗ to be the smallest set such that A ⊆ A ∗ and a 1 , a 2 ∈ A = ⇒ a 1 a 2 ∈ A ∗ . In other words, A ∗ is the set of concatenations of elements of A . We call elements of A ∗ actions or trades (we will use them interchangeably).
- For each pool state s ∈ Σ, the set A s ⊆ A ∗ is the set of admissible actions with respect to s .
- τ : S × A ∗ → S is the transition function, describing how the state of the pool changes under each action.
- π : A ∗ → R 2 is the payoff function. If action a is taken, then π ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ) represents the change in the trader's holdings in the assets x and y .
- s 0 is the initial pool state at time t = 0.

Assumption 3 (Liquidity pool axioms) . We assume a liquidity pool satisfies the following axioms: 1

- (Null action): There exists a null action ⊥ ∈ A , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (Composition of actions): For any two actions a 1 , a 2 ∈ A ∗ , their composite action a 1 a 2 ∈ A satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

2. a 1 ∈ A s , a 2 ∈ A τ ( s,a 1 ) = ⇒ a 1 a 2 ∈ A s
3. Composition is associative: ( a 1 a 2 ) a 3 = a 1 ( a 2 a 3 )

1 The algebraically inclined may notice that these axioms declare A ∗ to be the free monoid on the set A , and π : A ∗ → R 2 is a monoid homomorphism, and τ : S × A ∗ → S describes a monoid action of A ∗ on S .

- (Optimal action): For any pool state s ∈ Σ and external price P of the asset x , there exists an atomic a ∗ ( s, P ) ∈ A s ∩ A with π ( a ∗ ( s, P )) = (∆ x, ∆ y ) that maximizes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that ∆ xP +∆ y ≥ 0 since we can always choose ⊥ .

Definition 2 (Admissible sequence of actions) . If s ∈ Σ is a pool state, then a sequence a 1 , . . . , a n ∈ A is admissible with respect to s if a 1 · · · a n ∈ A s .

Assumption 4 (Single liquidity pool) . There is a single liquidity pool with reserves in the risky asset x and num´ eraire y . This assumption loses no generality, as shown in Section 5.1.

Definition 3 (No-arbitrage state) . For any external price P of the asset x , a no-arbitrage state relative to P is a state s ∈ Σ such that for every admissible a ∈ A s ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 4 (Frictionless pool) . A liquidity pool is frictionless if for every external price P there exists a unique no-arbitrage state s ∗ ( P ) ∈ Σ.

Definition 5 (Path-independent pool) . Aliquidity pool is path-independent if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all s ∈ Σ.

Definition 6 (Efficient pool) . A liquidity pool is efficient if every state is a no-arbitrage state relative to some price.

Definition 7 (Volume) . For any action a ∈ A ∗ , the volume of a , denoted | a | , is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is well-defined since composition in A ∗ is associative.

Definition 8 (Liquidity pool with fees) . Let φ &gt; 0. A liquidity pool Π = (Σ , A, { A s } s ∈ Σ , τ, π, s 0 ) has fee φ if there exists a payoff function π 0 such that the liquidity pool Π 0 = (Σ , A, { A s } s ∈ Σ , τ, π 0 , s 0 ) satisfies the axioms of Assumption 3 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We say Π has fee φ relative to Π 0 , which is the underlying pool.

A pool satisfying Definition 8 does not necessarily satisfy the axioms of Assumption 3, in particular the optimal action axiom. We show (Corollary 23) that if the underlying pool is efficient and frictionless, then the pool with fees satisfies the optimal action axiom.

In Section 6 we see that the most popular, dominant decentralized exchanges satisfy the liquidity pool axioms and furthermore are frictionless, path-independent, and efficient.

## 2.2 Blockchain markets

Definition 9 (Blockchain market) . A blockchain market is an increasing sequence of block times t 1 , t 2 , . . . ∈ R + and an ordering mechanism which is a probability distribution for each t n satisfying the following:

- For each block time t n , let s n be the pool state at time t n before any actions. For each sequence T of actions (not necessarily admissible), the ordering mechanism specifies a probability distribution over permutations σ ( T ) of T . The sequence T is the on-chain trades submitted for block n .
- Once a permutation σ ( T ) is selected, a subsequence T ′ is constructed from σ ( T ) by starting from the first element of σ ( T ) and iteratively dropping any action that is not admissible with respect to the pool state after all the preceding non-dropped trades. By construction, the resulting subsequence T ′ is admissible with respect to the original pool state s n . The sequence T ′ is the on-chain trades executed for block n .
- The starting state at block time t n +1 is s n +1 = τ ( s n , T ′ ) where we abuse notation by using T ′ to denote the composition of the elements of T ′ .

Assumption 5 (Deterministic block times) . We assume that the block times ( t n ) are deterministic.

Assumption 6 (No gas fees) . We assume there are no gas fees. As such, the PNL we measure for a trading strategy is the gross PNL (after liquidity provider fees) and an upper bound on how much the strategy would be willing to pay in fees to network operators.

## 2.3 Trading strategies

We extend the formalization of a trading strategy used in [MMRZ22] to explicitly reflect the ability to make discrete trades on a decentralized exchange on a blockchain.

Definition 10 (Trading strategies, on-chain trades) . A trading strategy is a stochastic process ( x t , y t ) representing its holdings at time t of the risky asset x and the num´ eraire y and, for each block time t n , a sequence of submitted on-chain trades T n , which may be chosen probabilistically. Because we assume block times are deterministic, we may assume that the on-chain trades are submitted using all information available at time t n .

We require that the process is adaptable, predictable, and satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all t ≥ 0.

Assumption 7 (Self-financing strategies) . Weassume that all trading strategies are self-financing , i.e. for all t ≥ 0, if t ∈ [ t n , t n +1 ), then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where (∆ x i,j , ∆ y i,j ) n i j =1 are the payoffs of the on-chain trades executed by the strategy for block i .

Informally, a self-financing strategy does not get any assets added or removed aside from through trades, either exchanging at the external market price or executing admissible trades through the on-chain liquidity pool.

Definition 11 (Sum of strategies) . Let S be a trading strategy whose asset holdings are given by ( x t , y t ) and whose sequence on-chain trades submitted for block n is T n , and similarly let S ′ be a trading strategy whose asset holdings and submitted on-chain trades are ( x ′ t , y ′ t ) and T ′ n respectively. Then their sum S + S ′ is defined to be the strategy whose asset holdings are given by ( x t + x ′ t , y t + y ′ t ) and whose on-chain trades submitted for block n is the union T n ∪ T ′ n .

Definition 12 (Arbitrage strategy) . An arbitrage strategy is a trading strategy with x t = 0 for all t .

Definition 13 (Simple arbitrage strategy S 0 ) . Given a fixed blockchain market and a fixed liquidity pool within that market, the simple arbitrage strategy , denoted by S 0 , with respect to that market is defined to be the self-financing arbitrage strategy such that for each block n with block time t n it submits the trade a ∗ ( s n , P t n ).

Definition 14 (Concurrent strategies) . Aset of trading strategies S 1 , . . . , S m is concurrent if their executed on-chain trades are disjoint.

Definition 15 (Covering strategies) . A set of trading strategies is covering if it is concurrent and the union of their on-chain trades equals all on-chain trades.

Definition 16 (Complete strategies) . A set of trading strategies is complete if it is covering and their sum is an arbitrage strategy.

Definition 17 (Competitive strategies) . A set of m trading strategies is competitive if it is complete and the following conditions are satisfied:

1. For each block, the pool state after executing all the on-chain trades from all the strategies in the set is a no-arbitrage state.
2. either m = 1 or with probability 1 each strategy submits non-null admissible on-chain trades for some positive number of blocks, and there are infinitely many blocks for which at least two of the strategies submit non-null admissible on-chain trades.

Intuitively, a concurrent set of strategies models a set of strategies that actually run in the same world and compete for the same set of opportunities. A covering set captures all strategies that trade on-chain. A complete set captures all strategies that trade in the external market as well. A competitive set models the notion of a set of strategies that leave no money on the table after each block. The second condition for competitiveness just enforces that each strategy is 'doing something' rather than just one strategy doing all the trading while the others sit back and watch.

## 2.4 PNL and MEV

Definition 18 (PNL of strategy) . Let S = ( x t , y t ) be a strategy. The PNL ( P rofit a n d L oss) of S , denoted PNL ( S ), is the process

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote by PNL ∗ ( S )

the PNL of S if S is the only trading strategy submitting on-chain trades, called the uncontested PNL of S .

Definition 19 (MEV) . Let B be a blockchain market and let m be a positive integer. The m -player competitive pathwise maximal extractable value (MEV) of B , denoted MEV path m ( B ), is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S ranges over all competitive sets of m or more strategies.

The m -player competitive MEV of B , denoted MEV m ( B ), is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where again S ranges over all competitive sets of m or more strategies.

The noncompetitive MEV of B , denoted MEV ∗ ( B ), is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S is allowed to range over all covering sets of strategies.

As we will see in Theorem 1, Theorem 3, and Theorem 5, MEV path m ( B ) and MEV m ( B ) are independent of m , and so there are well-defined notions of MEV path ( B ) and MEV ( B ).

Definition 19 is worth explaining, as it may look strange at first glance. Recall that PNL ( S ) is not a single number, it is a stochastic process, with a random value at each time t ≥ 0. Therefore ∑ S ∈S PNL ( S ) is a stochastic process. Since stochastic processes in general cannot be totally ordered, we must take the pathwise supremum over each time t . In particular, this means that for each t , the set S that approaches the supremum may be very different, and there may not be a single S whose total PNL comes close to MEV m ( B ). However, our first main result (Theorem 1) is that, in the frictionless setting, indeed there exists a single set S that attains this maximum value. As for MEV ( B ) and MEV ∗ ( B ), these quantities are no longer random, but are still functions of time t .

It is important to require concurrency because otherwise one can make MEV m ( B ) arbitrary large by adding arbitrarily many copies of the same strategy, while we are interested in the value that can be extracted by strategies competing for the same on-chain opportunities.

The covering hypothesis is also necessary to avoid a degenerate definition. The profit of an on-chain trade can be arbitrarily large if the trade is preceded by an arbitrarily unprofitable trade (this is the idea behind backrunning). Therefore, we should include both trades, so that we can show that on-chain trading is constant-sum.

For pathwise MEV, completeness is required because otherwise we can make a strategy's PNL arbitrarily large by making its risk exposure arbitrarily high in the external market. But the external market is zero-sum, so any arbitrarily large profits made by a strategy in the external market must be offset by corresponding losses spread across other strategies. Completeness essentially includes those strategies being traded against. When the price is a martingale, we do not require completeness because any trades in the external market have zero expected return.

The competitiveness condition is the main difference between MEV ( B ) and MEV ∗ ( B ). The former measures the MEV when the space is competitive to the point where every block no profits are left on the table, while the latter measures the maximum possible value if some profits could be deferred.

## 3 Main Results

We now state our results, deferring the proofs to Section 4.

## 3.1 Ordering mechanism invariance

Our main results characterize the measures of MEV defined in Section 2 in terms of the uncontested PNL of a single strategy or a family of strategies. This implies that the MEV is invariant to ordering mechanisms, since uncontested PNL is invariant.

## 3.1.1 Frictionless setting

When the pool is frictionless, we show that the pathwise competitive MEV is equal to the uncontested PNL of the simple arbitrage strategy.

Theorem 1 (Invariance of competitive pathwise MEV, frictionless) . Let B be a blockchain market with deterministic block times whose liquidity pool is frictionless. Then, for all positive integers m , there exists a competitive set S of m strategies such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, MEV path m ( B ) does not depend on m , so the following definition of competitive pathwise MEV

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is well-defined, and also does not depend on the ordering mechanism of B .

A corollary of this is that we can easily characterize the (non-pathwise) competitive MEV.

Corollary 2 (Competitive MEV is average competitive pathwise MEV) . Let B be a blockchain market with deterministic block times with a frictionless liquidity pool. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If we additionally require that the pool is path-independent and that the asset price P t is a martingale, then we can characterize the noncompetitive MEV as the expected uncontested PNL of the simple arbitrage strategy too, and therefore competitive and noncompetitive MEV are equal.

Theorem 3 (Invariance of noncompetitive MEV, frictionless) . Let B be a blockchain market with deterministic block times whose liquidity pool is frictionless and path-independent. Suppose P t is a martingale. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, MEV ∗ ( B ) is independent of the ordering mechanism of B , and also

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3.1.2 Fees setting

If the pool has a fee relative to an efficient , frictionless, path-independent pool, and the asset price is a martingale, then we can prove analogous results. In particular, Theorem 4 is the analogue of Corollary 2 and Theorem 5 is the analogue of Theorem 3. In Section 4.3, we give a counterexample to show how an analogue of Theorem 1 cannot hold in general when there are fees.

Theorem 4 (Invariance of competitive MEV, with fees) . Let B be a blockchain market with deterministic block times whose liquidity pool has a fee relative to an efficient, frictionless, path-independent pool. Suppose P t is a martingale. Then, for all positive integers m ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, MEV path m ( B ) does not depend on m , so the following definition of competitive MEV

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is well-defined, and also does not depend on the ordering mechanism of B .

Theorem 5 (Invariance of noncompetitive MEV, with fees) . Let B be a blockchain market with deterministic block times whose liquidity pool has a fee relative to an efficient, frictionless, path-independent pool. Suppose P t is a martingale. For each block n ≥ 1 with block time t n , define S n to be arbitrage strategy that only submits an on-chain trade of a ∗ ( s n , P t n ) on block n and no trades on any other block. Then, for t ≥ 0 , if t n ≤ t &lt; t n +1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3.2 Dependence on block times

We also investigate the dependence of the measures of MEV on block times, namely what happens if we subdivide each block into multiple blocks.

In the frictionless case, if the pool is path-independent and the asset price is a martingale, then there is no dependence on block times.

Theorem 6 (Block time invariance of MEV, frictionless) . Let B be a blockchain market with deterministic block times whose liquidity pool is frictionless and path-independent, and let B ′ be identical to B except each block is subdivided into k blocks (not necessarily evenly spaced). Suppose P t is a martingale. Then, for all block times t of B ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the setting with fees, if the underlying pool is efficient, frictionless, and path-independent, and the asset price is a martingale, then the noncompetitive MEV does not depend on block times, but the competitive MEV may shrink as block times get shorter.

and Theorem 7 (MEV is nonincreasing with shorter block times with fees) . Let B be a blockchain market with deterministic block times whose liquidity pool has a fee relative to an efficient, frictionless and path-independent pool, and let B ′ be identical to B except each block is subdivided into k blocks (not necessarily evenly spaced). Suppose P t is a martingale. Then, for all block times t of B ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

## 4 Proofs

In this section we prove the main results of Section 3.

## 4.1 Intermediate results

We begin by developing some helpful intermediate results.

## 4.1.1 General

This section contains general results about strategies and PNL. We start by observing some simple but useful facts that follow immediately from our definitions.

Proposition 8. If S 1 , . . . , S m are concurrent trading strategies, then S 1 + · · · + S m is a trading strategy whose submitted on-chain trades and executed on-chain trades are the respective unions of those of S 1 , . . . , S m .

Proof. Follows immediately by induction on Definition 11.

Proposition 9. Let S 1 , . . . , S m be trading strategies. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Follows from Definition 18 and Proposition 8, in particular the fact that PNL is linear in x t , y t , ∆ x i,j , and ∆ y i,j .

The next result provides a formula for the PNL of an arbitrage strategy.

Proposition 10. Let ( t n ) be block times. Let S be an arbitrage strategy. Let (∆ x i, 1 , ∆ y i, 1 ) , . . . , (∆ x i,n i , ∆ y i,n i ) be payoffs of the on-chain trades executed by S in block i . If t n ≤ t &lt; t n +1 , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. By Definition 18 and Assumption 7 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Definition 12, x s = 0 for all s ≥ 0, hence the integral equals 0.

The next lemma is used to show that S 0 is optimal in capturing MEV in a given block.

Lemma 11. Fix a block with time t and state s , and let a 1 , . . . , a n be an admissible sequence of trades with respect to s , with payoffs (∆ x 1 , ∆ y 1 ) , . . . , (∆ x n , ∆ y n ) . Let P t be the external market price. Let a ∗ ( s, P t ) ∈ A s be the optimal action and let π ( a ∗ ( s, P t )) = (∆ x ∗ , ∆ y ∗ ) . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let a = a 1 · · · a n , which has payoff π ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ) where ∆ x = ∑ n i =1 x i and ∆ y = ∑ n i =1 y i . By the composition axiom of Assumption 3, a is admissible with respect to s . By the optimality of a ∗ ( s, P ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The next lemma says that optimal actions put the pool in a no-arbitrage state.

Lemma 12. For any pool state s ∈ Σ and external market price P , τ ( s, a ∗ ( s, P )) if a no-arbitrage state relative to P . In particular, if Π is frictionless, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let s ′ = τ ( s, a ∗ ( s, P )). Suppose there exists a ∈ A s ′ with π ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ) such that ∆ xP + ∆ y &gt; 0. Let π ( a ∗ ( s, P )) = (∆ x ∗ , ∆ y ∗ ). Then the action a ∗ a is admissible with respect to s and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by the composition axiom of Assumption 3. But

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

contradicting the optimality of a ∗ ( s, P ). Therefore ∆ xP + ∆ y ≤ 0 for all a ∈ A s ′ . Therefore τ ( s, a ∗ ( s, P )) is a no-arbitrage state relative to P .

If Π is frictionless, then it has only one no-arbitrage state s ∗ ( P ) relative to P .

Corollary 13. If the liquidity pool is frictionless, the set { S 0 } is competitive.

- [ ] Proof. Follows immediately from Lemma 12.

Corollary 14. For a frictionless pool, if s ∈ Σ and P is some price, then there exists an atomic a ∈ A s ∩ A such that τ ( s, a ) = s ∗ ( P ) .

Proof. Follows immediately from Lemma 12.

The next lemma implies that concurrent copies of S exactly split the pie.

Lemma 15. For a given pool state s ∈ Σ and external price P , if π ( a ∗ ( s, P )) = (∆ x, ∆ y ) and ∆ xP +∆ y &gt; 0 , and m copies of a ∗ ( s, P ) are submitted, then exactly one of the trades will be executed.

Proof. Certainly at least one of the trades will be executed, so it only remains to show that none of the other trades are executed. It suffices to show that a ∗ ( s, P ) a ∗ ( s, P ) / ∈ A s . By Lemma 12, τ ( s, a ∗ ( s, P )) = s ∗ ( P ). By the equilibrium state axiom in Assumption 3, for any a ∈ A s ∗ ( P ) , its payoff (∆ x, ∆ y ) satisfies ∆ xP + ∆ y ≤ 0. Therefore a ∗ ( s, P ) / ∈ A s ∗ ( P ) , so by the composition axiom in Assumption 3, a ∗ ( s, P ) a ∗ ( s, P ) / ∈ A s .

Proposition 16. For any positive integer m , there exists a competitive set S of m strategies such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. For i ∈ { 1 , . . . , m } , let S i be a concurrent copy of S 0 and let S = { S 1 , . . . , S m } . On each block, either none of the S i submits any on-chain trade, or they all submit a copy of the trade a ∗ ( s ∗ ( P t n -1 ) , P t n ) at block time t n , in which case exactly one is executed (by Lemma 15). Therefore the executed trades of S 1 + · · · + S m are exactly equal to that of S 0 , hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This also implies that S is covering. The fact that it is complete follows from the fact that S 0 is an arbitrage strategy. Finally, it is competitive since it executes the same on-chain trades as S 0 which is competitive (Corollary 13).

## 4.1.2 Frictionless pools

This section contains a result that is true for frictionless pools. It states that no competitive set of strategies can make more profit than S 0 by itself.

Proposition 17. Suppose the liquidity pool is frictionless. Let S 1 , . . . , S m be a competitive set of trading strategies. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let S = S 1 + · · · + S m , which is an arbitrage strategy by Definition 17. Since both sets { S 1 , . . . , S m } and { S 0 } are competitive (Corollary 13), under each set of concurrent strategies the pool state at block time t i is s i = s ∗ ( P t i -1 ) since the pool is frictionless. Consider a fixed block at time t i and let T be the on-chain trades of S . Since S is complete, T is an admissible sequence of trades with respect to s i . Let (∆ x i, 1 , ∆ y i, 1 ) , . . . , (∆ x i,n i , ∆ y i,n i ) be the payoffs of the trades in T . Let (∆ x ∗ i , ∆ y ∗ i ) be the payoff of a ∗ ( s ∗ ( P t i -1 ) , P t i ). Therefore, if t n ≤ t &lt; t n +1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4.1.3 Martingales

This section contains results that are true when P t is a martingale. The first lemma says that if the pool is frictionless and path-independent, and P t is a martingale, then any two strategies that end the pool in the same state have the same expected cumulative PNL.

Lemma 18. Let B be a blockchain market whose liquidity pool is frictionless and path-independent. Suppose P t is a martingale. Let S be an arbitrage strategy that submits on-chain trade a i on block i at time t i . Let S ′ be an arbitrage strategy that submits no on-chain trades except a ′ on block n . If τ ( s 0 , a 1 · · · a n ) = τ ( s 0 , a ′ ) , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Decompose S = S 1 + S 2 where S 1 submits the same on-chain trades as S but has x t j = ∑ j i =1 ∆ x i for each 1 ≤ j ≤ n and x s = x t j for t j ≤ s &lt; t j +1 , where π ( a i ) = (∆ x i , ∆ y i ), and S 2 submits no on-chain trades and has x t j offsetting the position of S 1 , i.e. x t j = -∑ j i =1 ∆ x i for 1 ≤ j ≤ n and x s = x t j for t j ≤ s &lt; t j +1 .

Setting t 0 = 0, if x s is the holdings for x for S 1 , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let π ( a ′ ) = (∆ x ′ , ∆ y ′ ). By Proposition 10,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By hypothesis, τ ( s 0 , a 1 · · · a n ) = τ ( s 0 , a ′ ), so by path-independence, this implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, since S 2 exclusively trades in the external market and P t is a martingale,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Putting it all together, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The next lemma is nearly identical to Lemma 18 except the pool has a fee. The conclusion is also weakened: a strategy cannot outperform (on average) a version of itself that just waits until the end of n blocks and moves the pool to the same end state.

Lemma 19. Let B be a blockchain market whose liquidity pool has a fee relative to a frictionless and path-independent pool. Suppose P t is a martingale. Let S be an arbitrage strategy that submits on-chain trade a i on block i at time t i . Let S ′ be an arbitrage strategy that submits no on-chain trades except a ′ on block n . If τ ( s 0 , a 1 · · · a n ) = τ ( s 0 , a ′ ) , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Suppose the pool Π has a fee φ relative to Π 0 , which is frictionless and path-independent by hypothesis, and let π 0 be the payoff function of Π 0 . Let PNL ∗ 0 denote the uncontested PNL before fees, which is the PNL using π 0 . For each block i , let a i be the trade submitted by S on that block, with π 0 ( a i ) = (∆ x i , ∆ y i ). Then, by Lemma 18,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4.1.4 Efficient pools

We now prove some properties of efficient pools. These results are critical in proving our main results in the setting with fees. In particular, Corollary 23 establishes that S 0 is even well-defined for a pool with a fee whose underlying pool is efficient and frictionless. Many intuitive properties of exchanges can be proved for efficient pools.

The first result simply states that in an efficient, frictionless pool, any state is reachable from any other state by an atomic action.

Proposition 20. Let Π be an efficient, frictionless pool. Let s 1 , s 2 ∈ Σ be two states of the pool. Then there exists an atomic a ∈ A s 1 ∩ A such that τ ( s 1 , a ) = s 2 .

Proof. Since Π is efficient, there exists P such that s 2 = s ∗ ( P ). Apply Corollary 14.

The next result states the intuitive property that buying from the pool raises the pool price, while selling lowers the pool price.

Proposition 21. Let Π be an efficient, frictionless pool. Let s = s ∗ ( P 0 ) for some price P 0 and let a ∈ A s with π ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ) . Suppose ∆ xP +∆ y &gt; 0 .

- P &gt; P 0 if and only if ∆ y &lt; 0 .
- P &lt; P 0 if and only if ∆ y &gt; 0 .

Proof. Since s is a no-arbitrage state for P 0 , we have ∆ xP 0 + ∆ y ≤ 0. Subtracting this from ∆ xP +∆ y &gt; 0 yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If P &gt; P 0 , then ∆ x &gt; 0. Then we must have ∆ y &lt; 0, for if ∆ y ≥ 0, then ∆ xP 0 + ∆ y &gt; 0, contradicting that s is a no-arbitrage state for P 0 . Conversely, if ∆ y &lt; 0, then ∆ xP &gt; ∆ xP + ∆ y &gt; 0, hence ∆ x &gt; 0, so P -P 0 &gt; 0.

If P &lt; P 0 , then ∆ x &lt; 0, and so ∆ y &gt; ∆ xP + ∆ y &gt; 0. Conversely, if ∆ y &gt; 0, then we must have ∆ x &lt; 0, for if ∆ x ≥ 0, then ∆ xP 0 + ∆ y ≥ ∆ y &gt; 0, contradicting that s is a no-arbitrage state for P 0 . Therefore P -P 0 &lt; 0.

The following result characterizes the optimal action for a pool with fee relative to an efficient, frictionless pool. When the external price P is high, the optimal action is to buy until the pool price is P 1+ φ , while if P is low, the optimal action is to sell until pool price is P 1 -φ .

Proposition 22. Let Π have a fee φ relative to an efficient, frictionless pool Π 0 . If s = s ∗ ( P 0 ) and P is some price, and there exists an atomic action a ∈ A s ∩ A that maximizes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

such that

- if P &gt; P 0 (1 + φ ) , then τ ( s, a ) = s ∗ ( P 1+ φ ) ;
- if P &lt; P 0 (1 -φ ) , then τ ( s, a ) = s ∗ ( P 1 -φ ) ;

- otherwise, τ ( s, a ) = s .

In particular, s ∈ Σ is a no-arbitrage state (in Π ) for price P if and only if s = s ∗ ( P 0 ) (in Π 0 ) for some P 1+ φ ≤ P 0 ≤ P 1 -φ .

Proof. Suppose P &gt; P 0 (1 + φ ). By Proposition 21, ∆ x P 1+ φ +∆ y &gt; 0 only if ∆ y &lt; 0. Since we can always take a = ⊥ , this means maximizing ∆ x P 1+ φ + ∆ y does change when restricting to ∆ y &lt; 0, in which case, by multiplying the expression by 1 + φ , it is equivalent to maximizing

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since Π 0 satisfies the optimal action axiom, this maximization problem has an atomic solution a = a ∗ ( s, P 1+ φ ) ∈ A s ∩ A in Π 0 , and by Lemma 12, τ ( s, a ) = s ∗ ( P 1+ φ ) .

Similarly, if P &lt; P 0 (1 -φ ), Proposition 21 implies ∆ x P 1 -φ + ∆ y &gt; 0 only if ∆ y &gt; 0, so maximizing ∆ x P 1 -φ +∆ y does change when restricting to ∆ y &gt; 0, in which case it is equivalent to maximizing

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Again, this maximization problem has an atomic solution a = a ∗ ( s, P 1 -φ ) ∈ A s ∩ A in Π 0 , and Lemma 12 implies that τ ( s, a ) = s ∗ ( P 1 -φ ) .

Now suppose P 0 (1 -φ ) ≤ P ≤ P 0 (1 + φ ). Suppose there exists a ∈ A s with π ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ) and ∆ xP +∆ y -φ | ∆ y | &gt; 0. If ∆ y &lt; 0, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so Proposition 21 implies that P 1+ φ &gt; P 0 , a contradiction. A similar argument shows that ∆ y &gt; 0 cannot be true. Therefore ∆ y = 0. Since s is a no-arbitrage state for P 0 , this implies 0 ≥ ∆ xP 0 +∆ y = ∆ xP 0 , so ∆ x = 0, but this contradicts ∆ xP +∆ y &gt; 0. Hence such an action a does not exist and the best we can do is a = ⊥ .

We now move on to prove that s ∈ Σ is a no-arbitrage state in Π for price P if and only if s = s ∗ ( P 0 ) in Π 0 for some P 1+ φ ≤ P 0 ≤ P 1 -φ . We have just shown the reverse direction. Now suppose s is a no-arbitrage state, and let s = s ∗ ( P 0 ). Suppose P 0 &gt; P 1 -φ . By what was shown earlier in this proof, the optimal action in Π has payoff (∆ x, ∆ y ) maximizing ∆ x P 1 -φ +∆ y with ∆ y &gt; 0. Since s is a no-arbitrage state in Π, this implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so s is a no-arbitrage state in Π 0 for P 1 -φ . Since Π 0 is frictionless, this implies s = s ∗ ( P 1 -φ ) , and we are done. A similar argument shows that if P 0 &lt; P 1+ φ , then s = s ∗ ( P 1+ φ ) and again we are done.

The following is the culmination of the previous results in this section and states that S 0 is well-defined for a pool with fee relative to an efficient, frictionless pool.

Corollary 23. Let Π have a fee relative to an efficient, frictionless pool. Then Π satisfies the optimal action axiom of Assumption 3, and in particular the simple arbitrage strategy S 0 is well-defined for Π .

Proof. Let P be the external market price. By Proposition 22, there exists an atomic action a ∗ with π ( a ∗ ) = (∆ x ∗ , ∆ y ∗ ) maximizing

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It only remains to show that there is no action a ∈ A ∗ with π ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

But this follows simply from the fact that | a | ≥ | ∆ y | (which follows easily from the triangle inequality), so if such an action existed, that would imply

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which contradicts the optimality of a ∗ .

The following result states for an efficient, frictionless, path-independent pool one can define a nondecreasing potential function on prices such that the potential difference between two prices represents the volume one needs to buy or sell to change the pool price from one price to the other.

Proposition 24. Let Π be an efficient, frictionless, path-independent pool. Then there exists a well-defined nondecreasing potential function on prices, q : R + → R , such that for every pair of prices P 1 , P 2 , and every a ∈ A s ∗ ( P 1 ) with π ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Pick an arbitrary price P 0 ∈ R + and define q ( P 0 ) = 0. For any price P ∈ R + , we define q ( P ) as follows: by Proposition 20, there exists an admissible action a ∈ A s ∗ ( P 0 ) such that τ ( s ∗ ( P 0 ) , a ) = s ∗ ( P ), with π ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ); define q ( P ) = -∆ y .

Because Π is path-independent, the definition of q ( P ) is independent of our choice of a , and so q is well-defined. Let P 1 , P 2 be two prices. Let a ∈ A s ∗ ( P 1 ) be an action with π ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ). Let a 1 = a ∗ ( s ∗ ( P 0 ) , P 1 ) and a 2 = a ∗ ( s ∗ ( P 0 ) , P 2 ), with π ( a 1 ) = (∆ x 1 , ∆ y 1 ) and π ( a 2 ) = (∆ x 2 , ∆ y 2 ). Then q ( P 1 ) -q ( P 2 ) = ∆ y 2 -∆ y 1 . If τ ( s ∗ ( P 1 ) , a ) = s ∗ ( P 2 ), then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so path-independence implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, q ( P 1 ) -q ( P 2 ) = ∆ y 2 -∆ y 1 = ∆ y .

Finally, we verify that q is nondecreasing. If P 1 &lt; P 2 and a = a ∗ ( s ∗ ( P 1 ) , P 2 ) with π ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ). Since τ ( s ∗ ( P 1 ) , a ) = s ∗ ( P 2 ), by what we just proved above it follows that q ( P 2 ) -q ( P 1 ) = -∆ y , so it suffices to show that ∆ ≤ 0. First suppose ∆ xP 2 +∆ y &gt; 0. Then Proposition 21 implies ∆ y &lt; 0. Now suppose ∆ xP 2 + ∆ y = 0. Since a was optimal, this implies s ∗ ( P 1 ) is a no-arbitrage state for P 2 as well. Since Π is frictionless, this implies s ∗ ( P 1 ) = s ∗ ( P 2 ). So we may take a = ⊥ with ∆ y = 0.

The next lemma is critical to the proof of Theorem 4. It implies that S 0 minimizes fees paid among all competitive strategies. However, it states something even stronger: if we S is any other competitive strategy, we can modify S 0 into a strategy S ′ 0 that trades like S 0 and on the final block n makes an additional trade to get to the same state that S ends on, and even with that additional trade S ′ 0 still pays no more fees than S .

Lemma 25. Let Π have a fee φ relative to an efficient, frictionless, pathindependent pool Π 0 . Let S be a competitive strategy. Let n ≥ 1 and t n ≤ t &lt; t n +1 , and suppose S submits trades a 1 , . . . , a n on the first n blocks respectively. Define a strategy S ′ 0 to make the same trades as S 0 on blocks 1 , . . . , n -1 , i.e. a ∗ ( s i -1 , P t i ) , and on block n submit a ∗ ( s n -1 , P t n ) composed with a trade such that the state after is equal to τ ( s 0 , a 1 · · · a n ) . If a ′ 1 , . . . , a ′ n are the trades of S ′ 0 , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In other words, S trades at least as much volume as S ′ 0 .

Proof. Let a ∗ 1 , . . . , a ∗ n be the trades of S 0 on blocks 1 , . . . , n . Note that a ′ i = a ∗ i for 1 ≤ i ≤ n -1. Let P 0 ≜ sup { P | s 0 = s ∗ ( P ) } . First, consider the case

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose P t n &lt; P 0 (1 + φ ). By Proposition 22, S 0 does not submit any nonnull trades, so the result trivially follows. Now suppose P t n ≥ P 0 (1+ φ ). By Proposition 22, the only non-null trades S 0 submits are buys, and S 0 ends on state s ∗ ( P t n 1+ φ ) . Meanwhile, S lands on s ∗ ( P ) for some P ≥ P t n 1+ φ . Let q be a potential function given by Proposition 24. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, if we redefine P 0 ≜ inf { P | s 0 = s ∗ ( P ) } and consider the case

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then either P t n &gt; P 0 (1 -φ ) in which case S 0 does not submit any non-null trades and the result trivially follows, or P t n ≤ P 0 (1 -φ ) in which case there is some P ≤ P t n 1 -φ such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now consider the general where P t 1 , . . . , P t n are arbitrary. By grouping together consecutive prices moving in the same direction, we can assume without loss of generality that the sequence alternates directions with sufficiently large movements, say P t i 1+ φ ≥ P t i -1 1 -φ if i has the same parity as n and P t i 1 -φ ≤ P t i -1 1+ φ otherwise. Then after block n -1, S 0 is at state s ∗ ( P t n -1 1 -φ ) while S is at state s ∗ ( P ) for some P ≤ P t n -1 1 -φ , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since P t n ≥ P t n -1 1 -φ , after block n , S 0 ends at state s ∗ ( P t n 1+ φ ) while S ends at state s ∗ ( P ′ ) for some P ′ ≥ P t n 1+ φ . Therefore, by Proposition 24, the additional trade submitted by S ′ 0 is a buy to reach s ∗ ( P ′ ), and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4.2 Proofs of main results

## 4.2.1 Proof of Theorem 1

Proof. Let S = { S 1 , . . . , S m } be competitive. Since the pool is frictionless, we may apply Proposition 17 to conclude that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking the supremum over all complete S yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To finish the proof, it suffices to construct a competitive set S of m trading strategies such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore,

since then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

But this follows immediately from Proposition 16.

## 4.2.2 Proof of Theorem 3

Proof. For each block n ≥ 1, let S n be the arbitrage strategy that waits until block n and then submits a ∗ ( s 0 , P t n ). The pool is frictionless and path-independent, so it has a fee of φ = 0 relative to itself, so we can apply Theorem 5 to conclude that, for t n ≤ t &lt; t n +1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the pool is frictionless, it follows from Lemma 12 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, it follows from Lemma 18 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4.2.3 Proof of Theorem 4

Proof. It follows from Proposition 16 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so it only remains to prove the other direction. Let S be a competitive set of strategies. We wish to show

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since S is competitive, it is covering, so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since PNL is additive and netting trades cannot increase fees, and we are trying to prove an upper bound on ∑ S ∈S PNL ( S ), we may replace the set with their sum and assume without loss of generality that the set consists of a single strategy S .

Suppose Π has a fee relative to Π 0 with payoff π 0 , where Π 0 is efficient. Let PNL ∗ 0 denote uncontested PNL relative to π 0 , i.e. before fees. Let t n ≤ t &lt; t n +1 . Let a 1 , . . . , a n be the trades of S 0 . Define a strategy S ′ 0 to make the same trades as S 0 on blocks 1 , . . . , n -1, i.e. a ∗ ( s i -1 , P t i ), and on block n submit a ∗ ( s n -1 , P t n ) composed with a trade such that it ends in the state τ ( s 0 , a 1 · · · a n ) (there always exists such a trade by Proposition 20). Since the first n -1 trades of S ′ 0 and S 0 are identical, they pass through the same states in each block, and in block n the strategy S 0 makes an optimal trade compared with S ′ 0 , so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, it suffices to show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let a ∗ 1 , . . . , a ∗ n be the trades of S ′ 0 . By construction, τ ( s 0 , a 1 · · · a n ) = τ ( s 0 , a ∗ 1 · · · a ∗ n ), so by Lemma 18 it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since S is competitive and Π 0 is efficient, it trades at least much volume as S ′ 0 , hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4.2.4 Proof of Theorem 5

Proof. By definition, E [ PNL ∗ ( S n )] ≤ MEV ∗ ( B ), so it only remains to prove the other direction. Let S be a covering set of strategies. Since PNL is additive and netting trades cannot increase fees, and we are trying to prove an upper bound on ∑ S ∈S PNL ( S ), we may replace the set with their sum and assume without loss of generality that the set consists of a single strategy

## S . Our goal is to prove

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since S is covering, Suppose the pool Π has fee φ relative to Π 0 , which is frictionless and pathindependent by hypothesis, and let π 0 be the payoff function of Π 0 . Let PNL ∗ 0 denote the uncontested PNL before fees, which is the PNL using π 0 . For each block i , let a i be the trade submitted by S on that block, with π 0 ( a i ) = (∆ x i , ∆ y i ). Let ∆ x = ∑ n i =1 ∆ x i and ∆ y = ∑ n i =1 ∆ y i . Let S ′ be an arbitrage strategy that waits until block n and submits a 1 · · · a n for block n . By Lemma 19,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4.2.5 Proof of Theorem 6

Proof. Let S 0 and S ′ 0 be the simple arbitrage strategies for B and B ′ respectively. In light of Theorem 1 and Corollary 2, it suffices to show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the pool is frictionless, both S 0 and S ′ 0 end at the same state s ∗ ( P t ). Therefore we may apply Lemma 18 to obtain the result immediately.

## 4.2.6 Proof of Theorem 7

Proof. We first prove the equality of MEV ∗ . Let S be the arbitrage strategy that waits until time t and submits a ∗ ( s 0 , P t ). By Theorem 5,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next we prove the inequality of MEV . Let S 0 and S ′ 0 be the simple arbitrage strategies for B and B ′ respectively. Let S be an arbitrage strategy for B that submits two trades on each block n : the optimal trade a ∗ ( s n -1 , P t n ) and another trade a to land in the same state as S ′ 0 (such an action a always exists by Proposition 20). Since S ′ 0 is competitive, so is S , so by Theorem 4 it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore it suffices to show that S ′ 0 is no better than S on average. Since S ′ 0 and S end at the same state at each block time of B , it suffices to show that S ′ 0 is no better than S on average on each block of B , which consists of k blocks of B ′ . This follows immediately from Lemma 19.

## 4.3 Counterexamples

In this section we give counterexamples to show why Theorem 1 has no analogue in the fee setting, and why Theorem 5, the analogue of Theorem 3, does not characterize MEV ∗ ( B ) with the single strategy S 0 .

First, we consider Theorem 1 in the fee setting. Recall that the statement is an equality of random variables, so the equality holds for all possible price paths. In the fee setting, the proof breaks down because a pool with fee is no longer frictionless, i.e. for a given external price P it may have multiple noarbitrage states for P . Therefore, there is no guarantee that a competitive set of strategies passes through the same sequence of states as S 0 , so it is possible to construct price paths that reward deviating from the path taken by S 0 .

As a simple example, consider a liquidity pool with a linear liquidity curve: 1 unit per price of liquidity uniformly distributed across all prices. If the current pool price is p 1 , it costs ∫ p 2 p 1 p dp = ( p 2 2 -p 2 1 ) / 2 before fees to buy p 2 -p 1 units which pushes the pool price to p 2 . If the fee is φ , then the total cost would be ( p 2 2 -p 2 1 ) / 2 -φ | p 2 -p 1 | .

Suppose both the external market price and pool price start at P 0 = 1 and the fee is φ = 0 . 01. Now suppose at the next block, the external price rises to P 1 = 100. The simple arbitrage strategy S 0 will buy from the pool until the pool price is 100(1 -φ ) = 99, with (∆ x, ∆ y ) = (98 , -4949) and therefore a profit of 4851. Consider an alternate competitive strategy S 1 . It is required to push the price between 99 and 101. Suppose S 1 buys to push the price to 101, with (∆ x, ∆ y ) = (100 , -5151), for a total profit of 4849. Now suppose in the subsequent block the external price drops all the way back down to P 2 = 1. S 0 starts with a pool price of 99 and must sell until it is 1 . 01, with (∆ x, ∆ y ) = ( -97 . 99 , 4850 . 99) and a profit of 4753, while S 1 starts with a pool price of 101 and can also sell until it is 1 . 01, with (∆ x, ∆ y ) = ( -99 . 99 , 5048 . 99) and a profit of 4949. So S 1 loses to S 0 by 2 on the first block but beats by nearly 200 on the second block! This is because they pushed the pool price beyond the optimal price in the first block at a very low cost, and then when the external price dropped down S 1 was able to monetize those two extra units it bought at a value of nearly 100 each. If the price repeatedly alternates between 1 and 100 or any two prices sufficiently far from each other, then S 1 can outerpform S 0 by an arbitrarily large amount.

Next, we turn to looking at the difference between Theorem 3 and Theorem 5, which concern noncompetitive MEV, i.e. how much expected value can be captured if one is free to defer profit without worrying about others taking it. The former essentially says that in the frictionless setting, greedily optimizing profit every block also optimizes total profit across blocks on average, assuming the price is a martingale. This cannot be extended to the fee setting for a simple reason: Theorem 7. When there are fees, it is always better to wait n blocks and do one optimal trade than to do an optimal trade at each intermediate block.

## 5 Generalizations

## 5.1 Multiple liquidity pools

The formalism in Section 2 easily handles multiple liquidity pools. The idea is that multiple liquidity pools can be viewed as a single liquidity pool.

Definition 20 (Product of liquidity pools) . Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be two liquidity pools. The product Π 1 × Π 2 of Π 1 and Π 2 is defined to be the liquidity pool (Σ , A, { A s } s ∈ Σ , τ, π, s 0 ) defined by

- Σ = Σ 1 × Σ 2 ;
- A = A 1 × A 2 ;
- If ( s 1 , s 2 ) ∈ Σ, then ( a 1 , a 2 ) ∈ A ( s 1 ,s 2 ) if and only if a 1 ∈ A s 1 and a 2 ∈ A s 2 .
- τ (( s 1 , s 2 ) , ( a 1 , a 2 )) = ( τ 1 ( s 1 , a 1 ) , τ 2 ( s 2 , a 2 )) for every ( s 1 , s 2 ) ∈ Σ and ( a 1 , a 2 ) ∈ A .
- π (( a 1 , a 2 )) = π 1 ( a 1 ) + π 2 ( a 2 ) for every ( a 1 , a 2 ) ∈ A .
- s 0 = ( s 1 , 0 , s 2 , 0 ).

Conceptually, Π 1 × Π 2 just represents having both liquidity pools side by side, where the admissible actions are either simultaneously applying admissible actions on each pool, or only apply an admissible action on one of the pools. We show that the product satisfies the axioms if each of the constituents does, which demonstrates that we may assume without loss of generality that there is just a single liquidity pool for the asset x .

Proposition 26. If Π 1 and Π 2 are liquidity pools satisfying the axioms of Assumption 3, then so is their product Π 1 × Π 2 .

Proof. We first verify the liquidity pool axioms for Π 1 × Π 2 :

- (Null action): Let ⊥ 1 and ⊥ 2 be the respective null actions of Π 1 and Π 2 . It is easily verified that ⊥ = ( ⊥ 1 , ⊥ 2 ) is a null action of Π 1 × Π 2 .
- (Composition of actions): If ( a 1 , a 2 ) , ( a ′ 1 , a ′ 2 ) ∈ A ∗ , define their composition to be ( a 1 a ′ 1 , a 2 a ′ 2 ). It is easily verified that this composition law satisfies the required property.
- (Optimal action): Let s = ( s 1 , s 2 ) ∈ Σ and let P be the external price of asset x . Let a ∗ 1 = a ∗ 1 ( s 1 , P ) ∈ A s 1 and a ∗ 2 = a ∗ 2 ( s 2 , P ) ∈ A s 2 be optimal actions for Π 1 and Π 2 respectively, with respective payoffs (∆ x ∗ 1 , ∆ y ∗ 1 ) and (∆ x ∗ 2 , ∆ y ∗ 2 ). Define a ∗ ( s, P ) = ( a ∗ 1 ( s 1 , P ) , a ∗ 2 ( s 2 , P )) ∈ A s , which has payoff (∆ x ∗ 1 +∆ x ∗ 2 , ∆ y ∗ 1 +∆ y ∗ 2 ). Let a = ( a 1 , a 2 ) ∈ A and suppose π 1 ( a 1 ) = (∆ x 1 , ∆ y 1 ) and π 2 ( a 2 ) = (∆ x 2 , ∆ y 2 ), so π ( a ) = (∆ x 1 +∆ x 2 , ∆ y 1 +∆ y 2 ). By the optimality of a ∗ 1 and a ∗ 2 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so a is optimal.

This completes the verification that Π 1 × Π 2 satisfies the liquidity pool axioms.

The next two results show that the frictionless and path-independent properties are preserved by the product operation.

Proposition 27. If Π 1 and Π 2 are frictionless, then so is Π 1 × Π 2 .

Proof. Let P be the external price of the asset x . Let s ∗ 1 ( P ) and s ∗ 2 ( P ) be the no-arbitrage states of Π 1 and Π 2 respectively. Define s ∗ ( P ) = ( s ∗ 1 ( P ) , s ∗ 2 ( P )). Suppose a = ( a 1 , a 2 ) ∈ A s ∗ ( P ) where π 1 ( a 1 ) = (∆ x 1 , ∆ y 1 ) and π 2 ( a 2 ) = (∆ x 2 , ∆ y 2 ). Since s ∗ 1 ( P ) and s ∗ 2 ( P ) are no-arbitrage states,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

therefore s ∗ ( P ) is a no-arbitrage state. It only remains to show that s ∗ ( P ) is unique. Let s = ( s 1 , s 2 ) ∈ Σ be a different state, s = s ∗ ( P ). Without loss of generality, suppose s 1 = s ∗ 1 ( P ). Then s 1 is not a no-arbitrage state since s ∗ 1 ( P ) is unique, so there exists a 1 ∈ A s 1 with π 1 ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ) such that ∆ xP + ∆ y &gt; 0. Then the action a = ( a 1 , ⊥ 2 ) ∈ A s has π ( a ) = (∆ x, ∆ y ) and therefore ∆ xP +∆ y &gt; 0. Therefore s is not a no-arbitrage state.

̸

Proposition 28. If Π 1 and Π 2 are path-independent, then so is Π 1 × Π 2 .

Proof. Let s = ( s 1 , s 2 ) ∈ Σ. Suppose a = ( a 1 , a 2 ) and a ′ = ( a ′ 1 , a ′ 2 ) are actions such that τ ( s, a ) = τ ( s, a ′ ). Unrolling Definition 20, this means

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so τ 1 ( s 1 , a 1 ) = τ 1 ( s 1 , a ′ 1 ) and τ 2 ( s 2 , a 2 ) = τ 2 ( s 2 , a ′ 2 ). Since Π 1 and Π 2 are path-independent, this implies that π 1 ( a 1 ) = π 1 ( a ′ 1 ) and π 2 ( a 2 ) = π 2 ( a ′ 2 ). Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from Proposition 27 and Proposition 28 that any statement that holds for frictionless or path-independent pools holds for products of such pools, and in particular Theorem 1, Corollary 2, Theorem 3, and Theorem 6 all hold for multiple pools.

Extending the results in the fee setting is less automatic. The product of two efficient pools is not necessarily efficient. In fact, it almost certainly is not, because cross-exchange arbitrages are possible. Moreover, mutiple pools may have distinct fee rates. However, our results still hold for products of pools with fees relative to efficient, frictionless, path-independent pools. It follows from the following definition and result.

Definition 21 (Product of trading strategies) . Let Π 1 and Π 2 be liquidity pools, and let S 1 and S 2 be trading strategies that trade on Π 1 and Π 2 respectively. The product of S 1 and S 2 , denoted by S 1 × S 2 , is the strategy whose position is given by the sum of the positions and on each block it submits ( a 1 , b 1 ) , . . . , ( a n , b n ), if S 1 submits a 1 , . . . , a n and S 2 submits b 1 , . . . , b n (we may assume they submit the same number of trades by padding with ⊥ ).

Proposition 29. Let Π 1 and Π 2 be liquidity pools with product Π = Π 1 × Π 2 . Let S be a trading strategy trading on Π . Then S can be decomposed into a product of strategies S = S 1 × S 2 such that S 1 trades on Π 1 and S 2 trades on Π 2 , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. For any two strategies S 1 and S 2 , it follows from π (( a 1 , a 2 )) = π 1 ( a 1 ) + π 2 ( a 2 ) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So it only remains to show that we can decompose S into a product. Each on-chain trade submitted by S takes the form ( a 1 , a 2 ) ∈ A ∗ 1 × A ∗ 2 , For each such trade submitted by S , we define S 1 to submit the trade a 1 and S 2 to submit the trade a 2 . For the positions of S 1 and S 2 , we can arbitrarily split the position of S . Then S = S 1 × S 2 .

Each pool with fee satisfies the liquidity pool axioms, by Corollary 23, so by Proposition 26 their product does as well. Therefore the simple arbitrage strategy S 0 is well-defined for the product. From Proposition 29, it follows that S 0 can be decomposed into strategies on each pool in the product, and moreover from the proof of the decomposition and the definition of the product's optimal action, we see that S 0 can be decomposed into a product of simple arbitrage strategies on each pool. Furthermore, it follows from Proposition 29 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and similarly for MEV ∗ . Therefore Theorem 4, Theorem 5, and Theorem 7 extend to a product of pools each with a fee relative to some efficient, frictionless, path-independent pool.

## 5.2 Multiple risky assets

To extend our results to multiple assets, we must generalize our definitions and verify that our intermediate results still hold or are even well-defined. If we have n assets, none of which are the num´ eraire, we denote the position by a vector x ∈ R n and external market prices by a vector P ∈ R n + . Then all instances of xP + y generalize to x ⊤ P + y . Payoff functions generalize to π : A ∗ → R n +1 . The results in the frictionless setting easily follow in the general setting.

It is less clear how to generalize the definitions of volume (Definition 7) and therefore fees (Definition 8), as well as the results on efficient pools (Section 4.1.4), which assume the payoff of each action only involves two assets, one of which is the num´ eraire y , and therefore the results in the fee setting.

The definitions and results can be generalized as follows. We (arbitrarily) order the assets

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume that each efficient pool only involves two assets x i , x j where i &lt; j . We define the volume of an action a ∈ A ∗ to be a vector | a | ∈ R n +1 as follows: If a ∈ A is atomic, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where π ( a ) has entries ∆ x i and ∆ x j in the i th and j th coordinates respectively and zero elsewhere, and | a | has | ∆ x j | in the j th coordinate and zero elsewhere. If a = a 1 a 2 is a composition, then | a | = | a 1 | + | a 2 | as before. Then we may define a pool with fee even more succinctly than before with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then all of the results in Section 4.1.4 still hold if we replace external market price P with the ratio of external market prices P i /P j .

## 6 Examples of liquidity pools

In this section we show that a wide range of AMMs satisfy the liquidity pool axioms of Assumption 3, and furthermore have frictionless underlying pools that are also path-independent and efficient.

## 6.1 Constant function market makers

We show that under mild assumptions about the invariant, a CFMM without fees satisfies the liquidity pool axioms and is frictionless, path-independent, and efficient. Suppose the invariant of the CFMM is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some fixed L ∈ R . This defines a curve Σ ⊆ R 2 + which can be the state space. The atomic actions are (∆ x, ∆ y ), with transition function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The action (∆ x, ∆ y ) is admissible with respect to ( x, y ) if and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The payoff function π is just the identity on R 2 .

We can model this as a liquidity pool as follows. The state space is simply R 2 + , with the asset reserves ( x, y ) as the state. The action space is simply R 2 , with each action (∆ x, ∆ y ) representing the transfer of assets to the trader, with the payoff function π being the identity function. The transition function is τ (( x, y ) , (∆ x, ∆ y )) = ( x -∆ x, y -∆ y ). If we wish to model a trading fee, then the transition function would be τ (( x, y ) , (∆ x, ∆ y )) = ( x -∆ x ′ , y -∆ y ′ ) where ∆ x ′ and ∆ y ′ represent the amounts with the fee added in the appropriate asset depending on which quantity is negative. Then (∆ x, ∆ y ) is admissible if and only if f ( x -∆ x ′ , y -∆ y ′ ) = L .

The null action axiom is satisfied by (0 , 0). Composition of actions is defined by addition and can be seen to satisfy the composition axiom. We will show the optimal action exists by first showing that such a pool is frictionless.

A state ( x, y ) is a no-arbitrage state for external price P if and only if the line with slope -P through ( x, y ) is tangent to Σ. Suppose the gradient ∇ f = ( ∂ x f, ∂ y f ) is defined and continuous almost everywhere on Σ. Then the vector ( -∂ y f, ∂ x f ) is tangent to Σ at ( x, y ) and so ( x, y ) is a no-arbitrage state if -∂ x f ∂ y f = P . The optimal action is the one that brings the state to the state that satisfies this. If ∂ x f ∂ y f restricted to Σ is a bijection with R + , then the pool is frictionless and efficient. Path-independence is easily verified.

An application of this is to constant product market makers such as Uniswap V2. For constant product markets, f ( x, y ) = xy , so ( x, y ) is a no-arbitrage state for P if and only if y/x = P .

The StableSwap invariant implemented by Curve v1 stablecoin pools ([Ego19]) can also be shown to satisfy these properties, being an interpolation between constant sum and constant product markets.

Note that constant sum markets themselves do not satisfy the liquidity axioms.

## 6.2 Uniswap v3

Uniswap v3 ([AZS + 21]) offers an innovation over constant product market makers like Uniswap v2 and CFMMs in general by supporting concentrated liquidity , allowing liquidity providers to specify a price band in which to concentrate their liquidity, as opposed to spreading it out across the entire price range of (0 , ∞ ) as in CFMMs. This allows for greater capital efficiency, and as a result Uniswap v3 pools are the most actively traded AMMs on Ethereum and DeFi in general.

The state space of Uniswap V3 is parameterized by the pool price p and consists of several translated copies of Uniswap V2 states stitched together, each copy representing a price band [ p a , p b ). An action either takes the state to another point on the same Uniswap V2 curve or crosses into another band. One can verify that Uniswap V3 without fees satisfies the liquidity pool axioms and is frictionless, path-independent, and efficient.

## 7 Discussion and Open Questions

We have shown that an risk-neutral arbitrage-centric measure of MEV is invariant to some classes of transformations to a blockchain protocol design, namely ordering mechanisms and block times, assuming the liquidity resides in protocols satisfying our liquidity pool axioms, that block times are deterministic, and that liquidity providers are passive.

One consequence of this theoretical result is that certain ordering mechanisms, such as giving a trader guaranteed priority in a block or even exclusive access, do not change the overall profit that can be extracted, even if coupled with mechanisms that effectively decrease the time between blocks for the trader. Another corollary is that even given such a benefit, the simple arbitrage strategy optimally extracts the value of that benefit.

An interesting line of further work is to consider measures of value other than pure risk-neutral dollar profit. For example, traders may have different risk preferences, and different ordering mechanisms or block time distributions may increase the overall utility if not the overall dollar profit amount.

Another interesting direction is to extend our formalism to include DEXs that do not satisfy our current liquidity pool axioms, even in the absence of liquidity provider actions, e.g. pools whose state changes from price oracles, whether external or internal, such as Curve v2 crypto pools ([Ego21]).

Another question that is interesting purely theoretically is the invariance of MEV when block times are not deterministic, but follow a Poisson point process as in blockchains that use a PoW consensus protocol.

## 8 Acknowledgements

We thank Lucas Baker, Jeff Bezaire, Christopher Chung, Jennifer Pan, and Michael Setrin, Nihar Shah, and Anirudh Suresh for helpful conversations, inspiration, and feedback.

## References

- [AZR20] Hayden Adams, Noah Zinsmeister, Dan Robinson. Uniswap v2 core. 2020.
- [AZS + 21] Hayden Adams, Noah Zinsmeister, Moody Salem, River Keefer, Dan Robinson. Uniswap v3 core. 2021.
- [AC20] Guillermo Angeris, Tarun Chitra. Improved Price Oracles: Constant Function Market Makers. 2020.
- [AKC + 19] Guillermo Angeris, Hsien-Tang Kao, Rei Chiang, Charlie Noyes, Tarun Chitra. An analysis of Uniswap markets. arXiv:1911.03380 , 2019.
- [Cla20] Joseph Clark. The replicating portfolio of a constant product market. Available at SSRN 3550601 , 2020.
- [DGK + 19] Philip Daian, Steven Goldfeder, Tyler Kell, Yunqi Li, Xueyuan Zhao, Iddo Bentov, Lorenz Breidenbach, Ari Juels. Flash Boys 2.0: Frontrunning, Transaction Reordering, and Consensus Instability in Decentralized Exchanges. arXiv:1904.05234 , 2019.
- [Ego19] Michael Egorov. StableSwap - efficient mechanism for Stablecoin liquidity. 2019.
- [Ego21] Michael Egorov. Automatic market-making with dynamic peg. 2021.
- [KDC22] Kshitij Kulkarni, Theo Diamandis, Tarun Chitra. Towards a Theory of Maximal Extractable Value I: Constant Function Market Makers. arXiv:2207.11835 , 2022.
- [MMRZ22] Jason Milionis, Ciamac C. Moallemi, Tim Roughgarden, Anthony Lee Zhang. Automated Market Making and Loss-VersusRebalancing. arXiv:2208.060246 , 2022.

- [ZCP18] Yi Zhang, Xiaohong Chen, Daejun Park. Formal Specification of Constant Product ( x × y = k ) Market Maker Model and Implementation. 2018.