## Channel Normalization for Time Series Channel Identification

## Seunghan Lee 1 2 Taeyoung Park * 1 Kibok Lee * 1

## Abstract

Channel identifiability (CID) refers to the ability to distinguish between individual channels in time series (TS) modeling. The absence of CID often results in producing identical outputs for identical inputs, disregarding channel-specific characteristics. In this paper, we highlight the importance of CID and propose Channel Normalization (CN), a simple yet effective normalization strategy that enhances CID by assigning distinct affine transformation parameters to each channel . We further extend CN in two ways: 1) Adaptive CN (ACN) dynamically adjusts parameters based on the input TS, improving adaptability in TS models, and 2) Prototypical CN (PCN) introduces a set of learnable prototypes instead of per-channel parameters, enabling applicability to datasets with unknown or varying number of channels and facilitating use in TS foundation models. We demonstrate the effectiveness of CN and its variants by applying them to various TS models, achieving significant performance gains for both non-CID and CID models. In addition, we analyze the success of our approach from an information theory perspective. Code is available at https://github.com/seunghan96/CN .

## 1. Introduction

Time series (TS) forecasting is widely used in various fields, including traffic (Cirstea et al., 2022), electricity (Dudek et al., 2021), and sales forecasting (Li et al., 2022). A range of TS forecasting methods have been developed based on different architectures, such as Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) (Rumelhart et al., 1986), and state-space models (SSMs) (Gu &amp; Dao, 2023). Among them, some models are inherently able to distinguish between channels (i.e., channel-identifiable or

* Equal advising 1 Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yonsei University 2 KRAFTON; work done while at Yonsei University. Correspondence to: Taeyoung Park &lt; tpark@yonsei.ac.kr &gt; , Kibok Lee &lt; kibok@yonsei.ac.kr &gt; .

Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

Figure 1: Motivating example for channel identifiability. When two different channels receive the locally identical inputs (green), a non-CID model yields the same outputs (yellow) for both, failing to distinguish between them, as shown in the left panel. In contrast, applying CN enables CID and produces distinct outputs even with the same inputs, as shown in the right panel.

<!-- image -->

Table 1: Necessity of CID. Simply adding different constant vectors to each channel token improves the performance. Full results and comparison with our methods are shown in Appendix G.

| Average MSE (4  H  s)  ETTm1  Weather  PEMS03  Imp.  iTransformer  .408  .260  .142  -  + Constant vector  .397  .246  .114  6.5%   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

CID ), while others are not (i.e., channel-unidentifiable or non-CID ), producing identical outputs for the identical input regardless of the channel (Liu et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2023).

Figure 1 illustrates the TS forecasting results using iTransformer (Liu et al., 2024), a widely adopted non-CID model, on a toy dataset with two channels displaying distinct patterns. The figure shows that the model fails on this simple task, as non-CID models lack information about channel identities, producing identical outputs (yellow) for both channels whenever given identical inputs (green). Furthermore, Table 1 shows that adding distinct constant vectors to each channel token, enabling the model to distinguish between channels, improves the forecasting performance. These results highlight the importance of CID in TS models.

A naive approach to solving this issue is to use different parameters for each channel in the tokenization layer, although this increases computational burden (Nie et al., 2024), or to add learnable vectors to each channel token (i.e., channel identifiers) (Chi et al., 2024). These methods yield limited performance gains, as discussed in Section 5.3, motivating us to design a simple yet effective method to enhance CID.

To this end, we propose Channel Normalization (CN), a simple yet effective normalization strategy designed to enhance CID of TS models. Unlike Layer Normalization (LN) (Ba et al., 2016) which applies shared affine transformation parameters across all channels, CN employs distinct parameters for each channel , allowing models to differentiate be- tween channels effectively. Furthermore, we introduce two variants of CN: 1) Adaptive CN (ACN), which dynamically adjusts parameters based on the input TS to improve adaptability, and 2) Prototypical CN (PCN), which introduces a set of learnable prototypes as parameters after normalization to handle multiple datasets with unknown/varying number of channels using a single model, particularly useful for TS foundation models (TSFMs).

Figure 2: Effectiveness of CN/ACN. (a) shows that our method is effective across various backbones, where 1) non-CID models (e.g., RMLP, iTransformer) exhibit greater improvements from CN and 2) data-independent models (e.g., RMLP, TSMixer), whose parameters do not depend on the input, benefit more from transitioning from CN to ACN. (b) shows forecasting results with and without our methods.

<!-- image -->

The main contributions are summarized as follows:

- We propose CN to enhance CID of TS models by employing channel-specific parameters, unlike LN which uses shared parameters, offering a simple yet effective strategy.
- We propose two variants of CN: 1) ACN to better capture time-varying characteristics of each channel by adapting its parameters to input TS and 2) PCN to handle multiple datasets with unknown/varying number of channels by introducing learnable prototypes where parameters are assigned to prototypes instead of channels.
- We provide extensive experiments on various backbones including TSFMs, achieving significant improvements for both CID and non-CID models as shown in Figure 2(a).
- We analyze the effect of our method from an information theory perspective, showing that it 1) enriches feature representations, 2) improves the uniqueness of each channel representation, and 3) diversifies the correlation between channel representations, supporting the performance gain.

## 2. Related Works

TS forecasting models. TS forecasting in deep learning has been approached with two strategies: channel-dependent (CD) strategy, which captures dependencies between channels, and channel-independent (CI) strategy, which treats each channel individually and focuses only on the temporal dependency (TD). Methods using these strategies include Transformer-based, MLP-based, and SSM-based models.

For Transformer-based models, PatchTST (Nie et al., 2023) divides TS into patches and feeds them into a Transformer in a CI manner. iTransformer (Liu et al., 2024) treats each channel as a token to capture CD using the attention mechanism, resulting in significant performance gains. However, these models suffer from the quadratic complexity of the attention mechanism. To overcome this issue, various MLPbased models have been proposed, where DLinear (Zeng et al., 2023) uses a linear model to capture TD, RLinear and RMLP (Li et al., 2023) integrate reversible normalization (RevIN) (Kim et al., 2021) to MLPs, and TSMixer (Chen et al., 2023) adopts MLPs to capture both TD and CD. Recently, various methods (Ahamed &amp; Cheng, 2024; Ma et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024; Cai et al., 2024) have been proposed that utilize Mamba (Gu &amp; Dao, 2023), which introduces a selective scan mechanism to SSM to capture long-range context with linear complexity. S-Mamba (Wang et al., 2025) and Bi-Mamba+ (Liang et al., 2024) capture CD with bidirectional Mamba, and SOR-Mamba (Lee et al., 2024) employs a regularization strategy to effectively capture CD.

Recently, several methods have emerged that enhance CID of TS models. InjectTST (Chi et al., 2024) proposes a channel identifier that helps a Transformer differentiate between channels and C-LoRA (Nie et al., 2024) conditions a CD model on channel-specific components using a channel-aware low-rank adaptation method. Similarly, CCM(Chen et al., 2024a) integrates channel-cluster identity to a TS model by grouping channels based on their similarities. However, these methods, aside from the channel identifier, were not primarily developed to enhance CID, and their impact on CID is merely a byproduct. Furthermore, they either require modifications to the architecture (Chen et al., 2024a; Nie et al., 2024) or provide only limited performance gains (Chi et al., 2024; Nie et al., 2024), as shown in Table 6.

Normalization. Various normalization methods for deep neural networks have been introduced (Ioffe, 2015; Wu &amp; He, 2018) to improve convergence and training stability, differing in the dimension they normalize. Layer Normalization (LN) (Ba et al., 2016), which uses shared affine transformation parameters across channels, is commonly employed in TS backbones (Nie et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2025) to reduce inter-channel discrepancies (Liu et al., 2024). In contrast to LN, we propose assigning channel-specific parameters to distinguish between channels.

## 3. Preliminaries

TS forecasting (TSF). In TSF tasks, a model predicts the future values y = ( x L +1 , . . . , x L + H ) with a lookback window (i.e., input TS) x = ( x 1 , . . . , x L ) . In this setup, each x i ∈ R C represents values at individual time steps, with L , H , and C indicating the size of the lookback window, the forecast horizon, and the number of channels, respectively.

Figure 3: Overall framework of CN/ACN/PCN. (1) CN employs channel-specific parameters, enabling the model to distinguish between channels. (2) ACN extends CN by adapting its parameters to the input TS by utilizing local parameters , which are attended to with different weights based on the similarity between input channels (i.e., channel similarity ). (3) PCN makes CN applicable to multiple datasets with unknown/varying number of channels by assigning parameters to each prototype instead of each channel, which are attended to with different weights depending on the similarity between input channels and prototypes (i.e., channel-prototype similarity ).

<!-- image -->

## Framework of TSF models is organized as below:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where z is a D -dimensional vector and various normalization methods apply within f for training stability (e.g., LN). Similarly, our method applies within f , remaining orthogonal to techniques that normalize the input ( x ) and denormalize the output ( ˆ y ) to address distribution shifts (Passalis et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2021).

̸

Model property 1: Channel identifiability. A TSF model is said to exhibit CID if it can distinguish between channels based on their identity, even with identical inputs. Formally, let X = { x 1 , . . . , x C } ∈ R L × C be an input TS with C channels of length L . For any pair of channels i = j with identical inputs x i = x j , a non-CID model ϕ always produces identical outputs: ϕ ( X ) i = ϕ ( X ) j . In contrast, a CID model can produce distinct outputs: ϕ ( X ) i = ϕ ( X ) j .

̸

Model property 2: Data dependency. A TSF model ϕ is data dependent (Chen et al., 2023) if its parameters adapt to the input TS (e.g., attention in Transformers or selective scanning in Mamba). In contrast, ϕ is data independent if its parameters are fixed across the input TS (e.g., linear models). Data-dependent models exhibit high representational capacity, whereas data-independent models are simpler and less prone to overfitting (Chen et al., 2023).

## 4. Methodology

In this section, we introduce CN 1 which employs channelspecific parameters, unlike LN which employs shared parameters, to enhance CID of TS models. Furthermore, we propose two variants: ACN, which adjusts the parameters based on the input TS, and PCN, which handles multiple datasets with unknown or varying number of channels. The overall framework is shown in Figure 3.

1 CN can serve as both a strategy (framework) and a method.

## 4.1. Channel Normalization (CN)

Layer Normalization (LN). LN applies affine transformations with parameters { α, β } to the normalized data as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Various TS methods apply LN by using shared parameters { α, β } across channels to reduce discrepancies among the channels (Liu et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025).

Channel Normalization (CN). Unlike LN, which uses shared affine transformation parameters across channels, CN employs channel-specific parameters as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α c and β c denotes the parameters of the c -th channel. This simple modification enables the model to distinguish between channels, with the additional computational burden of using channel-specific parameters being minor compared to the shared parameters of LN, as shown in Table 8.

Variants of CN. To further enhance the flexibility and applicability of CN, we propose two variants, ACN and PCN, addressing the following questions, respectively:

- Q1) As the parameters of CN are independent on input and unable to capture the dynamic characteristics of each input channel, how can we make them adapt to the input?
- Q2) As CN requires a predefined number of channels, how can we handle multiple datasets with unknown or varying number of channels (e.g., training TSFMs)?

## 4.2. Adaptive Channel Normalization (ACN)

The parameters of CN are fixed across time steps and independent of the input TS. However, the characteristics of each channel may vary over time due to distribution shifts (Han et al., 2023). To this end, we propose ACN by introducing local parameters ( α L c ) to CN, which are attended to with different weights depending on the input channels. To distinguish local parameters from the original parameters of CN, we refer to the original parameters as global parameters ( α G c ), as they are shared globally across the time steps.

## Algorithm 1 Channel Normalization (CN)

## Require:

```
1: Input z ∈ R B × C × D 2: Parameters α, β ∈ R C × D Ensure: Output ˆ z ∈ R B × C × D 3: for b = 1 , . . . , B do 4: for c = 1 , . . . , C do 5: for d = 1 , . . . , D do 6: ˆ z b,c,d = α c,d · Norm( z b,c,d ) + β c,d 7: end for 8: end for 9: end for
```

Channel similarity. To attend to local parameters adaptively based on the input, we construct a channel similarity matrix ˆ S ∈ R B × C × C , representing the similarity between the input channels, where B denotes a batch size. Specifically, we use cosine similarity, which is then normalized by softmax with temperature τ as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where b ∈ { 1 , . . . , B } and c 1 , c 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , C } . This matrix ˆ S serves as dynamic weights to obtain (dynamic) parameter ˆ α L b,c ∈ R D from the (static) parameter α L c ∈ R D as below 2 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˆ S b,c,i is the similarity between the c -th and the i -th channel of the b -th data, α L i is the (static) local parameter of the i -th channel, and ˆ α L b,c is the resulting (dynamic) local parameters of the c -th channel of the b -th data, representing the weighted average of α L i using ˆ S b,c,i as dynamic weights.

The parameters of ACN are constructed by element-wise multiplication of the global and dynamic local parameters ( α G c ◦ ˆ α L b,c ), which complement each other, as shown in Table 7. Further analyses regarding the robustness to the similarity metric, τ , and the space where the similarity is calculated are shown in Appendix H, J, and K, respectively.

## 4.3. Prototypical Channel Normalization (PCN)

Since CN assigns parameters to each channel , it is infeasible to handle datasets with an unknown C (e.g., inference on unseen datasets) or to train on multiple datasets with varying C s (e.g., learning parameters for all channels in all datasets). To address this issue, we propose PCN by introducing learnable prototypes, where learnable parameters are assigned to each prototype instead of each channel , enabling it to handle an arbitrary number of channels. This imposes a weaker form of CID by identifying channel clusters rather than individual channels, as done in CN and ACN. Similar

2 The same procedure is applied to β as to α .

## Algorithm 2 Adaptive Channel Normalization (ACN)

## Require:

```
1: Input z ∈ R B × C × D 2: Channel similarity matrix ˆ S ∈ R B × C × C 3: Global and local parameters α G , α L , β G , β L ∈ R C × D Ensure: Output ˆ z ∈ R B × C × D 4: for b = 1 , . . . , B do 5: for c = 1 , . . . , C do 6: for d = 1 , . . . , D do 7: α b,c,d = α G c,d · ( ∑ C i =1 ˆ S b,c,i · α L i,d ) 8: β b,c,d = β G c,d · ( ∑ C i =1 ˆ S b,c,i · β L i,d ) 9: ˆ z b,c,d = α b,c,d · Norm( z b,c,d ) + β b,c,d 10: end for 11: end for 12: end for
```

## Algorithm 3 Prototypical Channel Normalization (PCN)

## Require:

```
1: Input z ∈ R B × C × D 2: Channel-proto similarity matrix ˆ S α , ˆ S β ∈ R B × C × K 3: Prototype parameters α P , β P ∈ R K × D Ensure: Output ˆ z ∈ R B × C × D 4: for b = 1 , . . . , B do 5: for c = 1 , . . . , C do 6: for d = 1 , . . . , D do 7: α b,c,d = ∑ K i =1 ˆ S α b,c,i · α P i,d 8: β b,c,d = ∑ K i =1 ˆ S β b,c,i · β P i,d 9: ˆ z b,c,d = α b,c,d · Norm( z b,c,d ) + β b,c,d 10: end for 11: end for 12: end for
```

to ACN, these prototype parameters ( α P k ) are attended to with different weights depending on the input TS.

Channel-prototype similarity. To enable channels with an arbitrary number to utilize the prototype parameters, we construct a channel-prototype similarity matrix ˆ S α ∈ R B × C × K , representing the similarity between input channels and prototypes. Note that rather than employing a latent space ( z ) to represent channels, we apply an additional projection layer ( h ) in the data space ( x ) to align with the prototype space. Specifically, we use cosine similarity, which is then normalized by softmax with temperature τ as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where k ∈ { 1 , . . . , K } , K is the number of prototypes, and h is a linear projection layer. Similar to ACN, this matrix is used as dynamic weights to obtain ˆ α P b,c from α k as below:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further analyses of the robustness to K and the employment of h are demonstrated in Appendix I and K.2, respectively.

Table 2: Results of TS forecasting. We apply CN/ACN to non-CID and CID models, achieving performance gains across all models.

| Non-CID  models  iTransformer  + CN  + ACN  Imp. (MSE)  RMLP  + CN  + ACN  Imp. (MSE)  Datasets  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  + CN  + ACN  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  + CN  + ACN  ETTh1  .457  .449  .441  .439  .438  .438  3.5%  4.2%  .471  .453  .445  .437  .448  .435  5.5%  4.9%  ETTh2  .384  .407  .376  .404  .374  .402  2.1%  2.6%  .381  .408  .380  .405  .376  .402  0.3%  1.3%  ETTm1  .408  .412  .396  .403  .395  .402  2.9%  3.2%  .401  .406  .384  .397  .383  .396  4.2%  4.5%  ETTm2  .293  .337  .289  .331  .288  .330  1.4%  1.7%  .280  .326  .277  .324  .277  .323  1.1%  1.1%  PEMS03  .142  .248  .101  .204  .098  .203  31.0%  38.0%  .205  .294  .192  .284  .159  .266  6.3%  22.4%  PEMS04  .121  .232  .088  .196  .088  .195  27.3%  27.3%  .236  .321  .212  .304  .156  .265  10.2%  33.9%  PEMS07  .102  .205  .087  .178  .085  .174  14.7%  16.7%  .200  .284  .184  .270  .131  .233  8.0%  34.5%  PEMS08  .254  .306  .159  .223  .153  .221  37.4%  39.8%  .277  .333  .247  .308  .187  .279  10.8%  32.5%  Exchange  .368  .409  .352  .401  .349  .398  4.4%  5.2%  .356  .403  .355  .400  .353  .399  0.3%  0.8%  Weather  .260  .281  .247  .273  .245  .271  5.0%  5.8%  .272  .292  .249  .274  .246  .273  8.5%  9.6%  Solar  .234  .261  .228  .258  .220  .253  2.6%  6.0%  .261  .313  .248  .276  .242  .277  5.0%  7.3%  ECL  .179  .270  .161  .256  .158  .256  10.1%  11.7%  .228  .313  .190  .277  .189  .276  16.7%  17.1%  Average  .275  .318  .244  .297  .241  .295  11.3%  12.4%  .297  .346  .280  .330  .262  .319  5.7%  11.8%  Best count (/48)  0  0  9  9  46  46  ∆  Imp.:  1.1%p  0  0  4  7  44  46  ∆  Imp.:  6.1%p  CID  models  S-Mamba  + CN  + ACN  Imp. (MSE)  TSMixer  + CN  + ACN  Imp. (MSE)  ETTh1  .457  .452  .455  .450  .448  .446  0.4%  2.0%  .462  .449  .438  .435  .453  .441  5.2%  1.9%  ETTh2  .383  .408  .375  .401  .374  .400  2.1%  2.3%  .403  .418  .387  .410  .386  .407  4.0%  4.2%  ETTm1  .398  .407  .397  .406  .394  .404  0.3%  1.0%  .401  .406  .386  .398  .385  .397  3.7%  4.0%  ETTm2  .290  .333  .286  .329  .284  .328  1.4%  2.1%  .287  .330  .286  .329  .280  .325  0.3%  2.4%  PEMS03  .133  .240  .108  .214  .107  .213  18.8%  19.5%  .129  .236  .124  .228  .120  .230  3.9%  7.0%  PEMS04  .096  .205  .085  .189  .095  .202  11.5%  1.0%  .115  .228  .114  .222  .109  .222  0.9%  5.2%  PEMS07  .090  .191  .078  .168  .073  .167  13.3%  18.9%  .115  .210  .115  .209  .103  .203  0.0%  10.4%  PEMS08  .157  .242  .133  .216  .121  .216  15.3%  22.9%  .186  .275  .167  .250  .167  .258  10.2%  10.2%  Exchange  .364  .407  .362  .405  .357  .402  0.5%  1.9%  .365  .406  .358  .402  .356  .400  1.9%  2.5%  Weather  .252  .277  .246  .273  .247  .274  2.4%  2.0%  .260  .285  .246  .274  .242  .272  5.4%  6.9%  Solar  .244  .275  .230  .262  .228  .261  5.7%  6.6%  .255  .294  .246  .267  .245  .274  3.5%  3.9%  ECL  .174  .269  .163  .261  .162  .259  6.3%  6.9%  .211  .310  .181  .280  .174  .273  14.2%  17.8%  Average  .253  .309  .243  .298  .240  .297  4.0%  5.1%  .266  .321  .254  .309  .243  .308  4.5%  8.6%  Best count (/48)  1  0  15  25  38  31  ∆  Imp.:  1.1%p  0  0  10  16  40  36  ∆  Imp.:  4.1%p   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 5. Experiments

Experimental setups. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on TSF tasks with 12 datasets. For evaluation metrics, we use mean squared error (MSE) and mean absolute error (MAE). We follow the experimental setups from C-LoRA (Nie et al., 2024), with size of the lookback window ( L ) set to 96, and divide all datasets into training, validation, and test sets in chronological order. Further details of the setups are provided in Appendix A.

Datasets. For the experiments, we use 12 datasets: four ETT datasets (ETTh1, ETTh2, ETTm1, ETTm2) (Zhou et al., 2021), four PEMS datasets (PEMS03, PEMS04, PEMS07, PEMS08) (Chen et al., 2001), Exchange, Weather, ECL (Wu et al., 2021), and Solar-Energy (Solar) (Lai et al., 2018). Details of the dataset statistics are provided in Appendix A.1.

Backbones. For the experiments, we select four backbones: iTransformer (Liu et al., 2024), RMLP (Li et al., 2023), SMamba (Wang et al., 2025), and TSMixer (Li et al., 2023). For backbones that utilize LN, we replace it with our method, and for those without, we add our method. As illustrated in Figure 2(a), these methods can be categorized based on their a) inherent CID ability and b) data dependency of model parameters. Furthermore, for PCN, we employ UniTS (Gao et al., 2024), a TSFM that addresses diverse tasks using prompt-tuning, to demonstrate its capability to handle multiple datasets with varying C s and perform inference on unseen datasets with unknown C s. The baseline results are obtained from previous works (Nie et al., 2024; Lee et al.,

2024) and replicated using the official codes.

## 5.1. Application of CN/ACN

TS forecasting. Table 2 presents the average performance across four horizons ( H ∈ { 96 , 192 , 336 , 720 } ), demonstrating that both CN and ACN consistently improve across all datasets and backbones, with ACN yielding additional gains compared to CN. Below, we analyze the performance gain from CN and the additional gain from ACN in relation to the two properties of the backbones.

a) CID vs. non-CID. As CN enhances the CID of models, it provides substantial improvements for non-CID models (e.g., iTransformer, RMLP), as shown in Figure 2(a). However, it also benefits CID models (e.g., S-Mamba, TSMixer) that already have the ability to distinguish between channels, although the improvements are relatively smaller. This is further validated by the results in Table 2, where non-CID models exhibit greater performance gains than CID models.

b) Data dependent vs. Data independent. As ACN improves upon CN by adapting to the input TS, transitioning from CN to ACN provides substantial improvements for data-independent models (e.g., RMLP, TSMixer), as shown in Figure 2(a). However, it also benefits data-dependent models (e.g., iTransformer, S-Mamba) whose parameters already adapt to the input TS, although the improvements are relatively smaller. This is further validated by the results in Table 2, where data-independent models exhibit greater additional performance gains from CN to ACN.

| (  N  : # datasets,  C  i  : # channels of  i  -th dataset)  # Parameters  Zero-shot  CN  2  ∑  N  i  =1  C  i  ·  D  ✗  ACN  4  ∑  N  i  =1  C  i  ·  D  PCN  2  K  ·  D  ✓  Metric (Best #)  UniTS  + PCN  Imp.  20 FCST  (MSE  ↓  )  Sup.  .469 (4)  .433  (16)  7.7%  Pmt.  .478 (3)  .453  (20)  5.2%  18 CLS  (Acc.  ↑  )  Sup.  80.6 (2)  83.0  (16)  3.0%  Pmt.  75.1 (3)  79.5  (16)  5.5%  12 Datasets  MSE  Imp.  iTransformer  .275  -  + CN  .244  11.3%  + ACN  .241  12.4%  + PCN  .252  8.4%   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 3: PCN for TSFMs.

## Table 4: PCN to TSFMs.

Table 5: PCN to single-task models.

Table 6: Comparison with other methods. We compare ACN with 1) baseline methods , which employ channel-specific parameters for token embedding ( C-token ) or projection layers ( C-project ), and 2) previous methods , including channel identifier and C-LoRA .

| Average MSE across 4 horizons  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  Avg.  Imp.  Non-CID  iTransformer  -  .457  .384  .408  .293  .142  .121  .102  .254  .368  .260  .234  .179  .275  -  + C-token  .450  .389  .400  .290  .123  .109  .106  .157  .376  .246  .255  .169  .256  6.9%  + C-project  .452  .381  .399  .286  .119  .109  .097  .163  .366  .244  .230  .163  .251  8.7%  + Channel identifier  .445  .382  .397  .293  .100  .093  .082  .168  .365  .248  .231  .165  .248  9.8%  + C-LoRA  .450  .392  .398  .289  .114  .113  .106  .169  .364  .248  .241  .167  .254  7.6%  + ACN (Ours)  .438  .374  .395  .288  .098  .088  .085  .153  .349  .245  .220  .158  .241  12.4%  RMLP  -  .471  .381  .401  .280  .205  .236  .200  .277  .356  .272  .261  .228  .297  -  + C-token  .455  .391  .385  .277  .220  .218  .196  .286  .368  .246  .267  .205  .293  1.4%  + C-project  .455  .389  .384  .277  .186  .190  .172  .233  .366  .245  .249  .195  .278  6.3%  + Channel identifier  .452  .380  .393  .279  .191  .209  .185  .262  .356  .250  .254  .199  .284  4.4%  + C-LoRA  .451  .379  .383  .279  .192  .198  .182  .264  .359  .245  .256  .190  .282  5.1%  + ACN (Ours)  .448  .376  .383  .277  .159  .156  .131  .187  .353  .246  .242  .189  .262  11.8%  CID  S-Mamba  -  .457  .383  .398  .290  .133  .096  .090  .157  .364  .252  .244  .174  .253  -  + C-token  .463  .383  .400  .285  .117  .087  .097  .134  .376  .245  .244  .171  .250  1.2%  + C-project  .466  .400  .405  .294  .122  .089  .099  .151  .391  .249  .266  .176  .259  -2.4%  + Channel identifier  .457  .406  .399  .287  .112  .086  .078  .137  .360  .248  .239  .167  .248  2.0%  + C-LoRA  .457  .405  .399  .289  .112  .084  .092  .144  .359  .247  .238  .169  .250  1.2%  + ACN (Ours)  .448  .374  .394  .284  .107  .095  .073  .121  .357  .247  .228  .162  .240  5.1%  TSMixer  -  .462  .403  .401  .287  .129  .115  .115  .186  .365  .260  .255  .211  .266  -  + C-token  .456  .417  .402  .327  .230  .221  .154  .258  .413  .271  .279  .291  .310  -16.5%  + C-project  .457  .412  .401  .324  .232  .222  .154  .268  .407  .271  .275  .281  .309  -16.2%  + Channel identifier  .454  .390  .394  .284  .124  .114  .106  .185  .355  .245  .251  .186  .257  2.3%  + C-LoRA  .460  .407  .399  .283  .122  .110  .103  .181  .366  .245  .251  .187  .260  3.4%  + ACN (Ours)  .453  .386  .385  .280  .120  .109  .103  .167  .356  .242  .245  .174  .243  8.6%   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 5.2. Application of PCN

Application to TSFMs. As shown in Table 3, applying CN and ACN to TSFM is infeasible due to 1) the substantial increase in parameters, as it requires parameters for all channels across all datasets and 2) their inability to handle unseen datasets during training, as the number of channels may differ between training and inference datasets. In contrast, PCN addresses these limitations by employing prototypes. Table 4 presents the application of PCN to UniTS, showing the average results for 20 forecasting and 18 classification tasks under supervised (Sup.) and prompt-tuning (Pmt.) settings, with consistent improvements observed across all tasks. Full results of Table 4 and improvements on zero-shot forecasting tasks are provided in Appendix N and L.

Application to single-task 3 models. Although PCN is designed for TSFMs, it also improves the performance of single-task models trained on a single dataset, even when the number of channels is unknown. As shown in Table 5, applying PCN with K = 5 to iTransformer improves performance by 8.4% on average across 12 datasets and 4 horizons, though the improvement is smaller than that achieved by CN and ACN. We attribute this to the fact that, unlike CN and ACN which assign each channel a distinct parameter, PCN assigns each prototype (channel cluster) a distinct parameter, resulting in a weaker enforcement of CID.

3 A single-task model is trained on a single dataset.

## 5.3. Comparison with Other Methods

To demonstrate the effectiveness of ACN, we compare it with two categories of methods: 1) baseline methods , which use a naive strategy of employing channel-specific parameters for token embedding ( C-token ) or projection layers ( C-project ), and 2) previous methods , including channel identifier (Chi et al., 2024), a learnable vector added to channel tokens and C-LoRA (Nie et al., 2024), which applies a channel-aware LoRA to TS models. Table 6 demonstrates that our method outperforms these approaches across all backbones, while two baseline methods (C-token and C-project) even degrade the performance of CID models.

## 6. Analysis

In this section, we conduct (1) ablation studies on ACN, (2) entropy analyses to explain the proposed method from an information theory perspective, and (3) other analyses including both qualitative and quantitative evaluations.

## 6.1. Ablation Study

To demonstrate the effectiveness of ACN, we conduct an ablation study of using the global and local parameters with iTransformer. Table 7 presents the results, indicating that using all components yields the best performance.

| ACN  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  Imp.  Adaptive  CN  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  .457  .384  .408  .293  .142  .121  .102  .254  .368  .260  .234  .179  .275  -  ✓  .439  .375  .395  .289  .108  .110  .099  .174  .347  .247  .226  .162  .247  10.2%  ✓  .441  .376  .396  .289  .101  .088  .087  .159  .352  .247  .228  .161  .244  11.3%  ✓  ✓  .438  .374  .395  .288  .098  .088  .085  .153  .349  .245  .220  .158  .241  12.4%   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 7: Ablation study. None: { α d } vs. Adaptive (local parameters): { ˆ α L b,c,d } vs. CN (global parameters): { α G c,d } vs. ACN: { α G c,d · ˆ α L b,c,d } .

<!-- image -->

- (a) Entropy gain vs. Number of channels ( C ).

(b) Entropy gain vs. MSE.

Figure 4: Channel entropy gain by CN. (a) Datasets with higher C show a higher entropy gain . (b) Datasets with higher entropy gain show a higher performance gain (average MSE across four horizons).

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: Entropy gain by CN. Non-CID models show greater channel/feature entropy gains from CN than CID models.

## 6.2. Entropy Analysis

We demonstrate the effect of our method through entropy analyses with four different backbones, showing that it 1) enriches feature representations ( feature entropy ↑ ), 2) increases the uniqueness of each channel representation ( channel entropy ↑ ), and 3) diversifies the attention heads and correlation between channel representations.

Gaussian entropy. Let Z ∈ R D be a random vector following a multivariate Gaussian distribution with a covariance matrix Σ ∈ R D × D . Then, the Gaussian entropy of Z is defined as H ( Z ) = 1 2 log ( (2 πe ) D det( Σ ) ) , which can be estimated by N samples z = [ z 1 , z 2 , . . . , z N ] ⊤ ∈ R N × D as H ( z ) = 1 2 log ( (2 πe ) D det ( 1 N z ⊤ z + ε I )) , with ε I added to avoid non-trivial solutions, following the previous works (Yu et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2024b; 2025).

For the analysis, we compute the average over a test dataset with ¯ z ∈ R C × D and use the normalized entropy averaged over the last dimension for comparison across different dimensions. Then, we define the entropy of ¯ z and ¯ z ⊤ as the feature entropy and channel entropy respectively, as they measure 1) the richness of the feature dimension and 2) uniqueness of each channel representation.

Entropy gain of non-CID vs. CID models. Figure 5 illustrates the gains in channel and feature entropies achieved by KL-divergence btw 8 attention heads (8x8)

<!-- image -->

Figure 6: Diversity of attention heads.

Figure 7: Diversity of correlations btw channel representations.

<!-- image -->

CN for both non-CID and CID models. The figure shows that non-CID models exhibit higher gains compared to CID models, indicating richer feature representations and greater uniqueness in channel representations. This supports our argument that the proposed method benefits non-CID models more than CID models, which aligns with the greater performance gain of non-CID models, as shown in Figure 2(a).

Entropy gain by datasets. To evaluate the effectiveness of CN across datasets, we analyze the channel entropy gain achieved by CN using iTransformer with respect to (1) the number of channels and (2) the performance gain for each dataset. Figure 4(a) illustrates the relationship between the entropy gain and C , showing that datasets with higher C achieve greater entropy gain. Figure 4(b) presents the relationship between the entropy gain and MSE improvement, with a correlation ( ρ ) of 0.724, indicating that datasets with higher entropy gain show greater performance improvement.

Diverse attention heads &amp; correlations btw channels. Figure 6 illustrates the KL divergence (KLD) between the distributions of eight attention heads of iTransformer on PEMS03 (Chen et al., 2001), showing that our method enables the model to maintain greater diversity across the heads. Specifically, the average KLD between the heads of the first and last encoder layers is 0.289 and 0.077 for LN, compared to 0.369 and 0.395 for CN. Additionally, Figure 7(a) presents the correlation matrices of channel representations of PEMS03 using iTransformer with and without CN, along with the distribution of matrix elements in Figure 7(b), demonstrating that CN enhances the diversity of the correlations. This increase in diversity in both aspects supports the performance improvements achieved by our method, with the average MSE across four horizons being 0.142, 0.101, and 0.098 for LN, CN, and ACN.

Figure 8: Visualization of parameters and channels. (a) shows the t-SNE of the parameters of CN, with four clusters formed. (b) visualizes three channels from each cluster, demonstrating that channels in the same cluster share similar patterns except for those in the 4 th cluster. (c) visualizes the correlation matrix of the channels, where channels in the 4 th cluster lack close relationships with others.

<!-- image -->

Table 8: Efficiency analysis.

| L  = 96  , H  = 12  iTrans.  + Ch. identifier  + C-LoRA  Ours  + CN  + ACN  Train (sec/epoch)  7.7  9.4  11.1  7.8  10.8  Inference (ms)  2.0  2.3  2.8  2.1  2.5  # Parameters  3.2M  + 0.1M  +2.8M  + 0.7M  +1.4M  Avg. MSE  .254  .168  .169  .159  .153   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 6.3. Other Analyses

Visualization of CN params. To demonstrate that the parameters of CN effectively capture the CID, we visualize the parameters ( α ) of 21 channels in Weather (Wu et al., 2021) using t-SNE (Van der Maaten &amp; Hinton, 2008). Figure 8 shows the result, displaying (a) four distinct clusters and (b) the visualization of channels corresponding to each cluster. The figure indicates that channels with similar patterns belong to the same cluster, except for the fourth cluster (blue), whose channels show no close relationship with other channels, as also shown by the (c) correlation matrix.

Efficiency analysis. Table 8 shows 1) the number of parameters, 2) training time (per epoch), and 3) inference time (per data instance) of iTransformer on PEMS08 (Chen et al., 2001) across various methods for CID. The results indicate that our methods introduce minimal overhead in terms of the number of parameters and computation time, while achieving greater performance gains compared to other methods.

Performance under varying L s. To validate the effectiveness of our method under various sizes of lookback windows ( L ), we evaluate our method on iTransformer with a forecast horizon of H = 12 for the PEMS datasets and H = 96 for the other datasets. Figure 9 indicates that the performance gains remain robust across all datasets regardless of L .

Various K s for PCN. Figure 10 shows the t-SNE visualizations of prototype parameters ( α P ) of PCN across varying

<!-- image -->

Figure 9: Effectiveness of CN/ACN under various L .

<!-- image -->

*Sum of squared distances to cluster centers

*Avg.MSE of 20 FCST tasks (Baseline: 0.478)

Figure 10: t-SNE &amp; distortion plot of PCN parameters.

numbers of prototypes ( K ), using UniTS as the backbone. The distortion plots, shown below, are obtained by performing K-means clustering on these parameters to assess the redundancy of the prototypes. The figures indicate that increasing K leads to performance stabilization after a certain point ( K = 20 ), as redundant prototypes begin to emerge.

For further analyses, please refer to the below sections:

- Theoretical entropy analysis: Appendix C
- Comparison with Instance Normalization: Appendix F
- Robustness to K , τ , similarity space: Appendix I, J, K
- PCN for zero-shot forecasting with TSFM: Appendix L
- Application of multiple methods for CID: Appendix E
- Visualization of TS forecasting results: Appendix O

## 7. Conclusion

In this work, we introduce CN, a normalization strategy to enhance CID of TS models with channel-specific parameters. Furthermore, we propose ACN to adapt to input TS on single-task models, and PCN to handle multiple datasets with unknown/varying number of channels on TSFMs. A potential direction for future work involves developing a method to automatically determine the number of prototypes for PCN based on the dataset. We hope that our work highlights the importance of CID in TS analysis.

## Impact Statement

This paper aims to advance time series modeling by emphasizing the importance of channel identification and proposing Channel Normalization to enhance it. We do not identify any specific societal consequences that require emphasis.

## Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (2020R1A2C1A01005949, 2022R1A4A1033384, RS-2023-00217705, RS-202400341749), the MSIT(Ministry of Science and ICT), Korea, under the ICAN(ICT Challenge and Advanced Network of HRD) support program (RS-2023-00259934) supervised by the IITP(Institute for Information &amp; Communications Technology Planning &amp; Evaluation), Yonsei University Research Fund (2024-22-0148), and a grant from KRAFTON AI.

## References

- Ahamed, M. A. and Cheng, Q. Timemachine: A time series is worth 4 mambas for long-term forecasting. In ECAI , 2024.
- Ba, J., Kiros, J. R., and Hinton, G. E. Layer normalization. ArXiv e-prints , pp. arXiv-1607, 2016.
- Cai, X., Zhu, Y., Wang, X., and Yao, Y. Mambats: Improved selective state space models for long-term time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16440 , 2024.
- Carson, W. R., Chen, M., Rodrigues, M. R., Calderbank, R., and Carin, L. Communications-inspired projection design with application to compressive sensing. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences , 5(4):1185-1212, 2012.
- Chen, C., Petty, K., Skabardonis, A., Varaiya, P., and Jia, Z. Freeway performance measurement system: mining loop detector data. Transportation research record , 1748(1): 96-102, 2001.
- Chen, J., Lenssen, J. E., Feng, A., Hu, W., Fey, M., Tassiulas, L., Leskovec, J., and Ying, R. From similarity to superiority: Channel clustering for time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01340 , 2024a.
- Chen, S.-A., Li, C.-L., Yoder, N., Arik, S. O., and Pfister, T. Tsmixer: An all-mlp architecture for time series forecasting. TMLR , 2023.
- Chen, X., Li, H., Amin, R., and Razi, A. Learning on bandwidth constrained multi-source data with mimo-inspired dpp map inference. IEEE Transactions on Machine Learning in Communications and Networking , 2024b.
- Chen, X., Qiu, P., Zhu, W., Li, H., Wang, H., Sotiras, A., Wang, Y., and Razi, A. Sequence complementor: Complementing transformers for time series forecasting with learnable sequences. In AAAI , 2025.
- Chi, C., Wang, X., Yang, K., Song, Z., Jin, D., Zhu, L., Deng, C., and Feng, J. Injecttst: A transformer method of injecting global information into independent channels for long time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02814 , 2024.
- Cirstea, R.-G., Yang, B., Guo, C., Kieu, T., and Pan, S. Towards spatio-temporal aware traffic time series forecasting. In 2022 IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) , pp. 2900-2913. IEEE, 2022.
- Dudek, G., Pełka, P., and Smyl, S. A hybrid residual dilated lstm and exponential smoothing model for midterm electric load forecasting. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 33(7):2879-2891, 2021.
- Gao, S., Koker, T., Queen, O., Hartvigsen, T., Tsiligkaridis, T., and Zitnik, M. Units: Building a unified time series model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.00131 , 2024.
- Gu, A. and Dao, T. Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00752 , 2023.
- Han, L., Ye, H.-J., and Zhan, D.-C. The capacity and robustness trade-off: Revisiting the channel independent strategy for multivariate time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05206 , 2023.
- Hyndman, R., Koehler, A. B., Ord, J. K., and Snyder, R. D. Forecasting with exponential smoothing: the state space approach . Springer Science &amp; Business Media, 2008.
- Ioffe, S. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift. In ICML , 2015.
- Kim, T., Kim, J., Tae, Y., Park, C., Choi, J.-H., and Choo, J. Reversible instance normalization for accurate time-series forecasting against distribution shift. In ICLR , 2021.
- Lai, G., Chang, W.-C., Yang, Y., and Liu, H. Modeling long-and short-term temporal patterns with deep neural networks. In The 41st international ACM SIGIR conference on research &amp; development in information retrieval , pp. 95-104, 2018.
- Lee, Seunghan Hong, J., Park, T., and Lee, K. Sequential order-robust mamba for time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.23356 , 2024.
- Li, C., Jiang, W., Yang, Y., Pan, S., Huang, G., and Guo, L. Predicting best-selling new products in a major promotion

- campaign through graph convolutional networks. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 34(11):9102-9115, 2022.
- Li, Z., Qi, S., Li, Y ., and Xu, Z. Revisiting long-term time series forecasting: An investigation on linear mapping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10721 , 2023.
- Liang, A., Jiang, X., Sun, Y., and Lu, C. Bi-mamba+: Bidirectional mamba for time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15772 , 2024.
- Liu, M., Zeng, A., Chen, M., Xu, Z., Lai, Q., Ma, L., and Xu, Q. Scinet: Time series modeling and forecasting with sample convolution and interaction. In NeurIPS , 2022.
- Liu, Y., Hu, T., Zhang, H., Wu, H., Wang, S., Ma, L., and Long, M. itransformer: Inverted transformers are effective for time series forecasting. In ICLR , 2024.
- Ma, S., Kang, Y., Bai, P., and Zhao, Y.-B. Fmamba: Mamba based on fast-attention for multivariate time-series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14814 , 2024.
- McLeod, A. and Gweon, H. Optimal deseasonalization for monthly and daily geophysical time series. Journal of Environmental statistics , 4(11):1-11, 2013.
- Nie, T., Mei, Y ., Qin, G., Sun, J., and Ma, W. Channel-aware low-rank adaptation in time series forecasting. In CIKM , pp. 3959-3963, 2024.
- Nie, Y., Nguyen, N. H., Sinthong, P., and Kalagnanam, J. A time series is worth 64 words: Long-term forecasting with transformers. In ICLR , 2023.
- NREL. Solar power data for integration studies. https://www.nrel.gov/grid/ solar-power-data.html , 2006.
- Passalis, N., Tefas, A., Kanniainen, J., Gabbouj, M., and Iosifidis, A. Deep adaptive input normalization for time series forecasting. TNNLS , 31(9):3760-3765, 2019.
- Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., Lerer, A., Bradbury, J., Chanan, G., Killeen, T., Lin, Z., Gimelshein, N., Antiga, L., Desmaison, A., Kopf, A., Yang, E., DeVito, Z., Raison, M., Tejani, A., Chilamkurthy, S., Steiner, B., Fang, L., Bai, J., and Chintala, S. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 , pp. 80248035. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
- Prasad, S. Certain relations between mutual information and fidelity of statistical estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1010.1508 , 2010.
- Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J. Learning representations by back-propagating errors. nature , 323(6088):533-536, 1986.
- Thomas, M. and Joy, A. T. Elements of information theory . Wiley-Interscience, 2006.
- Ulyanov, D. Instance normalization: The missing ingredient for fast stylization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.08022 , 2016.
- Van der Maaten, L. and Hinton, G. Visualizing data using t-sne. JMLR , 9(11), 2008.
- Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. In NeurIPS , 2017.
- Wang, Z., Kong, F., Feng, S., Wang, M., Yang, X., Zhao, H., Wang, D., and Zhang, Y. Is mamba effective for time series forecasting? Neurocomputing , 619:129178, 2025.
- Wu, H., Xu, J., Wang, J., and Long, M. Autoformer: Decomposition transformers with auto-correlation for long-term series forecasting. In NeurIPS , 2021.
- Wu, Y. and He, K. Group normalization. In ECCV , pp. 3-19, 2018.
- Yu, Y., Chan, K. H. R., You, C., Song, C., and Ma, Y. Learning diverse and discriminative representations via the principle of maximal coding rate reduction. In NeurIPS , 2020.
- Zeng, A., Chen, M., Zhang, L., and Xu, Q. Are transformers effective for time series forecasting? In AAAI , 2023.
- Zeng, C., Liu, Z., Zheng, G., and Kong, L. C-mamba: Channel correlation enhanced state space models for multivariate time series forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.05316 , 2024.
- Zhou, H., Zhang, S., Peng, J., Zhang, S., Li, J., Xiong, H., and Zhang, W. Informer: Beyond efficient transformer for long sequence time-series forecasting. In AAAI , 2021.

## Channel Normalization for Time Series Channel Identification

| ## Appendix  A  Experimental Settings  12  A.1  Dataset Statistics  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12  A.2  Experimental Setups  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12  B  Properties of TS Backbones  13  B.1  Channel Identifiability  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13  B.2  Data Dependency  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13  C  Theoretical Entropy Analysis  14  D  Various Backbones  15  E  Application of Multiple Methods for CID  16  F  Comparison with Instance Normalization  16  G Comparison with Constant Vectors  16  H Robustness to Similarity Metric  17  I  Robustness to Number of Prototypes  K  17  J  Robustness to Temperature  τ  18  K Robustness to Similarity Space for ACN &amp; PCN  19  K.1  Similarity Space for ACN .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  19  K.2  Similarity Space for PCN  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  20  L  Application of PCN to Zero-shot Forecasting with TSFMs  21  M Full Results: Application of CN &amp; ACN  22  N  Full Results: Application of PCN  24  N.1  Application of PCN to non-TSFMs .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  24  N.2  Application of PCN to TSFMs  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  24  O Visualization of Forecasting Results  26  O.1  Visualization of TSF with iTransformer  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  26  O.2  Visualization of TSF with RMLP .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  28  O.3  Visualization of TSF with TSMixer .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  30  O.4  Visualization of TSF with S-Mamba  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  32   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## A. Experimental Settings

## A.1. Dataset Statistics

Dataset statistics. For the experiments, 12 datasets from various domains are used, with their statistics detailed in Table A.1, where C and T represent the number of channels and timesteps, respectively.

Dataset split. We follow the same data processing steps and train-validation-test split protocol as used in S-Mamba (Wang et al., 2025), maintaining a chronological order in the separation of training, validation, and test sets, using a 6:2:2 ratio for the Solar-Energy, ETT, and PEMS datasets, and a 7:1:2 ratio for the other datasets. Hyperparameters are tuned based on the validation loss.

Size of lookback window ( L ). Following the previous works (Nie et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024), L is uniformly set to 96 for all datasets and models. Further analysis regarding the performance under different L is discussed in Figure 9.

Table A.1: Datasets for TS forecasting.

| Dataset  Statistics  Dataset Split  Size of Input &amp; Output  C  T  (  N  train  , N  val  , N  test  )  L  H  ETTh1 (Zhou et al., 2021)  7  17420  (8545, 2881, 2881)  96  {  96, 192, 336, 720  }  ETTh2 (Zhou et al., 2021)  17420  (8545, 2881, 2881)  ETTm1 (Zhou et al., 2021)  69680  (34465, 11521, 11521)  ETTm2 (Zhou et al., 2021)  69680  (34465, 11521, 11521)  Exchange (Wu et al., 2021)  8  7588  (5120, 665, 1422)  Weather (Wu et al., 2021)  21  52696  (36792, 5271, 10540)  ECL (Wu et al., 2021)  321  26304  (18317, 2633, 5261)  Solar-Energy (Lai et al., 2018)  137  52560  (36601, 5161, 10417)  PEMS03 (Liu et al., 2022)  358  26209  (15617, 5135, 5135)  {  12, 24, 48, 96  }  PEMS04 (Liu et al., 2022)  307  15992  (10172, 3375, 3375)  PEMS07 (Liu et al., 2022)  883  28224  (16911, 5622, 5622)  PEMS08 (Liu et al., 2022)  170  17856  (10690, 3548, 3548)   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## A.2. Experimental Setups

Application of CN/ACN. For all experiments regarding TS forecasting with four different backbones, we use the official code from C-LoRA (Nie et al., 2024), except for S-Mamba (Wang et al., 2025), as C-LoRA does not use S-Mamba as a backbone.

Application of PCN. For all experiments involving TSFM, UniTS (Gao et al., 2024) is trained across multiple tasks using a unified protocol. To accommodate the largest dataset, samples from each dataset are repeated within each epoch. The training protocol, as outlined in the original paper, is as follows:

- Supervised training: Models are trained for 5 epochs with gradient accumulation, yielding an effective batch size of 1024. The initial learning rate is set to 3.2e-2 and adjusted using a multi-step decay schedule.
- Self-supervised pretraining: Models are trained for 10 epochs with an effective batch size of 4096, starting with a learning rate of 6.4e-3 and utilizing a cosine decay schedule.

The embedding dimension is set to 64 for the supervised version and 32 for the prompt-tuning version. Note that we encountered a convergence issue in the prompt-tuning setting, which was also reported by others in a GitHub issue. To resolve this, we set the hidden dimension to 32, which led to a performance decrease compared to the results in the original paper. For a fair comparison, this setting is applied uniformly to both UniTS and its application to PCN.

Parameter initialization. The initialization of the parameters for Channel Normalization (CN), Adaptive Channel Normalization (ACN), and Prototypical Channel Normalization (PCN) is designed to ensure that no normalization occurs when learning has not yet taken place:

- The scale parameter ( α ) is initialized to 1.
- The shift parameter ( β ) is initialized to 0.

This choice is consistent with the default initialization used in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) normalization layers, including Layer Normalization and Batch Normalization. Therefore, the parameters for CN, ACN, and PCN are initialized as follows:

- CN: α = 1 , β = 0
- ACN: α G = 1 , α L = 0 , β G = 1 , β L = 0
- PCN: α P = 1 , β P = 0

## B. Properties of TS Backbones

## B.1. Channel Identifiability

Definition. Let f : R L × C → R H × C be a MTS forecasting model, where L is the size of the lookback window, H is the forecast horizon, and C is the number of channels. The model f is said to exhibit channel identifiability (CID) if, for some input x ∈ R L × C , there exists a pair of channel indices c 1 = c 2 such that x [: , c 1 ] = x [: , c 2 ] and the model produces different outputs for those channels: f ( x )[: , c 1 ] = f ( x )[: , c 2 ] . In other words, a model with CID can distinguish between channels based on their identity, even when their input values are identical.

̸

Based on this criterion, MTS forecasting models can be categorized into two types:

- 1) Models without channel identifiability (non-CID). A model f lacks CID if, for all inputs x ∈ R L × C and all pairs of channels with identical input values, the corresponding outputs are also identical:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 2) Models with channel identifiability (CID). A model f exhibits CID if there exists an input x ∈ R L × C and a pair of distinct channels c 1 = c 2 such that the model is able to produce different outputs for those channels, even when they receive identical input values:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This implies that the model encodes the channel identity and leverages this information when producing its output.

## B.2. Data Dependency

Definition. A MTS forecasting model f : R L × C → R H × C exhibits data dependency if the model parameters θ depend on the input x . Specifically, for a given input x ∈ R L × C , the model parameters θ may vary based on the content or structure of x , affecting the model's output.

Based on the property above, MTS forecasting models can be classified into two categories:

- 1) Model without data dependency. If a model f does not exhibit data dependency, the model parameters θ are fixed and independent of the input x :

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 2) Model with data dependency. If a model f exhibits data dependency, the model parameters θ depend on the input x :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

## C. Theoretical Entropy Analysis

Following the previous work (Chen et al., 2025), we analyze our approach using theoretical entropy analysis.

Justification 1. Applying CN achieves a more informative representation ( Z CN) compared to LN ( Z LN) or without any normalization ( Z None), as it increases in the entropy :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The joint entropy can be decomposed as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This follows from the non-negativity of conditional entropy (Thomas &amp; Joy, 2006).

Justification 2. A more informative representation (i.e., higher H ( Z ) ) can potentially lower forecasting error, as under the Gaussian assumption, the minimum mean-squared error (MMSE) is bounded by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Following Equation 1, we construct the chain with a modification where the last layer of g 2 is separated:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This allows the propagation in the final layer g 2 to be expressed as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assuming a Gaussian distribution for Z post , ˆ Y , and Y , we can derive the following bound, as shown in previous works (Carson et al., 2012; Prasad, 2010):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since Z post = g ′ 2 ( Z ) , the chain property (Thomas &amp; Joy, 2006) ensures that Z contains at least as much information about Y as Z post, i.e., knowing Z reduces the uncertainty about Y :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By substituting Equation C.10 into Equation C.9, we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## D. Various Backbones

Backbones for CN/ACN. The four backbones used in the experiments are categorized based on their 1) channel identifiability (CID) and 2) data dependency, as shown in Figure D.1.

- RMLP (Li et al., 2023) captures temporal dependencies within each channel in a channel-independent manner, applying identical weights across all channels.
- iTransformer (Liu et al., 2024) captures channel dependencies using a self-attention mechanism that is order-invariant, rendering channels unidentifiable (non-CID).
- TSMixer (Chen et al., 2023) employs MLPs to capture both temporal and channel dependencies, with distinct weights assigned to each channel.
- S-Mamba (Wang et al., 2025) utilizes the Mamba architecture to capture channel dependencies, leveraging the inherent properties of Mamba (e.g., state-space modeling) to differentiate between channels.

For architectures that utilize Layer Normalization (LN), such as iTransformer and S-Mamba, we replace LN with our proposed method. For architectures without any normalization, we incorporate our method directly.

<!-- image -->

: Parameters depend on input (data)

: Parameters do not depend on input (data)

Figure D.1: Four different backbones and their properties.

Backbones for PCN. UniTS (Gao et al., 2024) is designed with three distinct UniTS blocks, as well as a GEN tower and a CLS tower. Each data source is assigned unique prompt and task tokens, while tasks within the same source that require different forecast lengths use a shared prompt and GEN token. To facilitate zero-shot learning for new datasets, a universal prompt and GEN token are utilized across all data sources.

## E. Application of Multiple Methods for CID

As a plug-in method, ACN is applicable to TS models along with other CID methods. To demonstrate that our method complements these techniques, we evaluate its performance when combined with channel identifier (Chi et al., 2024) and C-LoRA (Nie et al., 2024), using iTransformer (Liu et al., 2024) as the backbone, as shown in Table E.1.

Table E.1: Application of multiple methods for CID.

| iTransformer  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  -  .457  .384  .408  .293  .142  .121  .102  .254  .368  .260  .234  .179  .275  + ACN  .438  .374  .395  .288  .098  .088  .085  .153  .349  .245  .220  .158  .241  + ACN + C-LoRA  .438  .380  .397  .285  .109  .090  .096  .162  .360  .245  .227  .162  .246  + ACN + Channel identifier  .442  .377  .394  .289  .099  .089  .084  .158  .344  .245  .222  .158  .242  + ACN + C-LoRA + Channel identifier  .440  .381  .400  .286  .105  .090  .089  .163  .346  .245  .226  .162  .244   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## F. Comparison with Instance Normalization

Table F.1 shows the comparison of our methods (CN, ACN) with Instance Normalization (IN) (Ulyanov, 2016) on iTransformer (Liu et al., 2024) in terms of average MSE across four horizons for various datasets, demonstrating that our methods outperforms IN.

Table F.1: Comparison with Instance Normalization (IN).

| iTransformer  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  + IN  .442  .377  .397  .291  .101  .092  .088  .165  .356  .249  .226  .162  .246  + CN  .441  .376  .396  .289  .101  .088  .087  .159  .352  .247  .228  .161  .244  + ACN  .438  .374  .395  .288  .098  .088  .085  .153  .349  .245  .220  .158  .241   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## G. Comparison with Constant Vectors

Table G.1 presents the performance of adding different constant vectors to each channel token, allowing the model to distinguish channels on iTransformer (Liu et al., 2024). The results indicate that this simple addition improves performance, while our methods (CN, ACN) achieves better performance in terms of average MSE across four horizons for various datasets.

Table G.1: Comparison with contant vectors.

| iTransformer  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  Imp.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  -  .457  .384  .408  .293  .142  .121  .102  .254  .368  .260  .234  .179  .275  -  + Constant vector  .443  .378  .397  .290  .114  .113  .103  .181  .355  .246  .233  .170  .252  8.4%  + CN  .441  .376  .396  .289  .101  .088  .087  .159  .352  .247  .228  .161  .244  11.3%  + ACN  .438  .374  .395  .288  .098  .088  .085  .153  .349  .245  .220  .158  .241  12.4%   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## H. Robustness to Similarity Metric

To construct a channel similarity matrix S ∈ R B × C × C for ACN, various similiarity metric can be employed. To evaluate whether the proposed method is sensitive to the choice of similarity metric, we compare several options, including (negative) cosine similarity, ℓ 1 distance, and ℓ 2 distance. Table H.1 presents the average MSE across four horizons for various datasets, demonstrating that the performance remains robust to the choice of similarity metric.

Table H.1: Robustness to similarity metric for ACN.

| iTransformer  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  LN (Base)  .457  .384  .408  .293  .368  .260  .234  .179  .329  CN  ℓ  1  .440  .374  .395  .288  .350  .245  .220  .179  .309  ℓ  2  .439  .375  .395  .288  .350  .245  .221  .158  .309  Cosine  .438  .374  .395  .288  .349  .245  .220  .158  .308   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## I. Robustness to Number of Prototypes K

Table I.1 shows the results of applying PCN with various values of K . The results indicate that the performance remains robust to the choice of K .

Table I.1: Robustness to K for PCN.

| Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  PCN  K  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  ✗  1  .457  .384  .408  .293  .142  .121  .102  .254  .368  .260  .234  .179  .275  ✓  2  .440  .376  .404  .290  .115  .121  .102  .180  .340  .257  .235  .169  .252  3  .439  .375  .403  .290  .116  .121  .101  .179  .345  .257  .235  .169  .252  5  .437  .376  .404  .289  .117  .120  .101  .176  .349  .257  .232  .169  .252  10  .438  .376  .403  .289  .116  .119  .101  .182  .339  .257  .233  .169  .252  20  .434  .376  .404  .288  .117  .120  .102  .183  .336  .257  .233  .169  .252   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## J. Robustness to Temperature τ

Tables J.1, J.2, J.3, and J.4 display the average MSE across four different horizons for the 12 datasets, with four different backbones, using various values of the temperature ( τ ) in ACN. The results show that the effectiveness of ACN is consistent across different values of τ .

| τ  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  0.05  .439  .376  .396  .288  .099  .088  .087  .156  .351  .245  .221  .159  .242  0.1  .439  .376  .396  .288  .099  .088  .085  .156  .351  .246  .222  .158  .242  0.2  .439  .375  .395  .289  .099  .088  .086  .154  .350  .246  .223  .158  .242  0.5  .439  .375  .395  .289  .098  .088  .086  .159  .350  .247  .224  .158  .242  1.0  .439  .376  .395  .289  .098  .088  .087  .159  .350  .248  .224  .158  .242   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table J.1: Robustness to τ for ACN with iTransformer .

| Backbone: S-Mamba  τ  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  0.05  .449  .375  .394  .285  .108  .093  .075  .122  .358  .248  .228  .164  .241  0.1  .449  .375  .394  .285  .107  .095  .074  .127  .358  .248  .229  .168  .241  0.2  .449  .375  .395  .285  .108  .095  .076  .129  .358  .249  .230  .163  .241  0.5  .449  .375  .395  .285  .109  .095  .076  .124  .358  .250  .231  .165  .241  1.0  .449  .375  .395  .285  .108  .095  .076  .124  .358  .250  .231  .165  .241   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table J.2: Robustness to τ for ACN with S-Mamba .

Table J.3: Robustness to τ for ACN with TSMixer .

| Backbone: TSMixer  τ  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  0.05  .453  .387  .391  .280  .130  .112  .105  .178  .356  .242  .248  .174  .255  0.1  .453  .387  .391  .280  .124  .109  .103  .177  .356  .242  .247  .174  .254  0.2  .453  .388  .391  .280  .120  .109  .103  .168  .356  .242  .246  .175  .253  0.5  .455  .388  .390  .280  .121  .110  .103  .171  .356  .242  .246  .174  .253  1.0  .455  .388  .390  .280  .122  .110  .104  .173  .356  .242  .246  .174  .254   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table J.4: Robustness to τ for ACN with RMLP .

| Backbone: RMLP  τ  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  0.05  .449  .378  .384  .277  .162  .164  .136  .200  .354  .246  .244  .189  .265  0.1  .450  .377  .384  .277  .159  .157  .131  .187  .354  .246  .243  .189  .263  0.2  .450  .377  .383  .277  .160  .157  .131  .188  .353  .247  .251  .189  .264  0.5  .448  .377  .384  .277  .178  .168  .136  .199  .353  .247  .257  .190  .268  1.0  .448  .377  .384  .277  .180  .168  .138  .202  .353  .247  .257  .191  .268   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## K. Robustness to Similarity Space for ACN &amp; PCN

## K.1. Similarity Space for ACN

The similarity between the channels in TS for ACN can be calculated either in the data space ( X ) or the latent space ( Z ). Table K.1 indicates that performance is robust to the choice of space across various datasets with four different backbones, further validating the effectiveness of ACN.

Table K.1: Robustness to similarity space for ACN.

| Sim. space  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  iTrans.  -  .457  .384  .408  .293  .142  .121  .102  .254  .368  .260  .234  .179  .275  ACN  X  .438  .375  .395  .288  .100  .089  .085  .156  .349  .247  .221  .158  .242  Z  .438  .374  .395  .288  .098  .088  .085  .153  .349  .245  .220  .158  .241  S-Mam.  -  .457  .383  .398  .290  .133  .096  .090  .157  .364  .252  .244  .174  .253  ACN  X  .448  .375  .394  .285  .107  .092  .073  .121  .357  .247  .228  .162  .240  Z  .448  .374  .394  .284  .107  .092  .073  .121  .357  .247  .228  .162  .240  TSMixer  -  .462  .403  .401  .287  .129  .115  .115  .186  .365  .260  .255  .211  .266  ACN  X  .453  .387  .387  .280  .121  .109  .103  .168  .356  .242  .245  .178  .244  Z  .453  .386  .385  .280  .120  .109  .103  .167  .356  .242  .245  .174  .243  RMLP  -  .471  .381  .401  .280  .205  .236  .200  .277  .356  .272  .261  .228  .297  ACN  X  .448  .376  .383  .277  .161  .157  .131  .186  .353  .246  .243  .189  .262  Z  .448  .376  .383  .277  .159  .156  .131  .187  .353  .246  .242  .189  .262   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## K.2. Similarity Space for PCN

The similarity between the channels in TS and the prototypes for PCN can be calculated either in the data space ( X ), latent space ( Z ), or the latent space with an additional linear layer ( h ), which is used to align the space between the input TS and the prototypes. Table K.2 indicates that performance is robust to the choice of space across various datasets with different numbers of prototypes ( K ), further validating the effectiveness of PCN.

Table K.2: Robustness to similarity space for PCN with K = 5 , 10 , 20

| PCN (  K  = 5  )  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  Exchange  Weather  -  .457  .384  .408  .293  .368  .260  .362  Space  X  .440  .378  .404  .289  .342  .258  .352  Z  .443  .381  .404  .290  .340  .259  .353  h  (  Z  )  .437  .376  .404  .289  .349  .257  .352  PCN (  K  = 10  )  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  Exchange  Weather  -  .457  .384  .408  .293  .368  .260  .362  Space  X  .440  .377  .406  .289  .342  .259  .352  Z  .443  .378  .405  .290  .341  .260  .355  h  (  Z  )  .438  .377  .403  .289  .339  .257  .351  PCN (  K  = 20  )  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  Exchange  Weather  -  .457  .384  .408  .293  .368  .260  .362  Space  X  .439  .377  .404  .289  .333  .258  .350  Z  .441  .379  .404  .290  .341  .259  .352  h  (  Z  )  .434  .375  .404  .288  .336  .257  .349   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## L. Application of PCN to Zero-shot Forecasting with TSFMs

We conduct TS forecasting tasks under two types of zero-shot settings with UniTS (Gao et al., 2024): the 1) Zero-shot dataset , which involves evaluation on a dataset not seen during training, and the 2) Zero-shot task , where we evaluate a new forecasting horizon not included in the training process by appending mask tokens at the end of the TS to predict future time steps.

Zero-shot dataset. In the TS forecasting task on unseen datasets, we evaluate our method with three datasets (NREL, 2006; McLeod &amp; Gweon, 2013; Hyndman et al., 2008). The results, shown in Table L.1, highlight consistent improvements by incorporating PCN.

Zero-shot horizon. For the TS forecasting task with new horizons, we predict an additional 384 time steps beyond the base forecasting horizon of 96 by appending 24 masked tokens of length 16 at the end of the TS. Table L.2 presents the results on four datasets (Zhou et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021), showing performance improvements across all datasets.

Table L.1: Results of TS forecasting with zero-shot dataset.

| Dataset  UniTS  + PCN  Imp.  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  Solar  .597  .607  .592  .514  0.8%  15.3%  River  1.374  .698  1.272  .580  7.4%  16.9%  Hospital  1.067  .797  1.046  .787  2.0%  1.3%  Avg.  1.013  .701  .970  .627  4.2%  10.6%   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table L.2: Results of TS forecasting with zero-shot horizon.

| Dataset  UniTS  + PCN  Imp.  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  ECL  .237  .329  .229  .322  3.4  %  2.2  %  ETTh1  .495  .463  .486  .459  1.8  %  0.9%  Traffic  .632  .372  .616  .362  2.5  %  2.7  %  Weather  .335  .336  .334  .335  0.3%  0.3%  Avg.  .425  .375  .416  .369  2.1%  1.6%   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## M. Full Results: Application of CN &amp; ACN

Table M.1 and Table M.2 present the results of TS forecasting for non-CID and CID models, respectively. The proposed method shows greater improvement in non-CID models, highlighting its role in enabling channel identifiability.

Table M.1: TS backbones w/o CID ability. Full results of TS forecasting tasks.

| Models  iTransformer  + CN  + ACN  RMLP  + CN  + ACN  Metric  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  ETTh1  96  .387  .405  .382  .401  .381  .400  .405  .413  .375  .394  .381  .394  192  .441  .436  .432  .429  .431  .429  .460  .444  .433  .426  .435  .424  336  .487  .458  .472  .451  .471  .450  .505  .466  .479  .449  .482  .446  720  .509  .494  .478  .474  .470  .469  .514  .490  .493  .478  .492  .473  Avg.  .457  .449  .441  .439  .438  .438  .471  .453  .445  .437  .448  .435  ETTh2  96  .301  .350  .300  .351  .299  .350  .298  .349  .295  .346  .291  .343  192  .381  .399  .375  .397  .375  .396  .374  .397  .369  .395  .367  .392  336  .427  .434  .410  .428  .409  .427  .424  .435  .423  .432  .418  .429  720  .430  .446  .420  .441  .413  .436  .433  .449  .431  .446  .428  .444  Avg.  .384  .407  .376  .404  .374  .402  .381  .408  .380  .405  .376  .402  ETTm1  96  .342  .377  .328  .364  .328  .364  .337  .374  .319  .358  .318  .357  192  .383  .396  .373  .388  .370  .387  .379  .391  .364  .383  .361  .381  336  .418  .418  .409  .412  .407  .411  .412  .412  .394  .404  .393  .403  720  .487  .456  .475  .448  .474  .446  .478  .447  .461  .442  .459  .441  Avg.  .408  .412  .396  .403  .395  .402  .401  .406  .384  .397  .383  .396  ETTm2  96  .186  .272  .181  .264  .181  .262  .179  .259  .177  .258  .175  .257  192  .254  .314  .248  .307  .247  .307  .242  .303  .241  .302  .239  .300  336  .317  .353  .314  .350  .315  .349  .300  .340  .298  .340  .298  .339  720  .412  .407  .411  .405  .410  .404  .401  .397  .394  .398  .395  .396  Avg.  .293  .337  .289  .331  .288  .330  .280  .326  .277  .324  .277  .323  PEMS03  12  .071  .174  .069  .170  .067  .168  .080  .188  .077  .187  .071  .179  24  .097  .208  .080  .184  .078  .181  .125  .236  .120  .232  .102  .216  48  .161  .272  .112  .215  .108  .214  .231  .324  .216  .312  .176  .288  96  .240  .338  .143  .246  .138  .247  .383  .430  .353  .405  .285  .379  Avg.  .142  .248  .101  .204  .098  .203  .205  .294  .192  .284  .159  .266  PEMS04  12  .081  .188  .071  .175  .071  .174  .097  .205  .093  .202  .083  .191  24  .099  .211  .079  .186  .080  .187  .149  .260  .138  .250  .113  .226  48  .133  .246  .095  .203  .093  .201  .266  .355  .237  .333  .172  .285  96  .172  .283  .109  .220  .109  .219  .432  .463  .379  .430  .258  .358  Avg.  .121  .232  .088  .196  .088  .195  .236  .321  .212  .304  .156  .265  PEMS07  12  .067  .165  .056  .151  .056  .150  .074  .177  .072  .175  .065  .165  24  .088  .190  .076  .173  .073  .169  .121  .228  .116  .223  .093  .198  48  .113  .218  .097  .185  .096  .183  .226  .316  .204  .298  .144  .251  96  .172  .283  .119  .202  .114  .195  .379  .416  .344  .385  .221  .318  Avg.  .102  .205  .087  .178  .085  .174  .200  .284  .184  .270  .131  .233  PEMS08  12  .088  .193  .078  .181  .078  .181  .096  .201  .091  .196  .084  .187  24  .138  .243  .109  .214  .109  .214  .158  .260  .142  .246  .125  .231  48  .334  .353  .217  .240  .196  .236  .299  .368  .260  .338  .204  .304  96  .458  .436  .232  .257  .228  .252  .555  .504  .494  .451  .334  .394  Avg.  .254  .306  .159  .223  .153  .221  .277  .333  .247  .308  .187  .279  Exchange  96  .086  .206  .086  .206  .085  .205  .083  .203  .084  .203  .082  .200  192  .177  .299  .174  .298  .173  .297  .175  .299  .175  .298  .173  .296  336  .338  .422  .324  .412  .323  .412  .325  .415  .325  .413  .323  .411  720  .847  .691  .824  .687  .815  .675  .839  .693  .835  .688  .834  .687  Avg.  .368  .409  .352  .401  .349  .398  .356  .403  .355  .400  .353  .399  Weather  96  .174  .215  .162  .205  .160  .204  .196  .235  .166  .210  .163  .209  192  .224  .258  .211  .251  .210  .250  .240  .271  .214  .252  .210  .251  336  .281  .298  .268  .293  .266  .290  .291  .307  .269  .292  .267  .292  720  .359  .351  .346  .343  .345  .341  .363  .353  .346  .342  .344  .342  Avg.  .260  .281  .247  .273  .245  .271  .272  .292  .249  .274  .246  .273  Solar  96  .201  .234  .197  .233  .185  .222  .233  .296  .217  .257  .207  .252  192  .238  .261  .229  .257  .221  .246  .260  .316  .245  .274  .239  .272  336  .248  .273  .239  .269  .231  .266  .276  .323  .265  .287  .261  .288  720  .249  .275  .246  .275  .241  .268  .273  .316  .265  .287  .263  .292  Avg.  .234  .261  .228  .258  .220  .249  .261  .313  .248  .276  .242  .277  ECL  96  .148  .240  .133  .229  .132  .228  .201  .287  .164  .253  .162  .252  192  .167  .258  .152  .247  .150  .244  .209  .297  .174  .262  .173  .262  336  .179  .272  .165  .262  .164  .260  .228  .316  .191  .279  .190  .278  720  .220  .310  .191  .286  .187  .280  .273  .350  .232  .312  .230  .312  Avg.  .179  .270  .161  .256  .158  .256  .228  .313  .190  .277  .189  .276  Average  .275  .318  .244  .297  .241  .295  .297  .346  .280  .330  .262  .319  1  st  Count  0  0  9  9  46  46  0  0  4  7  44  46  2  nd  Count  10  9  39  39  3  2  4  7  43  41  4  2   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table M.2: TS backbones w/ CID ability. Full results of TS forecasting tasks.

| Models  S-Mamba  + CN  + ACN  TSMixer  + CN  + ACN  Metric  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  ETTh1  96  .385  .404  .385  .405  .381  .403  .398  .411  .380  .399  .389  .402  192  .445  .441  .442  .438  .439  .435  .452  .441  .430  .426  .441  .426  336  .491  .462  .491  .465  .480  .459  .495  .462  .473  .448  .476  .454  720  .506  .497  .501  .492  .492  .488  .501  .482  .470  .466  .496  .479  Avg.  .457  .452  .455  .450  .448  .446  .462  .449  .438  .435  .453  .441  ETTh2  96  .297  .349  .290  .342  .289  .342  .316  .358  .308  .354  .311  .353  192  .378  .399  .371  .394  .370  .393  .401  .409  .378  .399  .399  .399  336  .425  .435  .418  .429  .415  .425  .440  .444  .428  .436  .416  .428  720  .432  .448  .422  .441  .423  .441  .454  .462  .433  .449  .426  .443  Avg.  .383  .408  .375  .401  .374  .400  .403  .418  .387  .410  .386  .407  ETTm1  96  .326  .368  .328  .365  .326  .363  .330  .366  .319  .358  .316  .355  192  .378  .393  .375  .392  .374  .391  .374  .391  .364  .385  .363  .382  336  .410  .414  .409  .415  .406  .412  .417  .415  .394  .404  .394  .409  720  .474  .451  .474  .451  .472  .448  .484  .450  .466  .444  .466  .444  Avg.  .398  .407  .397  .406  .394  .404  .401  .406  .386  .398  .385  .397  ETTm2  96  .182  .266  .176  .260  .175  .259  .178  .261  .177  .261  .175  .257  192  .252  .313  .246  .307  .243  .303  .245  .305  .248  .308  .239  .301  336  .313  .349  .311  .348  .308  .345  .313  .348  .311  .346  .303  .342  720  .416  .409  .409  .403  .409  .405  .416  .406  .410  .403  .401  .400  Avg.  .290  .333  .286  .329  .284  .328  .287  .330  .286  .329  .280  .325  PEMS03  12  .066  .171  .062  .164  .062  .164  .066  .171  .065  .169  .064  .169  24  .088  .197  .080  .185  .079  .185  .090  .202  .089  .197  .085  .195  48  .165  .277  .121  .231  .120  .230  .142  .253  .137  .244  .133  .245  96  .213  .313  .170  .276  .168  .275  .218  .319  .204  .300  .196  .312  Avg.  .133  .240  .108  .214  .107  .213  .129  .236  .124  .228  .120  .230  PEMS04  12  .073  .177  .069  .170  .072  .175  .074  .181  .074  .179  .072  .176  24  .084  .192  .077  .182  .085  .191  .091  .200  .091  .200  .087  .197  48  .101  .213  .091  .196  .102  .212  .121  .239  .121  .234  .117  .234  96  .125  .236  .103  .210  .124  .231  .173  .294  .168  .274  .159  .280  Avg.  .096  .205  .085  .189  .095  .202  .115  .228  .114  .222  .109  .222  PEMS07  12  .060  .157  .054  .145  .054  .147  .066  .167  .063  .161  .058  .155  24  .082  .184  .068  .160  .065  .160  .088  .190  .087  .187  .079  .179  48  .100  .204  .084  .175  .080  .179  .125  .220  .127  .224  .113  .215  96  .117  .218  .105  .189  .094  .188  .181  .273  .184  .265  .161  .264  Avg.  .090  .191  .078  .168  .073  .167  .115  .210  .115  .209  .103  .203  PEMS08  12  .076  .178  .071  .169  .071  .171  .081  .186  .080  .182  .079  .181  24  .110  .216  .093  .192  .092  .195  .115  .222  .113  .217  .110  .214  48  .173  .254  .134  .227  .133  .232  .188  .289  .181  .274  .179  .277  96  .271  .321  .233  .277  .190  .266  .362  .402  .295  .327  .304  .360  Avg.  .157  .242  .133  .216  .121  .216  .186  .275  .167  .250  .167  .258  Exchange  96  .086  .206  .086  .206  .086  .205  .086  .205  .085  .203  .084  .203  192  .181  .303  .180  .302  .179  .302  .177  .302  .175  .298  .173  .297  336  .331  .417  .323  .411  .324  .412  .329  .414  .321  .411  .317  .408  720  .858  .699  .860  .699  .841  .690  .868  .704  .851  .697  .846  .694  Avg.  .364  .407  .362  .405  .357  .402  .365  .406  .358  .402  .356  .400  Weather  96  .165  .209  .160  .205  .162  .207  .181  .228  .159  .206  .156  .204  192  .215  .255  .208  .250  .209  .251  .227  .263  .209  .252  .206  .250  336  .273  .296  .268  .292  .268  .294  .280  .300  .267  .295  .263  .293  720  .353  .349  .348  .344  .350  .348  .353  .347  .350  .345  .343  .343  Avg.  .252  .277  .246  .273  .247  .274  .260  .285  .246  .274  .242  .272  Solar  96  .207  .246  .194  .230  .189  .229  .222  .281  .200  .231  .215  .251  192  .240  .272  .227  .258  .223  .258  .261  .301  .251  .265  .250  .277  336  .262  .286  .248  .277  .246  .278  .271  .299  .269  .278  .264  .288  720  .267  .293  .250  .282  .252  .285  .267  .293  .266  .292  .254  .282  Avg.  .244  .275  .230  .262  .228  .261  .255  .294  .246  .267  .245  .274  ECL  96  .139  .237  .135  .233  .135  .233  .177  .278  .147  .250  .146  .248  192  .165  .261  .157  .255  .155  .250  .193  .293  .166  .266  .162  .262  336  .177  .274  .168  .267  .162  .268  .215  .315  .187  .288  .177  .278  720  .214  .304  .190  .289  .186  .286  .260  .352  .223  .316  .209  .304  Avg.  .174  .269  .163  .261  .162  .259  .211  .310  .181  .280  .174  .273  Average  .253  .309  .243  .298  .240  .297  .266  .321  .254  .309  .243  .308  1  st  Count  1  0  15  25  38  31  0  0  10  16  40  36  2  nd  Count  10  14  31  23  9  17  9  6  35  30  8  12   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## N. Full Results: Application of PCN

## N.1. Application of PCN to non-TSFMs

Although PCN is developed for scenarios with multiple datasets and varying C (e.g., TSFM), it can also be applied to single-task models trained on a single dataset, assuming the number of channels remains unknown. Table N.1 presents the results of applying PCN with K = 5 to iTransformer. The results, averaged over 12 datasets and 4 horizons, show an 8.4% performance improvement, which is smaller than the improvement achieved by CN and ACN.

Table N.1: Application of PCN to iTransformer.

| iTrans.  Average MSE across 4 horizons  Avg.  Imp.  ETTh1  ETTh2  ETTm1  ETTm2  PEMS03  PEMS04  PEMS07  PEMS08  Exchange  Weather  Solar  ECL  -  .457  .384  .408  .293  .142  .121  .102  .254  .368  .260  .234  .179  .275  -  CN  .441  .376  .396  .289  .101  .088  .087  .159  .352  .247  .228  .161  .244  11.3%  ACN  .438  .374  .395  .288  .098  .088  .085  .153  .349  .245  .220  .158  .241  12.4%  PCN  .437  .376  .404  .289  .117  .120  .101  .176  .349  .257  .232  .169  .252  8.4%   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## N.2. Application of PCN to TSFMs

Table 4 summarizes the results of 20 forecasting and 18 classification tasks under supervised and prompt-tuning settings, with full results for both tasks shown in Table N.2 and Table N.3, respectively.

Table N.2: Results of multi-task forecasting with UniTS.

| UniTS (LN)  Supervised  Prompt-Tuning  -  + PCN  -  + PCN  Dataset  H  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  MSE  MAE  NN5  112  .635  .556  .610  .545  .611  .552  .602  .543  ECL  96  .172  .273  .168  .272  .174  .277  .173  .278  192  .185  .284  .182  .283  .189  .289  .189  .292  336  .196  .297  .197  .296  .205  .304  .205  .306  720  .238  .321  .227  .321  .251  .340  .241  .334  ETTh1  96  .390  .408  .388  .406  .390  .411  .384  .405  192  .428  .432  .438  .434  .432  .439  .433  .432  336  .462  .451  .477  .454  .480  .460  .472  .450  720  .489  .476  .484  .475  .532  .500  .492  .475  Exchange  192  .239  .342  .202  .323  .221  .337  .207  .329  336  .479  .486  .383  .446  .387  .453  .366  .441  ILI  60  2.48  .944  1.93  .895  2.45  .994  2.14  .940  Traffic  96  .496  .325  .483  .320  .502  .330  .481  .318  192  .497  .327  .495  .324  .523  .331  .505  .322  336  .509  .328  .506  .326  .552  .338  .535  .330  720  .525  .350  .536  .341  .626  .369  .591  .352  Weather  96  .161  .211  .157  .207  .175  .214  .166  .217  192  .212  .255  .205  .251  .226  .266  .219  .261  336  .266  .295  .262  .293  .280  .303  .275  .299  720  .343  .344  .338  .342  .352  .350  .350  .348  Best Count (/20)  4  3  16  18  3  4  20  16  Average  .469  .386  .433  .378  .478  .393  .453  .384   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table N.3: Results of multi-task classification with UniTS.

| UniTS (LN)  Supervised  Prompt-Tuning  -  + PCN  -  + PCN  Heartbeat  59.0  71.7  69.3  73.1  JapaneseVowels  93.5  92.7  90.8  92.7  PEMS-SF  83.2  84.9  85.0  82.7  SelfRegulationSCP2  47.8  55.0  53.3  51.7  SpokenArabicDigits  97.5  98.0  92.0  94.9  UWaveGestureLibrary  79.1  85.3  75.6  84.1  ECG5000  92.6  93.6  93.4  94.0  NonInvasive.  90.5  89.7  27.1  54.8  Blink  99.1  99.8  91.1  98.0  FaceDetection  64.1  66.7  57.6  60.7  ElectricDevices  60.3  62.1  55.4  59.4  Trace  91.0  96.0  82.0  92.0  FordB  76.0  76.5  62.8  67.2  MotionSenseHAR  92.8  93.2  93.2  94.7  EMOPain  78.0  79.2  80.3  85.1  Chinatown  97.7  98.0  98.0  98.3  MelbournePedestrian  87.3  88.2  77.0  78.5  SharePriceIncrease  61.9  63.1  68.4  68.4  Best Count (/18)  2  16  3  16  Average Score  80.6  83.0  75.1  79.5   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## O. Visualization of Forecasting Results

To validate the effectiveness of our method, we visualize the predicted results for various L and H across different backbone architectures and four datasets from diverse domains: ETTm1 (Zhou et al., 2021), Weather (Wu et al., 2021), ECL (Wu et al., 2021), and PEMS (Liu et al., 2022), using three types of normalizations: base (LN), CN, and ACN.

## O.1. Visualization of TSF with iTransformer

Figure O.1: TS forecasting results of ETTm1 with iTransformer .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.2: TS forecasting results of Weather with iTransformer .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.3: TS forecasting results of ECL with iTransformer .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.4: TS forecasting results of PEMS07 with iTransformer .

<!-- image -->

## O.2. Visualization of TSF with RMLP

Figure O.5: TS forecasting results of ETTm1 with RMLP .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.6: TS forecasting results of Weather with RMLP .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.7: TS forecasting results of ECL with RMLP .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.8: TS forecasting results of PEMS07 with RMLP .

<!-- image -->

## O.3. Visualization of TSF with TSMixer

Figure O.9: TS forecasting results of ETTm1 with TSMixer .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.10: TS forecasting results of Weather with TSMixer .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.11: TS forecasting results of ECL with TSMixer .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.12: TS forecasting results of PEMS07 with TSMixer .

<!-- image -->

## O.4. Visualization of TSF with S-Mamba

Figure O.13: TS forecasting results of ETTm1 with S-Mamba .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.14: TS forecasting results of Weather with S-Mamba .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.15: TS forecasting results of ECL with S-Mamba .

<!-- image -->

Figure O.16: TS forecasting results of PEMS07 with S-Mamba .

<!-- image -->