## Unemployment and inflation in Western Europe: solution by the boundary element method

Ivan O. Kitov,

Institute for the Geospheres' Dynamics, Russian Academy of Sciences, ikitov@mail.ru

Oleg I. Kitov

## Abstract

Using  an  analog  of  the  boundary  element  method  in  engineering  and  science,  we  analyze  and  model unemployment rate in Austria, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States as a function of inflation and the change in labor force. Originally, the model linking unemployment to inflation and labor force was developed  and successfully tested for Austria, Canada,  France, Germany,  Japan,  and  the United States. Autoregressive properties of neither of these variables are used to predict their evolution. In this sense, the model is a self-consistent and completely deterministic one without any stochastic component (external shocks) except that associated with measurement errors and changes in measurement units.  Nevertheless, the model explains between ~65% and ~95% of the variability in unemployment and inflation. For Italy, the rate of unemployment is predicted at a time horizon of nine (!) years with pseudo out-of-sample root-mean-square forecasting error of 0.55% for the period between 1973 and 2006.  One can expect that the unemployment will be growing since 2008 and will reach ~11.4% [±0.6 %] near 2012. After 2012, unemployment in Italy will start to descend.

Key words: unemployment, inflation, labor force, boundary integral method, prediction, Western Europe JEL classification:  J64, J21, J11, E24, E31

## Introduction

Current  discussions  on  the  rate  of  unemployment  as  an  economic  phenomenon  and  those  on modern  versions  of  the  Phillips  curve,  where  unemployment  plays  a  crucial  role  as  one  of defining parameters, in particular have been rapidly growing since the early 1960s. There is an extensive  set  of  empirical  findings  and  models  exploring  various  assumptions  on  the  forces behind unemployment. There was no unique and comprehensive model for developed countries, however, which could explain all or part of observations relevant to the level and evolution of the portion of people in labor force but without job.

We have constructed and tested an alternative model linking inflation and unemployment in developed countries to the change rate of labor force by linear and lagged relationships. Our model is a completely deterministic one with the change in labor force being the only driving force causing all variations in the indissoluble pair unemployment/inflation, i.e. the reaction in unemployment  and  inflation  lags  behind  the  change  in  labor  force.    The  model  is  somewhat orthogonal to conventional economic models and concepts. In its original form, the model was revealed  and  formulated  for  the  United  States  (Kitov,  2006a).  After  the  correction  for  known breaks in labor force data, a revised model (Kitov, 2006b) allowed a significant improvement on the original one with the root-mean-square forecasting error (RMSFE) of inflation at a 2.5 year horizon of 0.8% between 1965 and 2004.  Because of well-known non-stationary of all involved variables,  the  model  was  tested  for  the  presence  of  cointegrating  relations  (Kitov,  Kitov, Dolinskaya,  2007a).  Both,  the  Engle-Granger  (1987)  and  Johansen  (1988)  approaches  have shown the existence of cointegration between unemployment, inflation and the change in labor force,  i.e.  the  presence  of  long-term  equilibrium  (in  other  words,  deterministic  or  causal) relations. Because the change in labor force drives the other two variables, it can be a stochastic process.

The first attempt to obtain empirical models for West European countries (Kitov, 2007a) also provided strong support to the model. In France, it was found that forecasting horizon for inflation is four years, i.e. the change in labor force leads inflation by four years. Unemployment in  France  also  leads  inflation  by  four  years,  and  various  cointegration  tests  (Kitov,  Kitov, Dolinskaya, 2007b) showed the existence of long-term equilibrium relations between the three variables.  In  Austria,  the  change  in  labor  force  and  the  pair  unemployment/inflation  is synchronized in time. For Austria, it was found that the break in units of measurement around 1987 requires the change in coefficients in linear lagged relationships.

In continuous efforts to extend the set of countries demonstrating the presence of a causal link between the change in labor force, inflation and unemployment,  we have build empirical models  for  the  second  and  third  largest  economies  in  the  world  -  Japan  (Kitov,  2007b)  and Germany  (Kitov,  2007d).  Surprisingly,  the  model  for  Canada  (Kitov,  2007c),  which  has  the United States as the largest trade partner, is also an accurate and reliable one, demonstrating the independence of unemployment and inflation on external factors.

It  is  important  to  use  the  rate  of  growth  not  increment  as  a  predictor  in  order  to  match dimension  of  inflation  and  unemployment,  which  are  defined  as  rates  as  well.  An  implicit assumption  of  the  model  is  that  inflation  and  unemployment  do  not  depend  directly  on parameters  describing  real  economic  activity  (Kitov,  2006a).  Moreover,  inflation  does  not depend on its own previous and/or future values because it is completely controlled by a process of different nature.

The  principal  source  of  information  relevant  to  this  study  is  the  OECD  database (http://www.oecd.org/) which provides comprehensive data sets on labor force, unemployment, GDP deflator (DGDP), and CPI inflation. In several cases, national statistical sources and the estimates reported according to definitions adopted in the United States are used for obtaining original  data  on  inflation  and  corroborative  data  on  unemployment  and  labor  force.  In  some cases,  readings  associated  with  the  same  variable  but  obtained  from  different  sources  do  not coincide. This is due to different approaches and definitions applied by corresponding agencies. Diversity  of  definitions  is  accompanied  by  a  degree  of  uncertainty  related  to  methodology  of measurements.  For  example,  figures  related  to  labor  force  are  usually  obtained  in  surveys covering  population  samples  of  various  sizes:  from  0.2  per  cent  to  3.3  per  cent  of  total population. The uncertainty associated with such measurements cannot be directly estimated but it certainly affects the reliability of empirical relationships between inflation and labor force.

We often  use  the  term  accuracy'  in  this  study.  When  using  it,  we  rather  refer  to  some estimated uncertainty of measurements than to the difference between measured and true values, i.e.  to  standard  definition  of  accuracy.  This  uncertainty  might  be  roughly  approximated  by variations  in  a  given  parameter  between  consequent  revisions  or  between  different  agencies. Survey reported uncertainties are just a formal statistical estimate of the internal consistency of measurements.  However,  population  related  variables  could  be  potentially  measured exactly because  they  are  countable  not  measurable.  In  any  case,  the  discrepancy  between  values predicted by models and corresponding measurements has to be considered in the light of the measurement uncertainty.

The reminder of the paper is organized in four sections. Section 1 formally introduces the model as obtained and tested in previous studies. In many countries, the US and Japan among others, the generalized link between labor force and two dependent variables can be split into two  independent  relationships,  where  inflation  apparently  does  not  depend  on  unemployment. However, in few countries, a striking example is France, only the generalized model provided an adequate description of the evolution of both dependent variables since the 1960s.

Section  2  introduces  the  method  of  cumulative  curves  for  the  solution  of  the  model equations. The proposed method is similar to the method of boundary elements in science and engineering because it is based on the conversion of original differential equations into a set of integral equations. The advantage of our method consists in the availability of an exact solution of the problem. It is shown that the cumulative curves method is a superior one to cointegration tests in obtaining long-term equilibrium relations between the studied variables.  For example, the difference between measured cumulative curves for inflation in the United States and France and that predicted from the change in labor force, which are both proven I(2) series, is an I(0) process!  This feature undoubtedly demonstrates that the link between labor force and inflation is a causal one.

Empirical  models  for  the  evolution  of  unemployment  and/or  inflation  in  Italy,  the Netherlands, Sweden, and Switzerland are presented in Section 3. These countries significantly enlarge the set of West European countries modelled so far: Austria, Germany, and France. The previously considered case of Austria has been revisited using different data sets and extended to 2007, compared to 2003 in the original version. We also update the prediction of unemployment in the United States. Section 4 concludes.

## 1. The model

As originally defined by Kitov (2006a), inflation and unemployment are linear and potentially lagged functions of the change rate of labor force:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where π (t) is the rate of price inflation at time t , as represented by some standard measure such as GDP deflator (DGDP) or CPI; UE(t) is  the  rate of unemployment at time t ,  which can be also represented by various measures; LF(t) is the level of labor force at time t ; t 1 and t 2 are the time lags between the inflation, unemployment, and labor force, respectively; A 1 ,  B 1 ,  A 2 ,  and B2 are country specific coefficients, which have to be determined empirically in calibration procedure. These coefficients may vary through time for a given country, as induced by numerous revisions to the definitions and measurement methodologies of the studied variables, i.e. by variations in

measurement units.

Linear  relationships  (1)  and  (2)  define  inflation  and  unemployment  separately.  These variables are two indivisible manifestations or consequences of a unique process, however. The process is the growth in labor force which is accommodated in developed economies (we do not include developing and emergent economies in this analysis) through two channels. First channel is the increase in employment and corresponding change in personal income distribution (PID). All  persons  obtaining  new  paid  jobs  or  their  equivalents  presumably  change  their  incomes  to some higher levels. There is an ultimate empirical fact, however, that PID in the USA does not change with time in relative terms, i.e. when normalized to the total population and total income (Kitov, 2009b). The increasing number of people at higher income levels, as related to the new paid jobs, leads to a certain disturbance in the PID. This over-concentration (or 'over-pressure') of population in some income bins above its 'neutral' long-term value must be compensated by such an extension in corresponding income scale, which returns the PID to its original density. Related  stretching  of  the  income  scale  is  the  core  driving  force  of  price  inflation,  i.e.  the  US economy needs exactly the amount of money, extra to that related to real GDP growth, to pull back  the  PID  to  its  fixed  shape.  The  mechanism  responsible  for  the  compensation  and  the income scale stretching, should have some positive relaxation time, which effectively separates in time the source of inflation, i.e. the labor force change, and the reaction, i.e. the inflation.

Second channel is related to those persons in the labor force who failed to obtain a new paid job. These people do not leave the labor force but join unemployment. Supposedly, they do not  change  the  PID  because  they  do  not  change  their  incomes.  Therefore,  total  labor  force change  equals  unemployment  change  plus  employment  change,  the  latter  process  expressed through lagged inflation. In the case of a "natural" behavior of the economic system, which is defined as a stable balance of socio-economic forces in the society, the partition of labor force growth between unemployment and inflation is retained through time and the linear relationships hold  separately.  There  is  always  a  possibility,  however,  to  fix  one  of  the  two  dependent variables. Central banks are definitely able to influence inflation rate by monetary means, i.e. to force money supply to change relative to its natural demand. For example, the Banque de France predefines  a  strict  percentage  growth  rate  of  monetary  aggregate  M2  when  formulating  its monetary  policy  (BdF,  2004).  Such  a  violation  of  natural,  i.e.  established  over  decades, economic behavior should undoubtedly distort the partition of the change in labor force - the portion previously accommodated by inflation would be redirected to unemployment, i.e. those who had to get new jobs would fail because of the lack of money in the economy. To account for this effect one should to use a generalized relationship as represented by the sum of (1) and (2):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Equation (3) balances the change in labor force to inflation and unemployment, the latter two variables potentially lagging by different times behind the labor force change. Effectively, when t 1 ≠ 0  or/and t 2 ≠ 0,  one  should  not  link  inflation  and  unemployment  for  the  same  year.  The importance of this generalized relationship is demonstrated by Kitov (2007a) on the example of France.

One  can  rewrite  (3)  in  a  form  similar  to  that  of  the  Phillips  curve,  without  any autoregressive terms, although:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where coefficients C1, C2, and C 3 should be better determined empirically despite they can be directly  obtained  from  (3)  by  simple  algebraic  transformation.  The  rationale  behind  the superiority of the empirical estimation is the presence of high measurement noise in all original time  series.  In  some  places,  (4)  can  provide  a  more  effective  destructive  interference  of  such noise than does (3). Consequently, the coefficients providing the best fit for (3) and (4), whatever method  is  used,  may  be  different.    In  this  study  we  use  relationship  (4),  but  one  should  not consider  it  as  an  equation  predicting  inflation.  It  is  rather  a  convenient  form  of  the  equation balancing  inputs  of  all  three  variables  with  the  labor  force  driving  the  other  two.  Moreover, inflation  may  actually  lead  unemployment,  as  it  is  found  in  the  United  States.  Then  inflation defined by (4) actually depends on some future readings of unemployment (Kitov, 2009a).

For the USA, there was no need to apply relationship (3) because corresponding monetary policies  and  other  potential  sources  of  disturbance  do  not  change  the  natural  partition  of  the change in labor force, as observed since the late 1950s. Coefficients in relationships (1) and (2) specific  for  the  USA  are  as  follows: A1 =4, A2 =-0.03, t 1 =2  years  (DGDP  as  a  measure  of inflation), B1 =2.1, B2 =-0.023, t 2 =5 years.

For  Japan, A1 =1.31, A2 =0.0007, t 1 =0  years  (DGDP),  and B1 =-1.5, B2 =0.045, t 2 =0  years (Kitov, 2007b). It is worth noting that B1 is negative and any decrease in the level of labor force or too weak growth would result in increasing unemployment.  The change rate of labor force measured in Japan has been negative since 1999 and the measured inflation, DGDP and CPI, has been negative as well. There is no indication of a recovery to positive figures any time soon if to consider the decrease in working age population and participation rate as has been observed in Japan since the late 1990s.

For Germany, there exists a Phillips curve:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with  inflation  lagging  unemployment  by  one  year.  The  goodness-of-fit  is  ( R 2 =)  0.86  for  the period between 1971 and 2006, i.e. during the period where data are available. Coefficients in (1) and (2) are as follows: A1 =-1.71, A2 =0.041, t 1 =6 years (CPI), and B1 =2.5, B2 =0.04, t 2 =5 years (Kitov,  2007d).    Considering  the  presence  of  the  same  time  lags  before  and  after  the reunification, but different coefficients, the case of Germany  is  an  outstanding  one.  It demonstrates how deep are the socio-economic roots of the driving force behind inflation and unemployment.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  really  difficult  to  imagine  that  the  process  of  the transformation of the change in labor force into inflation takes six years. However, the lag of inflation behind the change in labor force allows a prediction at a six-year horizon with a very small RMSFE.

In Canada, A1 =2.58, A2 =-0.0043, t 1 =2 years (CPI) with R 2 =0.67, and B1 =-2.1, B2 =0.12, t 2 =0 years with (Kitov, 2007c). Therefore, the change in labor force and unemployment lead inflation by two years allowing a natural forecasting horizon of two years.

We  have  carried  out  a  formal  statistical  assessment  of  the  empirical  linear  lagged relationship  (1)  for  the  USA  (Kitov,  Kitov,  Dolinskaya,  2007b).  It  has  demonstrated  that  the pseudo out-of-sample RMSFE for CPI inflation at a two-year horizon for the period between 1965  and  2002  is  only  0.8%.  This  value  is  superior  to  that  obtained  with  any  other  inflation model by a factor of 2, as presented by Stock and Watson (1999, 2005), Atkeson and Ohanian (2001). This forecasting superiority is retained for shorter sub-periods with RMSFE of 1.0% for the first (1965-1983) and 0.5% for the second (1983-2002) segment. In the mainstream models of  inflation,  the  turning  point  in  1983  is  dictated  by  the  inability  to  describe  inflation  process with  one  set  of  defining  parameters.  Therefore,  special  discussions  are  devoted  to  statistical, economic, and/or financial justification of the split and relevant change in parameters (see Stock and Watson, 2005). Our model denies the necessity of any change in the factors driving inflation in  the  US  around  1983  or  in  any  other  point  after  1960.  Each  and  every  inflation  reading  is completely defined by the change in labor force occurred two years before.

## 2. The boundary element method in economics

Kitov,  Kitov,  and  Dolinskaya  (2007a)  introduced  a  simple  but  effective  method  to  find  an appropriate set of coefficients in (1) through (4). This method consists in the search of the bestfit  between  cumulative  values  and  is  similar  to  the  boundary  element  method  (BEM)  in engineering and science, in its 1D form. The BEM reduces a set of linear (partial) differential equations, e.g. relationships (1) and (2), to a set of integral equations. The solution of the integral equations, as expressed in boundary integral form, is an exact solution of the original differential equations. In the case of relationship (1):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The solution of the integral equation (5) is as follows :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P(t) is the level of price (index) at time t ( π (t) ≡ dP(t)/P(t)=dlnP(t) ); t 0 and t 01 are the start and end time of the integration, respectively; and C is the free term, which ahs  to be determined together  with  coefficients A1 and A2 from  the  boundary  conditions: P(t 0 )=P0 , P(t01)=P1 , LF( τ 0 )=LF 0 , LF( τ 01 )=LF1, where τ= t-t 1 is the time lagged  by t 1 , i.e. by the lag of the change in price behind the change in  labor force.

For  1D  problems,  we  have  fixed  values  as  boundary  conditions  instead  of  boundary integrals. The number of boundary conditions in (6) is complete for calculation (or quantitative estimation,  if  there  is  no  analytic  solution)  all  involved  coefficients,  considering  that,  without loss of generality, one can always set P0 =1.0 as a boundary condition.   When estimated, these coefficients entirely define the particular solution of (6):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

on both boundaries, i.e. at t 0 and t 01 , as well as over the entire time domain between t 0 and t 01 . (It is presumed that LF(t) is  a  function of time known from measurements.) The estimation of all involved coefficients is the essence of numerical solution of 2D and 3D problems by BEM in scientific applications. In this study, a simple trial-and-error method is used as based on visual fit.  Therefore,  the  residual  between  observed  and  predicted  curves  is  not  minimized  in  any metrics and a better OLS solution is likely to exist.

For  solving  problems  (1)  and  (2)  using  (7)  with  an  increasing  accuracy,  we  can  use  a series of boundary conditions for subsequent years. As a rule, inflation in developed countries varies in a relatively narrow range and only rarely dives into the zone of negative growth rate. This makes it difficult to obtain reliable estimates of the involved coefficients from short time series,  which  is  a  characteristic  feature  of  economic  research.    Our  experience  shows,  that depending on the dynamics of inflation and the level of measurement noise in a given country, one needs from 30 to 50 readings to get a reliable solution of problems (1) or (2). (Japan is a brilliant  example  of  a  country  with  a  long  history  of  deflation,  which  makes  the  resolution  of cumulative curves possible even for shorter time intervals.) Similar to many physical problems, the wider is the range of inflation change and lower is the noise level (i.e. the higher is signal to noise ratio) the shorter observation period is needed. A proper set of coefficients should make subsequent residuals between observed and predicted cumulative curves to be a stationary time series with decreasing relative (i.e. normalized to the attained cumulative value) errors. This is a consequence of high correlation in measurement errors for any variable with increasing level: over time, each annual reading is characterized by the same absolute error, but the cumulative change  over  decades,  which  is  much  larger  that  any  annual  step,  is  measured  with  the  same absolute  and  falling  in  relative  terms  error.  Compare  this  feature  with  famous  tests  for cointegration, where time series are differentiated with a significant decrease in signal-to-noise ratio  and  corresponding increase in measurement error, both absolute and relative. In physical terms, if a link between two variables does exist one should better use integral not differential approach.

Overall, solution (7) is the basis of the cumulative curve approach to estimate coefficients A1, A2 , etc., in relationships (1) and (2). In terms of the boundary element method, the right hand side of (7) is the particular solution of the (ordinary) differential equation (1). Because t 1 ≥ 0, the causality principle holds, and the independent function is known before the dependent one. The only  principal  difference  with  the  standard  BEM  used  in  scientific  applications  is  that  the solution (7) is not a closed-form or analytic solution, as those in fluid dynamics, acoustics, and electromagnetism. It is the change in labor force in a given country, which may follow a quite exotic trajectory as related to demographic, social, economic, cultural, climatic, etc. circumstances. From (7), inflation in the country can be exactly predicted at a time horizon t 1 , and possibly evaluated at longer horizons using various projections of labor force (Kitov, Kitov, 2008a). As a logic consequence, there is no alternative way to predict inflation since it is etirely constrained  by  the  change  in  labor  force.  At  the  same  time,  solution  (7)  may  have  infinite number of future trajectories.

It is a requirement that BEM is applicable to problems for which Green's functions can be derived,  i.e.  the  functions  describing  the  solution  in  the  body  between  the  boundaries.  For example,  fields  in  linear  homogeneous  media  created  by  point  (Dirac  delta-function)  sources. What does play the role of the Green function in the problem under consideration? The answer is obvious: ln[(LF(t)/LF(t0))] and (t-t 0 ) . A linear combination of these two functions comprises any particular solution of (3).  In physical terms, there is a causal link between labor force and the combination of inflation and unemployment. However, the particular solutions of problems (1) and (2) are sensitive to the change in 'physical' conditions in a given economy. When a central bank introduces a strict bound on inflation, both coefficients in (1) should change. Unemployment must react to compensate the  deviation  from  the  original  relationship  (4)  and both coefficients in (2) must also change. However, the generalized relationship holds as long as the economy reproduces all economic and social links between its agents. Apparently, there are circumstances in which the generalized relationship does not work any more. Moreover, at some point  in  the  past,  there  was  no  generalized  relationship  between  labor  force,  inflation  and unemployment. At some point in the future, current relations will not hold any more replaced by some new economic laws.

There is  a  variety  of  numerical  methods  for  the  estimation  of  coefficients  in  boundary problem (7), which are the workhorse of the BEM. For our purposes, even the simplest visual fit between observed and predicted cumulative curves over 40 to 50 years is an adequate method for the  estimation.  Thus,  all  coefficients  estimated  in  this  study  are  likely  to  be  slightly  biased  in sense of OLS, but still provide a much better overall fit than any set of coefficients, which can be obtained by OLS (or even the VAR technique) from dynamic data.

In order to demonstrate the power of the cumulative curve concept we applied the method to Austria and the USA (Kitov, Kitov, Dolinskaya, 2007ab). Figure 1 (right panel) displays the observed  cumulative  curve  in  Austria  and  that  obtained  from  the  particular  solution  (7)  of equation (1):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where π (t) is  the GDP deflator reported by national statistics, with the boundary conditions set for 1960 and 2003 (Kitov, 2007a): Π (1959)= 0; Π (2003)= 1.637; LF(1959) =2,364,200; LF(2003) =3,424,900, where Π (2003)= Σπ (t i ) , i =1960,…, 2003.

These  boundary  conditions  evolve  with  calendar  year,  but  since  the predicted cumulative curve is always close to the observed one, coefficients in (4) do not fluctuate much. It is  possible  to  get  the  best-fit  coefficients  using  the  full  set  of  estimations  for  all  possible combinations of the start and end years. However, this is not the purpose of the study, which demonstrates that the concept linking inflation and unemployment to the level of labor force is an adequate one even in its simplest realization.

The boundary integral equation method allows effective noise suppression, both the one induced by the discretization of continuous functions and that related to measurement errors. The superior performance of the boundary integral method is demonstrated by Figure 2, where the differences between predicted and observed time series are shown. As one can judge from the left  panel  of  the  Figure,  the  difference  between  the  cumulative  curves  does  not  deviate  much from the zero line.

The measured dynamic series of π (t) and that predicted from the dLF( τ )/LF( τ ) in the left panel of Figure 1 contain 47 observations and are essentially non-stationary. According to the Phillips-Perron  unit  root  test, z( ρ ) =-7.1  for  the  measured  time  series  and z( ρ )=-5.29  for  the predicted one. The 1% critical value is -16.63 and the 5% critical value is -13.17. The augmented Dickey-Fuller test gives z(t)=1.87 and -1.53, respectively, with the 1% critical values -3.61 and the 5% critical value of  -2.94. Therefore, one can not reject the null hypothesis of the presence of unit roots in both time series.  As shown below, the first differences of both series have no unit  roots,  and  thus  the  original  series  are  essentially  integrated  of  order  1,  I(1),  and  it  is necessary to test them for cointegration before using linear regression analysis.

The Phillips-Perron  test  shows  that  the  difference  between  the  measured  and  observed variables  is  characterized  by z( ρ )=-34.37,  with  the  1%  critical  value  of  -18.63.    The  DickeyFuller test gives z(t)=5.41, with the 1% critical value of -3.61. Therefore, both tests reject the presence  of  unit  roots  in  the  difference  and,  thus,  it  is  integrated  of  order  0.  This  finding evidences in favor of the hypothesis that the observed and predicted inflation are cointegrated because the difference is similar to the residual in the Engle-Granger (1987) two-step method. The only distinction is that the residual of a linear regression is replaced with the difference of the measured and predicted time series. This is a insignificant deviation, however, because there exists a linear combination of two I(1) series,  which is proved to be a I(0) series. For that reason, we do not follow up the original Engle-Granger method in this study. It should give no other result except the absence of unit roots in the residual. Otherwise, it is a flawed method.

The Johansen procedure tests for cointegration and defines cointegration rank at the same time. For two variables, cointegration rank 1 means the existence of an equilibrium long-term relation.  For  Austria,  cointegration  rank  is  1  with  trace  statistics  of  the  Johansen  test  of  2.80 compared  to  the  5%  critical  value  of  3.76.  Thus,  the  null  hypothesis  of  the  existence  of  a cointegrating relation cannot be rejected.

From this analysis one can conclude that there exists a cointegrating relation between the observed inflation and that predicted from the change in labor force and unemployment using relationship  (4)  with  the  empirical  coefficients  derived  above.  Therefore,  the  case  of  Austria validates the model obtained by the method of cumulative curves in econometric terms and one can  use  the  long-term  causal  relationships  as  empirical  relations  describing  the  Austrian economy as a physical system. The coefficients obtained by simple fit of the cumulative curves provide a linear relation between the inflation and the change in labor force with an I(0) process as the residual.  On the contrary, the above tests for cointegration are based on an extraordinary sophisticated assumptions and sets of simulated data.

Now  the  existence  of  a  cointegrating  relation  between  the  observed  and  predicted inflation is proved and one can use standard statistical methods for the estimation of predictive power of the model. A simple linear regression gives R 2 =0.82 and standard (RMS) error of 0.9% for the years between 1960 and 2003. Hence, the predicted series explains 82% of the variability in the measured one and the prediction uncertainty is on the level of measurement uncertainty, with the range of inflation change between 9.5% and -0.4%.  It is also instructive to build a VAR model for the observed and predicted inflation in Austria, which uses autoregressive properties of both series. With the largest time lag of 4, the VAR model is characterized by RMSE of 1.1% for  the  measured  series,  i.e.  by  a  larger  error  than  that  obtained  by  OLS.  In  any  case,  the uncertainty is very low according to the standards dictated by conventional models.

Figure 1. Observed and predicted inflation in Austria. Left panel - annual (dynamic) curves. Right panel : cumulative curves.

<!-- image -->

Figure  2. Left  panel :  The  difference  between  the  observed  and  predicted  inflation  (i.e.  the  prediction error) presented in Figure 4. The differnce presented for the dynamic and cumulative curves. Right panel: The difference for the cumulative curves normalized to the atteained level of cumulative inflation. Notice the gradual decrease in the relative error through time.

<!-- image -->

The cumulative curves have another implication. The long-term behavior of the observed and predicted curves implies that the former can be replaced with the latter without any loss of accuracy. Kitov (2007a) demonstrated that high prediction accuracy for both the dynamic and cumulative series is also achievable when only the change in labor force is used. Corresponding RMSE are 0.01 and 0.016 for the period between 1960 and 2003, as shown in Figure 2 (left panel),  which  also  demonstrates  that  relative  deviation  between  the  measured  and  predicted cumulative  curves,  i.e.  the  difference  divided  by  the  attained  level  of  cumulative  inflation, gradually decreases (right panel). Both differences in the left panel of Figure 2 are integrated of order 0, as the Phillips-Perron (PP) and the Dickey-Fuller (DF) tests show. Specifically, the PP test gives z( ρ )=-50.6 and -19.9 for the dynamic and cumulative series with the 1% critical value of -18.8; and z(t)=6.96 and -3.54 with the 1% critical value of -3.63 (5% critical value is -2.95). The DF test gives z(t)=6.97 and -3.56 with the 1% critical value of -3.63.  Therefore, one can reject the null the series contain a unit root, i.e. both differences are stationary processes. The difference between the cumulative curves is an I(0) process and is a linear combination of two I(2) processes! This is the expression of the power of the boundary element method in science integral solutions, when exist, suppress noise very effectively by destructive interference.

Thus, the replacement of the observed curve with the predicted one is the solution of the original ordinary differential equation. Such a replacement does not compromise the accuracy of cumulative inflation growth, i.e. the overall change in price over longer periods. Imagine, there is no  need  to  measure  inflation  -  just  count  the  number  of  people  in  labor  force!  It  is  also applicable  to  the  prediction  of  the  price  evolution  at  longer  horizons  -  one  has  to  project  the growth in labor force.

We have carried out a similar analysis for the United States. Figure 3 compares dynamic and cumulative curves of measured inflation to that predicted from labor force. The best visual fit of the cumulative curves provides the following relationship:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where π (t) is  the  CPI  inflation.  The  period  covered  by  this  relationship  is  between  1965  and 2006.  Figure  4  depicts  the  differences  between  the  observed  and  predicted  curves,  both  the dynamic and cumulative ones, for the same period. Despite the best fit between the cumulative curves  there  is  a  constant  term  in  both  differences.  This  is  an  important  specification  of  the following unit root tests.

Both  differences  in  Figure  4  are  integrated  of  order  0,  as  the  Phillips-Perron  (with maximum time  lag  4)  and  the  Dickey-Fuller  (DF)  tests  show.  Specifically,  the  PP  test  gives z( ρ )=-38.44 and -14.71 for the dynamic and cumulative difference with the 1% critical value of 12.54; and z(t)=5.94 and -3.54 with the 1% critical value of -2.63 (5% critical value is -1.95). The  DF  test  gives z(t)=5.95  and  -3.10,  respectively,  with  the  1%  critical  value  of  -2.63. Therefore,  one  can  reject  the  null  that  the  series  contain  a  unit  root,  i.e.  both  differences  are stationary  processes.  Having  the  stationary  difference  between  the  cumulative  curves  one  can suggest that the dynamic times series, which are obtained from the cumulative curves, are also cointegrated.  In  other  words,  there  exists  a  linear  combination  of  the  dynamic  series  which creates an I(0) process.

Figure 3. Observed and predicted (CPI) inflation in the United States. Left panel - annual rate curves. Right panel : cumulative curves.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4. The difference between the observed and predicted inflation presented in Figure 3.

<!-- image -->

We have analyzed the performance of the cumulative curve method for two countries. Both examples demonstrate that one can easily obtain coefficients of linear lagged relationship between  inflation  and  the  change  in  labor  force,  which  provide  excellent  prediction  for  both dynamic and cumulative inflation.  As in physics, the success of this method can be only rooted in  the  existence  of  a  causal  link  between  these  macroeconomic  variables.    And  similar  to  the situation  in  the  hard  sciences,  there  is  no  ultimate  proof  of  the  existence  of  the  link  -  only statistical evidences obtained from numerous measurements with increasing accuracy. Hence, to make the link more reliable one must extend relevant data set - both over time and across other developed economies.   Section 3 adds on four West European countries.

## 3. Unemployment in European countries

The linear and lagged relationships between inflation, unemployment, and the change in labor force have been demonstrating an excellent performance for the largest (the United States, Japan, Germany, and France) and smaller (Austria and Canada) world economies since the early 1960s. These relationships  are  expected  to  be  successful  for  other  developed  economies  with  similar socio-economic structure. European countries provide a variety of features related to inflation and unemployment as one can conclude from the economic statistics provided by the OECD. This  diversity  includes  periods  of  very  high  inflation  accompanied  by  high  unemployment, periods of low inflation and unemployment, and other combinations complicated by transition periods. It is a big challenge for any theory of inflation to explain the diversity of empirical facts.

## Austria

It is convenient to start with Austria for four reasons. First, there are several alternative data sets for  all  involved  variables,  which  demonstrate  the  uncertainty  of  measurements  as  related  to definition.  Second, we have already derived a model for Austria for the period between 1960 and 2003 (Kitov, 2007a), which is also discussed in Section 2. Recent readings (between 2004 and 2008) and alternative data sets allow validation of the previous model. Third, the length of data  set  for  Austria  is  around  50  years  long  what  made  it  possible  to  test  the  model  for cointegration.    Other  European  countries  is  this  study  are  characterized  by  shorter  periods  of measurement what effectively makes any test for cointegration unreliable. Fourth, it was found that the Austrian data sets have a major break in 1986, when new units of measurements were introduced  by  revisions  to  current  definitions.  The  OECD  (2008)  provides  the  following description of relevant breaks:

Series breaks: Employment data from 1994 are compatible with ILO guidelines and the time criterion applied to classify persons as employed is reduced to 1 hour. Prior to 1994, armed forces were included in the civilian labour force, in services. In 1987, a change occurred in the definition of the unemployed where non-registered jobseekers were classified as unemployed if they had been seeking work in the last four weeks and if they were available for work within four weeks. In previous surveys, the unemployment concept excluded most unemployed persons not previously employed and most persons re-entering the labour market.

Therefore, the model for Austria is an instructive one and evidences that there were no structural  breaks  in  terms  of  the  change  in  underlying  economic  processes,  but  rather  new measurement units were used. (Same as a country would shift from miles per hour to kilometers per hour.) Therefore, the relationships derived for the period before 1986 should be scaled to fit new units.

The model and its performance have been described and tested in Section 2 and in several papers. So, there is no harm to skip many formal details in describing the same procedures for individual cases and to focus on empirical results represented in graphical form.  Scatter plots and  time  history  curves  bring  most  valuable  information  on  amplitude,  timing,  scatter  of  the involved variables and the difference between observed and predicted time series.  Generally, graphical representation is more informative than long tables.

Figure 5 displays several time series for unemployment and the change rate of labor force obtained  according  to  different  definitions:  AMS  (Arbeitsmarktservice  -  http://www.ams.at/), NAC (national accounts - http://www.statistik.at/), Eurostat, and OECD. A remarkable feature in both  panels  of  Figure  5  is  a  large  difference  between  amplitudes  of  the  curves,  otherwise evolving synchronously. Therefore, it is possible to scale the curves. The difference between the curves could serve as a conservative estimate of the uncertainty in relevant measurements, i.e. as a proxy of the difference between measured and true values of the studied variables. Specifically, one can compare the dLF/LF curves near 1975, 1985, 1995, and 2005. There are spikes in the OECD and Eurostat curves, which not present in the NAC curve. Usually, such spikes manifest a step-like  revision  to  population  controls  or  the  introduction  of  new  definitions.  All  in  all,  the modelling of unemployment and inflation using the dLF/LF curves in Figure 5 has some room for the deviation between predicted and observed curves as associated with measurement errors. Figure 6 depicts three time series with two measures of inflation rate: CPI inflation reported by the  national  statistical  agency  and  GDP  deflator  reported  by  the  OECD  and  Eurostat.  The difference between the latter two measures is so large because they count nominal and real GDP in local currency and Euros (using current exchange rate).

Figure  5.  Unemployment  rate  ( left  panel )  and  the  rate  of  labor  force  change  ( right  panel )  in  Austria according to various definitions: NAC and AMS - national definition, Eurostat and OECD. Variations in the variables are a crude approximation of the uncertainty in relevant measurements.

<!-- image -->

Figure  7  demonstrates  the  accuracy  of  the  generalized  model  (4)  in  prediction  of inflation. This model is similar to that described in Section 2 and also has a break in 1986, but it uses  different  measures  of  labor  force  and  unemployment  (both  AMS).  As  a  consequence, empirical coefficients are also different, except fixed one: C2 =-1.0; C1 =1.1 and C3 =0.068 before 1986; C1 =0.8  and C3 =0.077  after  1986.  These  coefficients  are  obtained  using  the  cumulative curve method, as shown in the right panel of Figure 7.

For  Austria,  there  is  no  need  to  distinguish  between  unemployment  and  inflation.  The predictive power of the generalized model allows an accurate forecast for both macroeconomic variables from projections of labor force. The better is the projection, the higher is the accuracy.

Figure 6. Three definitions of the rate of price inflation in Austria: GDP deflator (DGDP) - national currency and Euro, and CPI inflation.

<!-- image -->

Figure 7. Prediction of GDP deflator in Austria using the generalized model. Left panel : the rate of price inflation . Right panel : Cumulative inflation. (See details in the text.)

<!-- image -->

Italy

Retaining the above developed approach to the presentation of data and empirical model, Figure 8  displays  two  measures  of  unemployment  and  the  change  rate  of  labor  force  in  Italy.  First measure is introduced by national statistics and second is estimated according to the approach developed in the United States. All time series are available through the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (http://www.bls.gov/data/). The difference between the curves is obvious. In contrast to Austria, the unemployment curves cannot be so easily scaled, i.e. their cross-correlation is lower. Moreover,  it  seems  that  the  national  definition  was  replaced  by  the  US  one  near  1993.  This assumption is supported by the change rate of labor force having a large spike in the same year, the spike being a well-known sign of a large revision to definitions (OECD, 2008):

Series  breaks:  In  October  1992,  changes  were  introduced  in  the  Household  Labour  Force  Survey concerning  the  lower  age  limit  of  the  active  population  (from  14  to  15  years  old),  the  definition  of unemployment, the population estimates, the estimation procedure and the imputation procedure. These changes resulted in a reduction in level estimates for employment and unemployment. In January 2004, major  changes  were  introduced  such  as:  the  passage  to  a  continuous  survey,  the  implementation  of CAPI/CATI  instead  of  PAPI  for interviews, better adherence  to the international definition of employment, the change of the age limit in the definition of the unemployed (74 years old), and the data were revised back till the third quarter 1992.

Figure  8.  Unemployment  rate  ( left  panel )  and  the  rate  of  labor  force  change  ( right  panel )  in  Italy according to national definition (NAC) and the definition adopted in the US.

<!-- image -->

In Figure 9, the observed unemployment is compared to that predicted from the change in labor force. Using only visual fit between the dynamic curves, we have estimated the coefficients in (2) for Italy: B1 =3.0, B2 =0.085, and t 2 =11 (!) years. Hence, an increase in labor force causes a proportional increase in unemployment with a factor of 3. The original time series dLF/LF is very  noisy  and  thus  is  smoothed  by  a  five-year  moving  average,  MA(5).  The  right  panel  in Figure 9 displays a scatter plot - the measured UE vs. the predicted one, a linear regression line, and corresponding equation. The slope of the regression line is 0.96 (a slight underestimation of the slope results from the uncertainty in the independent variable) and R 2 =0.92. So, the predicted series explains 92% of the variability in the observed one.

Figure 9. Observed and predicted unemployment in Italy. The prediction horizon is 11 years. Due to large fluctuations associated with measurement errors in the labor force we are using centered MA(5) for the prediction, which reduces the horizon to 9 years. Goodness-of-fit ( R 2 =) 0.92 for the period between 1973 and 2006, with RMSFE of 0.55%. The unemployment should start to increase in 2008.

<!-- image -->

As a rule, smoothing by MA(5) is an operation introducing a high bias in time series due to increasing autocorrelation. However, Italy is an exceptional economy with an eleven-year lag of unemployment behind the change in labor force. This lag is twice as large as in Germany and the  largest  among  all  studied  countries.  What  kind  of  social  and  economic  inertia  should  be involved in such a long delay of reaction?  In any case, the smoothing with MA(5) is an adequate and  accurate  procedure  for  the  prediction  of  unemployment  at  9-year  horizon  in  Italy  with RMSFE of only 0.55% for the period between 1973 and 2006. This small RMSFE is associated with a wide range of change in the unemployment from 5.4% in 1974 to 12% in 1999. Together with the extremely large forecasting horizon, such uncertainty allows a decisive validation of our model in the next 9 years.  One  can  expect  that  unemployment  in  Italy  will  be  growing  since 2008 and will reach ~11.4% [±0.6 %] near 2012. After 2012, unemployment in Italy will likely start to descend.

## The Netherlands

For the Netherlands, two different time series are available for unemployment and labor force according  to  national  (NAC)  definition  and  the  US  concept.  Two  measures  of  inflation  are reported by the OECD. Figures 10 and 11 display all the involved series, which have different length but all are in the range between 1960 and 2006. The difference in the measures of labor force  is  outstanding,  especially  around  1980  and  1990.  One  should  not  tolerate  such  a discrepancy.  Otherwise,  no  quantitative  analysis  is  possible  and  economics  will  never  have  a chance  to  join  the  club  of  the  hard  sciences.  The  OECD  (2008)  provides  the  following information on the changes in definitions in the Netherlands:

Series  breaks:  The  break  in  1991-92  is  due  to  the  introduction  of  new  definitions  in  the  survey.  The implementation  of  a  continuous  survey  also  caused  a  break  in  series  between  1986  and  1987.  The increase  in  employment  figures  is  due  to  the  survey  collecting  more  information  on  persons  working fewer  weekly  hours  (less  than  20  hours  a  week).  Between  1982  and  1983,  the  break,  mainly  in  the unemployment series, is due to the implementation of the Labour Force Survey.

<!-- image -->

Figure  10.  Unemployment  rate  ( left  panel )  and  the  rate  of  labor  force  change  ( right  panel )  in  the Netherlands according to national definition (NAC) and the definition adopted in the US.

Figure 12 corroborates the presence of a reliable Phillips curve in the Netherlands, at least between  1970  and  2001;  the  DGDP  time  series  is  taken  from  the  OECD  data  set  and  the unemployment readings obey the national definition. It is worth noting that the unemployment is three years ahead of the inflation. Therefore, one can predict inflation in the Netherlands using measured unemployment, but not vice versa. Results of linear regression of the unemployment on the inflation are shown in the right panel: R 2 =0.79 for the entire period between 1971 and 2004,  with  RMSFE at a 3-year horizon of 1.6%. The measured unemployment changed from 0.9% (!) in 1971 to 10.2% in 1983. If to exclude three recent points from the unemployment curve, RMSFE=1.3% and R 2 =0.89. The year of 2001 is likely to be associated with a break in measurement units as Figures 10 and 11 show, because of the introduction of new statistics.

The unemployment rate and the change in labor force both are three years ahead of the inflation. Thus, it is natural to use the generalized model to predict inflation. In the left panel of Figure 13 we present the observed GDP deflator and that predicted from the labor force for the years between 1971 and 2004. Because of high fluctuations in the labor force time series (see Figure 10) the predicted curve is smoothed with MA(5). Finally, the right panel in Figure 13 evaluates  the  predictive  power  of  the  generalized  model.  The  agreement  is  excellent  with  a possibility to predict at a three year horizon, when accurate measurements of unemployment and labor  force  will  be  available.  In  a  sense,  the  prediction  from  labor  characteristics  has  an uncertainty  similar  to  that  associated  with  the  definition  of  inflation  -  compare  the  curves  in Figures 11 and 13.

<!-- image -->

Figure  11.  Two  measures  of  inflation  in  the  Netherland;  GDP  deflator  and  CPI  inflation.  Both  are reported by the OECD.

<!-- image -->

Figure 12. Phillips curve in the Netherlands.

<!-- image -->

So,  one  might  consider  the  case  of  the  Netherlands  as  an  evidence  in  favor  of  the generalized model. One more developed country reveals the presence of a long-term equilibrium link between inflation, unemployment, and the level of labor force. The goodness-of-fit between the observed and predicted time series in the right panel of Figure 13 is ( R 2 =) 0.77 for the period between 1980 and 2006. We do not conduct tests for cointegration because the samples are small for any robust inferences.

Figure 13. Inflation in the Netherlands (DGDP and CPI) as a function of the change in labor force and unemployment.

<!-- image -->

## Sweden

For  Sweden,  two  different  versions  of  unemployment  rate  and  labor  force  are  available  -  the NAC  and  US  ones.  Figure  14  displays  the  evolution  of  all  series  between  1960  and  2006. Surprisingly,  the  curves  are  very  close  with  only  one  visible  step  in  1993,  as  reported  by  the OEDC (2008):

Series  breaks : In  1993  a  new  reference  week  system  and  new  estimation  procedures  were  introduced. Also, the definition of unemployed was adjusted so that it followed the recommendations of the ILO more closely. In the new reference week system, the Labour Force Survey measures all weeks during the year as  opposed to  two  weeks  per  month  in  the  older  system.  In  1987  a  new  questionnaire  was  introduced resulting in the presentation of additional variables, and in the establishment of dependent interviewing. From 1986 to 2006, data refer to all persons aged 16 to 64 years; previously they referred to all persons aged 16 to 74 years. As from October 2007 the data cover age group 15 to 74 again.

The Phillips curve in Sweden is not a reliable link between unemployment and inflation, as Figure 15 shows. The goodness-of-fit is only 0.67 for the years between 1971 and 2006. The unemployment curve does not match the fluctuations in the inflation curve. It is likely that the definition  of  unemployment before 1987 was not adequate - it essentially produced a straight line from 1960 to 1980.

It  seems  that  the  definition  of  labor  force  has  the  same  problem  as  the  definition  of unemployment, as the left panel of Figure 16 demonstrates. The observed curve diverge after 2001  from  that  predicted  using  labor  force  only.  (Same  problem  as  with  the  Netherlands.)

Otherwise,  the  agreement  is  good.  As  in  many  European  countries,  the  change  in  labor  force leads the change in unemployment; the former is two years ahead of the latter in Sweden.

The  generalized  model  links  all  three  involved  macroeconomic  variables  much  better than individual relationships. The right panel of Figure 16 evidences a reliable description of the inflation by the unemployment and the change in labor force. Because of fierce fluctuations in the inflation and labor force moving average MA(5) and MA(7) are applied to the original series. In Sweden, an increase in the level of labor force reduces the rate of unemployment and pushes inflation up, as coefficients in individual relationships between relevant variables shows.

<!-- image -->

Figure 14. Unemployment rate ( left  panel )  and  the  rate  of  labor  force  change  ( right  panel )  in  Sweden according to national definition (NAC) and the definition adopted in the US.

Figure 15. The Phillips curve in Sweden.

<!-- image -->

Figure  16. Left  panel :  Prediction  of  unemployment  by  the  change  in  labor  force. Right  panel :  The generalized model in Sweden: inflation as a function of the change in labor force and unemployment).

<!-- image -->

## Switzerland

The OECD reports measurements of unemployment in Switzerland only from 1991, as Figure 17 depicts. The BLS does not provide unemployment readings for this country at all. This makes the construction of a generalized model meaningless at this point in time.  Longer observations of labor force (right panel, Figure 17) and inflation (Figure 18) are available, however. Apparently, the labor force series has two breaks: one in 1974 of unknown nature and one in 1991, as the OECD (2008) informs:

Series breaks: From 1998, data are adjusted in line with the 2000 census. Prior to 1991, data refer only to persons who are gainfully employed at least six hours per week.

Figure 17. Unemployment rate ( left  panel )  and  the  rate  of  labor  force  change  ( right  panel )  in  Sweden according to national definition (NAC) and the definition adopted in the US

<!-- image -->

Figure 18. Two definitions of the rate of price inflation in Switzerland: GDP deflator and CPI inflation according to OECD definition.

<!-- image -->

The link between inflation and labor force also has a break around 1987, as Figure 19 depicts. Linear regression of the observed series on the predicted one is characterized by slope 0.74,  free  term  0.003,  and R 2 =0.82.  According  to  well-know  problem  with  OLS,  the  slope  is underestimated. Otherwise, the agreement is excellent. We did not use the cumulative curves for the estimation of coefficients in (1) for Switzerland since corresponding time series are not long enough  to  provide  a  robust  estimate.  On  the  other  hand,  the  original  inflation  curve  heavily oscillates,  and  one  needs  only  to  fit  the  peaks  of  the  oscillations  in  order  to  find  appropriate coefficients in (1), as shown in the Figure.

Figure 19. Left panel : The rate of CPI inflation in Switzerland as predicted by the generalized model with a structural break neat 1987 related to the change in measuring units. Notice that the predicted series is smoothed with MA(3). Right panel : Linear regression of the data in the left panel.

<!-- image -->

## The United States

Three  years  ago  we  presented  a  prediction  of  unemployment  at  a  six-year  horizon  (Kitov, 2006ab).  Despite  the  US  is  not  a  European  country,  this  is  a  good  opportunity  to  extend  the prediction by four new readings and check the accuracy of the previous prediction. There are two possibilities to predict unemployment in the USA - using the dependence on the change in labor force and the generalized model. Figure 20 and 21 displays pertinent dynamic and cumulative curves  with  their  equations.  As  predicted,  the  measured  unemployment  has  been  decreasing since 2004. The accuracy of the forecast increases when the measured and predicted curves are smoothed with MA(5) and MA(3), respectively. This is the effect of suppression of measurement noise  by  destructive  interference.  Considering  the  lag  of  six  years  (actually  22  quarters)  such smoothing does no harm to the out-of-sample prediction.

Figure 20. Prediction of unemployment USA from the change in labor force.

<!-- image -->

The second half of 2008 and the beginning of 2009 are characterized by a unprecedented fast growth in unemployment (not seasonally adjusted), from 5.2 % in May 2008 to 8.9% in February

2009. The predicted curves in Figures 20 and 21 do not show any sign of so high rate in the longrun.  Therefore,  both  models  predict  that  the  unemployment  should  return  to  the  level  ~5%  in near future.

Previously,  we  made  a  prediction  of  unemployment  at  a  longer  horizon  using  various projections  of  labor  force.  It  is  time  to  update  the  forecast  and  to  check  whether  one  should expect  the  transition  to  a  deflationary  period  since  2012.    Figure  22  presents  a  number  of prediction curves with data borrowed from the Congressional Budget Office (2004).  According to our model, deflation in the United States is inevitable.

Figure 21. Prediction of unemployment in the USA by the generalized model.

<!-- image -->

Figure 22.  The evolution of GDP deflator predicted using various projections of labor force. Sources: Congressional Budget Office; Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS); Social Security Administration (SSA); Macroeconomic Advisers (MA); Global Insight (GI).

<!-- image -->

## Conclusion

We have presented an empirical model explaining the evolution of inflation and unemployment in  developed  countries  as  driven  by  the  change  in  the  level  of  labor  force.  The  model  was previously tested on data from the biggest economies - the United States, Japan, Germany, and France. Smaller economies of Austria and Canada also support the existence of the link.

In order to validate the model and facilitate the procedure of the estimation of the model coefficients we have introduced and tested a new technique - the method of cumulative curves. This method is a direct analog of the boundary element methods extensively used in engineering and  science.  Using  Austria  and  the  United  States  as  examples,  we  have  demonstrated  that cumulative curves provide particular solutions of the model equations and guarantee the residual of the model to be a I(0) process. In other words, the difference between measured and predicted cumulative curves, both I(2) processes, is a stationary process. This is strong evidence in favor of the existence of a causal link between labor force and the pair inflation/unemployment.

Instead of repeating major and minor conclusions made in our previous papers we would like to summarize all results obtained so far as a complete list of empirical models derived for developed countries (in alphabetic order):

Austria:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Canada:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

France:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Germany:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Italy:

Japan:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The Netherlands:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Sweden:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Switzerland:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## The United States:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These developed countries produce a larger portion of the worlds' GDP. Most of these countries are situated in Western Europe. They had various economic and social histories in the 20 th century and in the first decade of the 21 st century.  Nevertheless, they all demonstrate similar links  between  inflation,  unemployment  and  labor  force.  Currently,  empirical  models  for Australia, Spain, and the United Kingdom are under construction.

## References

Atkeson, A., Ohanian, L.E., (2001). Are Phillips curves useful for forecasting inflation?, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 25, 2-11.

Banque  de  France,  (2004).  Definition  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  Retrieved  January  10,  2007  from http://www.banque-france.fr/gb/instit/sebc/1d.htm

Congressional Budget Office, (2004). CBO's Projections of the Labor Force, http://cbo.gov/ftpdocs/58xx/doc5803/09-15-LaborForce.pdf

Engle, R.,  Granger, C., (1987). Cointegration and error correction: representation, estimation, and testing. Journal of Econometrics, 55, 251-276

Johansen, S, (1988). Statistical analysis of cointegrating vectors. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 12, 231-254

Kitov, I., (2006a). Inflation, unemployment, labor force change in the USA, Working Papers 28, ECINEQ, Society for the Study of Economic Inequality, http://www.ecineq.org/milano/WP/ECINEQ2006-28.pdf

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Kitov,  I.,  (2006b).  Exact  prediction  of  inflation  in  the  USA,  MPRA  Paper  2735,  University  Library  of Munich, Germany, http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/2735/01/MPRA\_paper\_2735.pdf

Kitov, I., (2007a). Inflation, Unemployment, Labor Force Change in European countries, in T. Nagakawa (Ed.), Business Fluctuations and Cycles, pp. 67-112,  Hauppauge NY: Nova Science Publishers

Kitov, I., (2007b). Exact prediction of inflation and unemployment in Japan, MPRA Paper 5464, University Library of Munich, Germany, http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/5464/01/MPRA\_paper\_5464.pdf

Kitov,  I.,  (2007c).  Exact  prediction  of  inflation  and  unemployment  in  Canada,  MPRA  Paper  5015, University Library of Munich, Germany, http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/5015/01/MPRA\_paper\_5015.pdf

Kitov,  I.,  (2007d).  Exact  prediction  of  inflation  and  unemployment  in  Germany,  MPRA  Paper  5088, University Library of Munich, Germany,  http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/5088/01/MPRA\_paper\_5088.pdf

Kitov, I., (2009a). The anti-Phillips curve, MPRA Paper 13641, University Library of Munich, Germany, http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/13641/01/MPRA\_paper\_13641.pdf

Kitov,  I.,  (2009b).  Mechanical  model  of  personal  income  distribution,  MPRA  Paper  13422,  University Library of Munich, Germany, http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/13422/01/MPRA\_paper\_13422.pdf

Kitov, I., Kitov, O., (2008a). The driving force of labor force participation in developed countries, Journal of Applied Economic Sciences, Spiru Haret University, Faculty of Financial Management and Accounting Craiova, vol. 2(3(5)\_Fall), pp. 203-222.

Kitov,  I.,  Kitov,  O.,  (2008b).  The  driving  force  of  labor  productivity,  MPRA  Paper  9069,  University Library of Munich, Germany, http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/9069/01/MPRA\_paper\_9069.pdf

Kitov,  I.,  Kitov,  O.,  Dolinskaya,  S.,  (2007a).  Inflation  as  a  function  of  labor  force  change  rate: cointegration  test  for  the  USA,  MPRA  Paper  2734,  University  Library  of  Munich,  Germany,  http://mpra.ub.unimuenchen.de/2734/01/MPRA\_paper\_2734.pdf

Kitov,  I.,  Kitov,  O.,  Dolinskaya,  S.,  (2007b).  Relationship  between  inflation,  unemployment  and  labor force  change  rate  in  France:  cointegration  test,  MPRA  Paper  2736,  University  Library  of  Munich,  Germany, http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/2736/01/MPRA\_paper\_2736.pdf

OECD, (2008). Notes by Country, http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/35/3/2771299.pdf

Stock, J.H., Watson, M.W., (1999). Forecasting inflation, Journal of Monetary Economics, 44, pp. 293-335.

Stock, J.H., Watson, M.W., (2005). Has inflation become harder to forecast?, manuscript,  Harvard University, http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~JStock/pdf/qepd\_sw\_jmcb\_submission\_1.pdf