## Some Remarks on T-copulas

V. Frishling and D. G. Maher ∗

November 4, 2018

## Abstract

We examine three methods of constructing correlated Studentt random variables. Our motivation arises from simulations that utilise heavytailed distributions for the purposes of stress testing and economic capital calculations for financial institutions. We make several observations regarding the suitability of the three methods for this purpose.

Keywords:

Student- t distribution, correlation, copula.

## 1 Introduction

The use of heavy-tailed distributions for the purposes of stress testing and economic capital calculations has gained attention recently in an attempt to capture exposure to extreme events.

Among the various distributions available, the Student-t distribution has gained popularity in these calculations for several reasons (as opposed to, say, α -stable distributions). The first is that for three or more degrees of freedom it possesses a finite variance, and so can be calibrated to the variance of observable data. The second is that t-variables are relatively easy and fast to generate for simulations.

However, one very desirable property that should be exhibited by any calculation of economic capital is the ability to capture concentrated risks. Put simply, asset movements - particularly large movements - should be correlated. Thus, it is necessary to generate correlated t-variables. A recent paper on this topic is [SL] - we refer the reader to this paper for the necessary background on t -copulas, and the references contained therein.

In this paper we examine three t-copulas in this context, in particular their properties regarding correlation and tail correlation.

∗ Group Market Risk, National Australia Bank. 24/255 George St, Sydney NSW 2000. Corresponding author: 〈 David.G.Maher@nab.com.au 〉

## 2 T-Copulas

Let X,Y ∼ N (0 , 1) with correlation ρ ( X,Y ) = ρ .

Typically, correlated Studentt distributions with n degrees of freedom, U and V , can be formed via the transformations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C is sampled from a chi-squared distribution with n degrees of freedom 1

An alternative formulation is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C 1 and C 2 are independently sampled from a chi-squared distribution with n degrees of freedom. This formulation is suggested to be more desirable in [SL] as it gives rise to a product structure of the density function when ρ = 0.

However, we will show that this has a major impact on the correlation, and in particular the resulting bivariate distribution 2 and tail correlation.

Another na¨ ıve method of constructing correlated t-variables, U and V , (assumed to have the same degrees of freedom) is the following: take uncorrelated t-variables, U and W , then put

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

However, V will not have a t-distribution as the sum of two t-variables is not a t-variable. Note that for three degrees of freedom or more, the t-variable sums lie within the domain of attraction of the Normal distribution. However, since we are only performing one sum, the tail of the distribution is still a power law of order n . Despite this, the resulting distribution does posses some useful properties.

(2.1), (2.2), and (2.3) define the three t-copulas that we will examine. We refer to these t-copulas as being generated by the Same χ 2 , Independent χ 2 , and Correlated-t , respectively.

## 3 Independent χ 2

We will firstly examine the case of the Independent χ 2 t-variables. We now show that this construction has a major impact on the correlation as follows:

1 Formulations for Studentt distributions with different degrees of freedom can be found

in [SL].

2 We shall restrict our analysis in this paper to the bivariate case only.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assuming that A and B have the same distribution, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In fact, the amount by which the correlation is reduced, namely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

can be determined explicitly. For the case where C 1 and C 2 have 3 degrees of freedom, this turns out to be 2 /π ≈ 0 . 6366.

We now determine the amount by which the correlation is reduced by explicitly. We first begin with a calculation of the required moments - we could not find a convenient reference, and record it here for completeness:

Lemma 1. The n th moment of the Inverse-Chi Distribution with ν degrees of freedom is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: Let f ( x ; α, β ) denote the Gamma distribution, given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If α = ν/ 2 and β = 2, then this is the chi-squared distribution with ν degrees of freedom.

We wish to make the transformation Y = 1 / √ X . Since this is a monotonic function, we use the transformation formula:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(3.14)

We now derive the formula for the n -th moment of Y . Firstly, note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark: Note that the moments for this distribution will not be defined when α -n/ 2 is a negative integer.

Consider now the case when α = ν/ 2 and β = 2:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as required. □

Proposition 1. The factor by which the correlation is reduced by is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, we have for ν = 3 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and for large ν we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: Let us first consider the case ν = 3:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence,

and

Thus we have,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For general degrees of freedom we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark: Compare (3.31) with the expression given in [SL], section 4.1, which is very similar, except that they (erroneously) give the square-root of this expression.

Using the properties of Beta functions and Stirling's formula, we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and thus

as required. □

To explicitly compute (3.31) for a given value of ν , we need to consider odd and even cases. We table here the following values:

| Degrees of Freedom  Reduction of Correlation  3  0.6366  4  0.7854  5  0.8488  6  0.8836  7  0.9054  8  0.9204  9  0.9313  10  0.9396  20  0.9726  50  0.9896  100  0.9949   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 4 Empirical Distributions and Copulas

We now provide empirical results for each of our three t-copulas. We simulated 1,000,000 observations using each of the three methods, and have provided below graph of the pdf's of the distribution and the copulas. We have only considered here the case of the t-distribution with three degrees of freedom, and a base correlation of 0.9. (the graphs presented in this section are based on the first 5,000 observations)

Figure 1: Same χ 2

<!-- image -->

Figure 2: Independent χ 2

<!-- image -->

Figure 3: Correlatedt

<!-- image -->

As can be clearly seen, the pdf's of the Same χ 2 and Correlatedt are elliptical, but the pdf of the Independent χ 2 is quite splayed out.

We have also constructed graphs of their copulas (below). Despite being slightly more 'fatter', the copula of the Independent χ 2 appear little different.

Figure 4: Same χ 2 Copula Density

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: Independent χ 2 Copula Density

<!-- image -->

Figure 6: Correlatedt Copula Density

<!-- image -->

## 5 Tail Correlation

We firstly prove a general result concerning the tail correlation. Recall that the tail correlation is the quantity

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ is the number of standard deviations into the tail.

Consider two random variables, Z and X , having correlation ρ , formed by the sum:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X and Y are independent random variables.

Theorem 1. The tail correlation of X and Z is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, suppose the tails of X and Y have a power law, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and X and Y are Normal variables, then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The corollary for the t -distribution follows from our proof of this theorem:

Corollary 1. Let X and Y be independent t -variables with ν degrees of freedom. Then the tail variance of X is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: Consider the conditional correlation, given X &gt; µ . Then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so the behaviour of the tail correlation depends on the tail variance V . We firstly examine power law tails, then the Normal distribution.

## Power law tails:

Let the tail of a distribution (density) be f ( x ) = Cx -n The conditional distribution is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the conditional density is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, the conditional variance (that is, V ) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Normal Distribution:

The conditional distribution for the Normal distribution is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the conditional density is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, the conditional variance (that is, V ) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It can be shown using l'hˆ opital's rule that this expression tends to zero as µ tends to infinity. Thus we have,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which concludes the proof. □

## 6 Tail Correlations: Empirical Results

We now examine numerical calculations of the tail correlations for each of our three t-copulas. That is, we estimate the quantity

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ is the number of standard deviations into the tail. We record the tail correlation for each of our three t-copulas - using the same base 0.9 correlation and three degrees of freedom - for the given standard deviation below:

As can be seen, the tail correlation for the t-distribution using the Same χ 2 remains high, and decays slightly into the tail to approximately 0.8. Unsurprisingly for the t-distribution using Different χ 2 , the tail correlation is quite low, and even becomes slightly negative into the tail. This is a feature of the tail, and can be seen in Figure 7 below, which is a graph of all observations where the first variable. As predicted by Theorem 1, the tail correlation of the Correlated-t increases into the tail.

| Tail St. Dev.  Tail Correlation  γ  Same  χ  2  Different  χ  2  Correlated-t  2  0.8273  0.0430  0.9314  3  0.8255  0.0124  0.9562  4  0.8210  -0.0046  0.9723  5  0.8168  -0.0046  0.9800  6  0.8113  -0.0011  0.9839  7  0.8074  -0.0021  0.9880  8  0.8049  -0.0148  0.9899  9  0.8036  -0.0199  0.9912  10  0.8044  -0.0128  0.9927  11  0.8033  -0.0024  0.9934  12  0.8003  -0.0031  0.9942  13  0.8015  -0.0094  0.9941  14  0.8053  -0.0132  0.9942  15  0.8023  -0.0120  0.9938  16  0.8027  -0.0132  0.9942  17  0.8016  -0.0206  0.9938  18  0.7991  -0.0247  0.9945  19  0.7983  -0.0390  0.9944  20  0.7927  -0.0338  0.9949   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Figure 7: Independent χ 2 Tail

<!-- image -->

We also give the number of tail observations (out of 1,000,000) for each of our three t-copulas, again using the same base 0.9 correlation and three degrees of freedom. That is, the quantity

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

| Tail St. Dev.  Tail Observations  γ  Same  χ  2  Different  χ  2  Correlated-t  2  49925  24825  53046  3  19918  5558  21880  4  9534  1524  10472  5  5199  451  5706  6  3099  165  3421  7  2039  71  2214  8  1417  37  1530  9  998  22  1088  10  726  9  800  11  556  5  606  12  439  3  476  13  334  0  383  14  258  0  305  15  208  0  255  16  166  0  204  17  143  0  171  18  118  0  147  19  97  0  127  20  88  0  113   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 7 Summary and Conclusions

We have examined the t-copulas for the purposes of stress testing and economic capital calculations. It appears that using correlated t-variables generated by using different χ 2 is not appropriate as the correlation is affected (and essentially destroyed) by the construction. Whilst the Correlated-t is not a true t-distribution with the desired degrees of freedom, the distribution is still heavy tailed, and has the desired properties regarding correlation and in particular tail correlation.

## References

- [SL] Shaw, W.T. and Lee, K.T.A. Copula Methods vs Canonical Multivariate Distributions: the multivariate Student T distribution with general degrees of freedom, [2007], Preprint available at: http://www.mth.kcl.ac.uk/ ∼ shaww/web page/papers/MultiStudentc.pdf