## Replica Analysis for Maximization of Net Present Value

Takashi Shinzato ∗

Department of Management Science, College of Engineering, Tamagawa University, Machida, Tokyo 1948610, Japan

(Received October 14, 2018; accepted *** 1, 2018)

In this paper, we use replica analysis to determine the investment strategy that can maximize the net present value for portfolios containing multiple development projects. Replica analysis was developed in statistical mechanical informatics and econophysics to evaluate disordered systems, and here we use it to formulate the maximization of the net present value as an optimization problem under budget and investment concentration constraints. Furthermore, we confirm that a common approach from operations research underestimates the true maximal net present value as the maximal expected net present value by comparing our results with the maximal expected net present value as derived in operations research. Moreover, it is shown that the conventional method for estimating the net present value does not consider variance in the cash flow.

In recent decades, in order to grow their businesses, companies have used indicators based on internal interest rates, net present value, yield to redemption, etc., and these indicators have aided decision making, particularly with respect to development projects, for example, real estate development by real estate companies and the development of new drugs by pharmaceutical companies. 1, 2) Meanwhile, in mathematical finance research, there have been several attempts to evaluate the investment value of a project while taking into consideration uncertainty regarding the cash flow generated by the project during the investment period. Estimating the expected investment value from multiple projects by the maximization of the expected utility and determining how to diversify portfolios constitute an active area of research. 3-8) It is difficult to determine the minimal investment risk and maximal expected return with the conventional operations research approach, which is related to analyzing annealed disordered systems in the context of spin glass theory. Thus, the portfolio optimization problem has been analyzed using analytical methods from statistical mechanical informatics and econophysics, and the findings compared with those of conventional methods from operations research. 9-26) Indicators for minimizing the investment risk, maximizing the expected return, and reducing the investment concentration in portfolio optimization have been analyzed, but there has been little research conducted on evaluating the optimal solution for decision making related to multiple investment projects. The maximization of the net present value in investment projects is a stochastic optimization problem, and methods for quenched disordered systems from spin glass theory literature have been used to analyze the optimal investment strategy. 17-26) In this study, methods for quenched disordered systems are used to obtain the maximal net present value, under budget and investment concentration constraints, and the investment allocation for maximizing the sum of the net present value over multiple investment projects. The maximal net present value will also be considered using replica analysis, which is a powerful analysis method from statistical mechanical informatics.

∗ shinzato@eng.tamagawa.ac.jp

Here, we consider a portfolio of investments in development projects, and seek to maximize the total net present value for N investment projects (hereinafter referred to as projects), such as real estate development and drug development, under constant conditions. The present period ( t = 0) is taken as the beginning of the investment period, the amount invested into project i (= 1 , 2 , · · · , N ) is w i , the amounts invested across all projects are represented as ⃗ w = ( w 1 , w 2 , · · · , w N ) T ∈ R N (the total amount invested is the sum ∑ N i =1 w i = Nm , where m is the initial budget of each project),and r ( &gt; 0) is the interest rate. Each project i generates a cash flow until it is finished at maturity period t = T , where the notation T indicates the transpose of a vector or matrix. Moreover, the divestment amount of project i at maturity period T is λ i w i with attenuation rate λ i ≥ 0. Then, the net present value of project i NPV i is described as

where c i ≥ 0 is the coupon rate of project i , and the cash flow in each investment period is c i w i + c i w i x it , in which c i w i is the mean cash flow and c i w i x it represents random fluctuations in the cash flow. Moreover, we assume that the random element x it is independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) with mean and variance E [ x it ] = 0 and V [ x it ] = v i , respectively. From this, the sum of the net present value of N projects

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for investment amount ⃗ w is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X = { x it } ∈ R N × T is a matrix representing random fluctuations in the cash flow x it . Furthermore, the budget constraint (Eq. (3)) and the investment concentration constraint (Eq. (4)) with respect to the investment amount ⃗ w are defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Eq. (4) represents the expansion of the Herfindahl-Hirschman index, that is, the investment concentration q w = 1 N ∑ N i =1 w 2 i . Moreover, regarding the budget and investment concentration constraints, since 1 N ∑ N i =1 w 2 i -( 1 N ∑ N i =1 w i ) 2 = 1 N ∑ N i =1 ( w i -1 N ∑ N i =1 w i ) 2 ≥ 0 holds, τ ≥ m 2 can be easily obtained.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For investment portfolios, we wish to determine the portfolio which can maximize the net present value H ( ⃗ w | X ) in Eq. (2) with respect to the investment amount ⃗ w under the constraints of Eqs. (3) and (4). From the above definitions, the maximal net present value for a project is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the constraints in Eqs. (3) and (4) with respect to the investment amount ⃗ w are represented as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As in previous work, in this research, we reformulate this stochastic optimization problem using the framework of statistical mechanical informatics to determine the maximal net present value per project κ . 9-26) The partition function for this investment system at inverse temperature β is denoted by

and ⃗ e = (1 , 1 , · · · , 1) T ∈ R N is used.

and then from

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we can determine the maximal net present value per project κ . Since we can evaluate κ with the self-averaging property using replica analysis 17-26) , E [ Z n ( X,β )], the n th moment of the partition function Z ( X,β ) is calculated as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where notations ∑ a = ∑ n a =1 , ∑ i = ∑ N i =1 , ∏ a = ∏ n a =1 , and ∏ i = ∏ N i =1 are used. Moreover, assuming there are a sufficiently large number of projects N , the average values with respect to stochastic fluctuations of the cash flow x it can be estimated as

This gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the constant vector ⃗ e n = (1 , 1 , · · · , 1) T ∈ R n , the vector of order parameters ⃗ k = ( k 1 , k 2 , · · · , k n ) T ∈ R n , A 1 = ∑ T t =1 1 (1+ r ) t = 1 r ( 1 -1 (1+ r ) T ) , A 2 = ∑ T t =1 1 (1+ r ) 2 t = 1 r 2 +2 r ( 1 -1 (1+ r ) 2 T ) , and B i = c i A 1 + λ i (1+ r ) T = c i r + 1 (1+ r ) T ( λ i -c i r ) are defined. Then, the element of the order parameter matrix Θ i = { θ i,ab } ∈ R n × n , θ i,ab , is defined as follows:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 As in previous work, the ansatz of the replica symmetry solution is used, that is, k a = k, θ a = θ , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is analyzed. Here, we already use the notation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, from the replica trick,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is obtained. From the extremum of k, θ , in the limit of the large inverse temperature β ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

are obtained, where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is employed. Using the alternative formulation in Eq. (8), we assess ∂φ ∂β = -m + β θ A 2 〈 c 2 v 〉 + k θ 〈( cA 1 + λ (1+ r ) T )〉 + β θ 〈 ( cA 1 + λ (1+ r ) T ) 2 〉 , and the maximal net present value per project is then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, we can rewrite the investment amount w i in Eq. (3) as w i = mz i , where m denotes the initial budget; then Eqs. (3) and (4) can be substituted with ∑ N i =1 z i = N, ∑ N i =1 z 2 i ≤ N ( τ m 2 ) . From the above, we can determine the novel investment concentration, which is normalized by m , τ ′ = τ m 2 . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It turns out that the maximal net present value per project κ is proportional to the initial budget m . In this expression for the maximal net present value per project, by replacing w i in Eq. (1) with mz i , we can see that NPV i and H ( ⃗ w | X ) are proportional to m .

Next, we estimate the maximal net present value using an alternative method. The Lagrange multiplier function for maximization of the net present value, with budget and investment constraints, is defined as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where k, θ are the parameters representing the two constraints. From the extremum of the Lagrange multiplier function L ( ⃗ w, k, θ ), ∂ L ∂w i = ∂ L ∂k = ∂ L ∂θ = 0, the maximal net present value per project κ is calculated, assuming the number of projects N is sufficiently large:

Fig. 1. Internal interest rate of the maximal net present value r c and internal interest rate of the maximal expected net present value r OR c versus maturity date T . (a) region where κ &gt; 0 , κ OR &gt; 0, (b) region where κ &gt; 0 , κ OR &lt; 0, and (c) region where κ &lt; 0 , κ OR &lt; 0.

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where h i = -1+ c i ∑ T t =1 1+ x it (1+ r ) t + λ i (1+ r ) T , 〈 h 〉 = lim N →∞ 1 N ∑ N i =1 h i = -1+ A 1 〈 c 〉 + 〈 λ 〉 (1+ r ) T , 〈 h 2 〉-〈 h 〉 2 = lim N →∞ 1 N ∑ N i =1 h 2 i -〈 h 〉 2 = A 2 〈 c 2 v 〉 + V , θ = √ 〈 h 2 〉-〈 h 〉 2 τ -m 2 , and k θ = m -〈 h 〉 θ are obtained. From this, the optimal investment amount for project i is w i = k + h i θ . Comparing the results of Eqs. (19) and (22), it turns out that the theoretical values obtained with replica analysis are consistent with those obtained with the Lagrange multiplier method.

While in the analytical approach based on operations research one first assesses the average of the net present values, E [ H ( ⃗ w | X )], we maximize the expected net present value. Previous studies have shown that the above operations research approach is related to the analytic procedure for annealed disordered systems in spin glass theory. Thus, we can use the approach for quenched disordered systems to evaluate investment strategies under both constraints in this paper. Here, we analyze the maximal expected net present value per project κ OR , which is analogous to an annealed disordered system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the maximal net present value per project κ in Eqs. (19) and (22) and the maximal expected net present value κ OR in Eq. (23) are compared. As a result,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, the maximal net present value κ is related to the variance of the stochastic fluctuations of the cash flow, V [ x it ] = v i , that is, 〈 c 2 v 〉 , though the maximal expected net present value κ OR does not depended on the variance of x it . With our proposed approach, by treating the net present value as a quenched disordered system, it is possible to evaluate the influence of stochastic fluctuations in the cash flow on κ , which is not possible with the analytical procedure for annealed disordered systems.

In general, we can compare and contrast investment portfolios based on their net present values. In particular, the interest rate r , which is called the internal interest rate when the net present value is equal to zero, is a useful indicator of how profitable an investment is. Here, when the distributions of the parameters c i , λ i , v i are known, we can evaluate the internal interest rate r c for the maximal net present value κ and the internal interest rate r OR c for the maximal expected net present value κ OR . The coupon rate c i of project i is i.i.d. and follows a beta distribution (shape parameters α, β ( &gt; 0), and density function f c ( c i ) = c α -1 i (1 -c i ) β -1 B ( α,β ) , 0 &lt; c i &lt; 1), and the attenuation rate of the sales amount for project i , λ i , is also i.i.d. and follows an exponential distribution (with mean γ and density function f λ ( λ i ) = 1 γ e -λ i γ , 0 &lt; λ i ); furthermore, the variance of the stochastic fluctuation of the cash flow x it , v i , is 1. Here, when α = 2 , β = 5 , γ = 0 . 9 , τ ′ = τ m 2 = 3, the internal interest rates r c , r OR c as a function of maturity date T are as shown in Figure 1. When the interest rate r is under both lines, the maximal net present value κ and the maximal expected net present value κ OR are both positive, and when the interest rate r is above both lines, the maximal net present value κ and the maximal expected net present value κ OR are negative. For regions (a) and (c) in the figure, since the signs of κ and κ OR are consistent with each other, investment judgment based on the results of the operations research approach is not misled. In contrast, since in the region (b) the maximal net present value κ is positive and the maximal expected net present value κ OR is negative, that is, they are not consistent, investment judgment based on the maximal expected net present value κ OR creates the possibility of an investment loss because of κ &gt; 0 holding in region (b).

In this work, we have considered the use of methods for analyzing quenched disordered systems for optimizing the net present value of investment portfolios containing multiple projects. Using the framework of statistical mechanical informatics, we represented the object function of the investment system as a Hamiltonian, which is defined by the sum of the net present value of each project, and we succeeded in deriving an expression for the maximal net present value. We then derived an expression for the maximal expected net present value using the analytical approach developed in operations research (the analytical procedure for annealed disordered systems), and we verified that the maximal net present value is always larger than the maximal expected net present value because an approach commonly used in operations research underestimates the true maximal net present value. Furthermore, through a numerical experiment, we revealed that the regions of positive and negative maximal expected net present values obtained by the conventional analytic method in operations research are not consistent with the other theoretical bounds. From this, by including a stochastic component in the expression for the net present value, the optimal investment portfolio can be estimated with greater accuracy.

In this paper, we have assumed that t = 0 is the time at which all projects are invested in simultaneously, and the maturity date T and interest rate r are the same for all projects. However, these assumptions are not realistic, and will be generalized in future work. Furthermore, our method needs to allow not only the investment amount but also the timing of the investment to vary by project.

The author is grateful for detailed discussions with D. Tada and H. Yamamoto. This work was supported in part by Grants-in-Aid Nos. 15K20999, 17K01260, and 17K01249; the Research Project of the Institute of Economic Research Foundation at Kyoto University; and Research Project No. 4 of the Kampo Foundation.

## References

- 1) D. G. Luenberger: Investment Science (Oxford University Press, 1998).
- 2) Z. Bodie, A. Kane, and A. Marcus: Investments (McGraw-Hill Education, 2014).
- 3) W. Wiesemann, D. Kuhn, and B. Rustem: European Journal of Operational Research 202 (2010) 356.
- 4) A. H. Russell: Management Science 16 (1970) 357.
- 5) K. K. Yang, L. C. Tay, and C. C. Sum: European Journal of Operational Research 85 (1995) 327.
- 6) S. E. Elmaghraby and W. S. Herroelen: European Journal of Operational Research 49 (1990) 35.
- 7) R. H. Doersch and J. H. Patterson: Management Science 23 (1977) 882.
- 8) D. E. Smith-Daniels and V. L. Smith-Daniels: Journal of Operations Management 7 (1987) 33.
- 9) I. Kondor, G. Papp, and F. Caccioli: Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2017 (2017) 123402.
- 10) I. Varga-Haszonits, F. Caccioli, and I. Kondor: Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2016 (2016) 123404.
- 11) F. Caccioli, S. Still, M. Marsili, and I. Kondor: The European Journal of Finance 19 (2013) 554.
- 12) I. Kondor, S. Pafka, and G. Nagy: Journal of Banking &amp; Finance 31 (2007) 1545.
- 13) S. Pafka and I. Kondor: Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 319 (2003) 487.
- 14) S. Pafka and I. Kondor: The European Physical Journal B - Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 27 (2002) 277.
- 15) S. Ciliberti and M. M´ ezard: The European Physical Journal B 57 (2007) 175.
- 16) S. Ciliberti, I. Kondor, and M. M´ ezard: Quantitative Finance 7 (2007) 389.
- 17) T. Shinzato: IEICE technical report 110 (2011) 23.
- 18) T. Shinzato: Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 86 (2017) 063802.
- 19) D. Tada, H. Yamamoto, and T. Shinzato: Journal of the Physical Society of Japan 86 (2017) 124804.

- 20) T. Shinzato: Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 490 (2018) 986.
- 21) T. Shinzato: Phys. Rev. E 94 (2016) 052307.
- 22) T. Shinzato: Phys. Rev. E 94 (2016) 062102.
- 23) T. Shinzato and M. Yasuda: PLOS ONE 10 (2015) e0134968.
- 24) T. Shinzato: PLOS ONE 10 (2015) e0133846.
- 25) T. Shinzato: Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2017 (2017) 023301.
- 26) R. Wakai, T. Shinzato, and Y. Shimazaki: Journal of Japan Industrial Management Association 65 (2014) 17.