

Abstract -A  deep  convolutional  fuzzy  system  (DCFS)  on  a high-dimensional input space is a multi-layer connection of many low-dimensional fuzzy systems, where the input variables to the low-dimensional  fuzzy  systems  are  selected  through  a  moving window across the input spaces of the layers. To design the DCFS based  on  input-output  data  pairs,  we  propose  a  bottom-up layer-by-layer scheme. Specifically, by viewing each of the first-layer fuzzy systems as a weak estimator of the output based only on a very small portion of the input variables, we design these fuzzy systems using the WM Method. After the first-layer fuzzy systems are designed, we pass the data through the first layer to form  a  new  data  set  and  design  the  second-layer  fuzzy  systems based  on  this  new  data  set  in  the  same  way  as  designing  the first-layer fuzzy systems. Repeating this process layer-by-layer we design the whole DCFS. We also propose a DCFS with parameter sharing  to  save  memory  and  computation.  We  apply  the  DCFS models to predict a synthetic chaotic plus random time-series and the real Hang Seng Index of the Hong Kong stock market.

Index Terms -Hierarchical fuzzy systems; deep learning; the WM Method; stock index prediction.

## I. INTRODUCTION

## Fast Training Algorithms for Deep Convolutional Fuzzy Systems with Application to Stock Index Prediction

Li-Xin Wang

conducted in the fuzzy community around the middle 2000s -the same period when Hinton [2] proposed the celebrated new training algorithm for deep neural networks in 2006 which has led to the current AI boom. During this period, the structural and  approximation  properties  of  hierarchical  fuzzy  systems were studied in depth [9,10,11,12] and many new methods for designing hierarchical fuzzy systems were proposed [13,14,15, 16]. Since then, hierarchical fuzzy models have been applied to a  wide  variety  of  practical  problems,  such  as  environmental monitoring [17], educational assessment [18], video de-interlacing  [19],  price  negotiation  [20],    mobile  robots automation [21,22,23] ， self-nominating in peer-to-peer networks [24], linguistic hierarchy [25], hotel location selection [26],  smart  structures  [27],  weapon  target  assignment  [28], image  description  [29],  nutrition  evaluation  [30],  spacecraft control [31], photovoltaic management [32], wastewater treatment [33], etc.. More recently, the research on hierarchical fuzzy systems has been advanced along many directions, such as fast implementation [34], adaptive control [35], multi-objective optimization [36], interpretability [37], classification [38,39], etc..

The  great  success  of  deep  convolutional  neural  networks (DCNN)  [1,2]  in  solving  complex  practical  problems  [3,4] reveals a basic fact that multi-level structures are very powerful models in representing complex  relationships. The main problems of DCNN are the huge computational load to train the tones of parameters of the DCNN and the lack of interpretability for these huge number of model parameters [5]. The goal of this paper is to develop deep convolutional fuzzy systems (DCFS) and fast training algorithms for the DCFS to explore the power of multi-level rule-based representations and to overcome the computational and interpretability difficulties of DCNN.

Hierarchical  fuzzy  systems  were  proposed  by  Raju,  Zhou and Kisner [6] in 1991, roughly the same time when LeCun [1] introduced the deep convolutional neural networks in 1990. In the  late  1990s,  the  basic  properties  of  hierarchical  fuzzy systems  such  as  universal  approximation  were  proved  in  [7] and a back-propagation algorithm was developed in [8] to train the hierarchical fuzzy systems based on input-output data. Then, a wave of research on hierarchical fuzzy systems was The researches summarized in the last paragraph demonstrate that the hierarchical fuzzy models are successful in solving many practical problems. However, the applications of hierarchical fuzzy models have been generally restricted to low dimensional  problems  with  small  data  sets.  Furthermore,  the current training algorithms for hierarchical fuzzy systems are of the  same  types as those  for deep neural  networks,  which are computationally  intensive  when  applied  to  high-dimensional problems  with  big  data.  The  heavy  computational  load  is mainly  due  to  the  iterative  nature  of  the  training  algorithms (multiple  passes  of  the  data)  and  it  may  take  a  long  time  to converge.  Since  the  parameters  of  fuzzy  systems  have  clear physical  meanings  (a  clear  connection  to  the  input/output variables and the data) which the neural network parameters do not have, we can take advantage of these physical meanings to develop  fast training  algorithms for the  parameters.  The Wang-Mendel (WM) Method proposed in [40,41] is such a fast training algorithm that uses the training data only one-pass to determine the fuzzy system parameters.

Manuscript submitted November 30, 2018; revised May 3 and June 11, 2019; accepted July 12, 2019.

Li-Xin  Wang  is  with  the  University  of  Chinese  Academy  of  Sciences, Beijing, P.R. China (e-mail: lxwang@ucas.edu.cn).

The basic  idea  of  this  paper  is  to  use  the  WM  Method  to design  the  low-dimensional  fuzzy  systems  in  a  bottom-up, layer-by-layer  fashion  so  that  a  deep  convolutional  fuzzy system  is  eventually  constructed,  where  the  inputs  to  the low-dimensional fuzzy systems are selected through a convolutional operator (a moving window). These low-dimensional fuzzy systems may be viewed as weak estimators [42] of the output variable. But, unlike the classical ensemble methods in machine learning [43] such as bagging [44], random forest [45] or boosting [46], the weak estimators (the low-dimensional fuzzy systems) in our DCFS models are constructed in a layer-by-layer fashion. Specifically, the first-level fuzzy systems may be viewed as the ordinary weak estimators,  with  each  fuzzy  system  uses  only  a  very  small number of the input variables from the high-dimensional input space. After the first-level fuzzy systems are designed using the standard WM Method, they are fixed and their outputs form the input space to the second-level fuzzy systems. By passing the training data through the fixed first-level fuzzy systems, a new data  set  is  generated  and  the  second-level  fuzzy  systems  are designed  based  on  this  new  data  set  in  the  same  way  as  the first-level  fuzzy  systems.  This  process  continues,  layer  after layer, until the DCFS is constructed.

Fig. 1: The general structure of a deep convolutional fuzzy system (DCFS).

<!-- image -->

To  test  the  DCFS  models  and  the  training  algorithms,  we apply them to predict a synthetic chaotic plus  random time-series and the real Hang Seng Index of the Hong Kong stock  market.  Although  it  was  generally  believed  that  stock prices  follow  random  walks  [47,48]  and  therefore  are  not predictable, many researches showed that the stock prices do not follow random  walks  [49,50]  and  demonstrated  that predicting  the  market  is  possible  [51,52,53,54,55].  Since  the stock prices are driven by the buying and selling operations of human traders who are influenced by human psychology such as greed and fear [56,57], it is reasonable to believe that there are some predictable elements in the stock prices. Of course, it is  a  very  challenging  task  to  catch  up  with  these  predictable elements in a timely fashion to make a profit [53,54].

This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we show the structural details of the DCFS. In Section III, we develop four training algorithms for the DCFS. In Section IV, we apply the DCFS models with the training algorithms to predict a chaotic plus random time-series and the real Hang Seng Index of the Hong Kong stock  market.  Finally,  some  concluding  remarks are drawn in Section V, and the MATLAB code of the main training algorithm is provided in the Supplemental Material.

## II. STRUCTURE OF DEEP CONVOLUTIONAL FUZZY SYSTEMS

We begin with the definition of the general deep convolutional fuzzy system.

Definition 1 : The general structure of a deep convolutional fuzzy  system (DCFS) is  illustrated  in  Fig.  1,  where  the  input vector  ( , , …, ) to the DCFS is generally of very high dimension, and the output is a scalar (a multi-output DCFS may  be  designed  as  multiple  single-output  DCFSs).  Level l ( l= 1,2, …, L -1) consists of fuzzy systems ( i= 1,2, …, ) whose outputs are denoted as which are inputs to Level l +1. The  top  level,  Level  L,  has  only  one  fuzzy  system that combines the outputs from Level L-1 to produce the final output . The input sets , , …, to the fuzzy systems , ,  …, ( l= 1,2, …,  L -1)  are  selected  from  the  previous level's outputs , , …, through a moving window of length m , where the window size m is usually a small number such as 3, 4 or 5.

The moving window may take a variety of moving schemes. For example, it may move one variable at a time starting from until is covered, and this gives

where l= 1,2, …, L -1 (for Level l =1 we have ). For this one-variable-at-a-time moving scheme, we have

for l= 1,2, …, L -1 with , from which we get

If we do not want to use too many fuzzy systems in the construction  of  the  DCFS  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  each fuzzy system ,  we  may  move  the  window  more  than  one variable at a time to cover the input variables in the levels. In the extreme case, we may move the window m variables each time for all the fuzzy systems so that a L level DCFS can cover input  variables.  For  a L =5  level  DCFS  with m =5 inputs  to  each  fuzzy  system ,  for  example, input variables can be covered. Also, the window size m may be different  for  different  fuzzy  systems to  introduce  more flexibility to the DCFS model.

The  fuzzy  systems ( i= 1,2, …, , l= 1,2, …,  L -1)  are standard fuzzy systems [58] constructed as follows. For each input  variable to  the  fuzzy  system (note that is the first input variable to and may not be the input  variable  to  Level ),  define  q  fuzzy  sets , , , as shown in Fig. 2, where the centers of the q fuzzy sets are equally spaced and the endpoints and are determined from the training data (the details will be given in the next section when we develop the training algorithms for the DCFS). The fuzzy system is

which  is  constructed  from  the  following fuzzy  IF-THEN rules:

where the membership functions 's are given in Fig. 2, and the parameters are the centers of the fuzzy sets and will be designed using the training algorithms in the next section.

For the membership  functions  in Fig. 2 we  see that ,  …, ,  so  the denominator of the fuzzy system of (4) is equal to 1:

and the fuzzy system of (4) is simplified to

where i= 1,2, …, and l= 1,2, …,  L -1.  The  top  level  fuzzy system is in the same form of (7) with input variables , …, .

We  claimed  in  the  Introduction  that  the  DCFS  has  better interpretability than the DCNN, and now we show the details of how to interpret the DCFS in terms of the fuzzy IF-THEN rules (5)  and  the  parameters .  First,  notice  that  the  fuzzy system of (7) is constructed from the fuzzy  IF-THEN  rules  (5)  with  each  rule  covering  a  cell in the m -dimensional input space to .  Fig.  3  illustrates  the  case  of m =2  and , where the 2-dimensional input space is partitioned into cells  with the cell ( )  covered by the fuzzy IF-THEN rule:

and the parameter being the center of the fuzzy set . For a given input point, say the point in  Fig.  3  (left),  the action of the fuzzy system can be represented by the fuzzy  IF-THEN  rule: , which covers the cell over .  That is, the fuzzy system takes local actions with one rule responsible mainly for one cell. Therefore, for a given point , the action of the fuzzy system of (7) can be represented by a single parameter that represents the fuzzy IF-THEN rule in the form of (5).

Because each of the fuzzy system in the general DCFS of Fig. 1 can be represented by a single parameter (as we demonstrated in the last paragraph), the whole action of the DCFS on any given input point can be interpreted by a graph of connected 's. Fig. 3 (the right part) shows an example of 6-level DCFS with n =7 inputs to the DCFS and m =2 inputs to each  fuzzy  system in  the  DCFS.  For  a  given  input in Fig. 3, if the DCFS gives a bad output (such as causing an accident in an auto-car application), then from the DCFS graph in the right part of Fig. 3 we can easily check what rules cause the bad output and take appropriate changes to these rules so that the mistake will not happen again. We will discuss this  easy-error-correction  property  of  DCFS  in  more  details after we develop the training algorithms in the next section.

Fig. 3: Interpretation of DCFS. Left: The action of a fuzzy system on any given input point can be represented by the local fuzzy IF-THRN rule with parameter . Right: For a given input point, a DCFS can be interpreted by a networked connection of fuzzy IF-THEN rules with parameters .

<!-- image -->

Finally, we introduce a special DCFS that can greatly reduce the  memory  requirement  and  the  computational  cost  of  the training algorithms for the DCFS to be developed in the next section.  We  see  from  (7)  that  each  fuzzy  system has free  parameters to  be  designed  and  stored  in  the computer memory. The total computational and storage requirement  is  proportional  to ,  which  may  be  a large  number  for  high-dimensional  problems.  To  reduce  the computational and storage requirement, we introduce a parameter sharing scheme where the fuzzy systems in the same level are identical  (sharing  the  same parameters). Specifically:

Definition  2 :  A DCFS with parameter sharing is  a  DCFS where the fuzzy systems in the same level l are identical, i.e., for l= 1,2, …,  L ,  and  we  denote  this identical  fuzzy  system  in  Level l as .  A  DCFS  with parameter  sharing  has free  parameters to be designed and stored.

We now move to the next section to develop a number of fast training algorithms to determine the parameters of the fuzzy  system  (7)  based  on  input-output  data  for  the  general DCFS and the DCFS with parameter sharing.

## III. FAST TRAINING ALGORITHMS FOR DCFS

Task 1 (off-line training): Given N input-output data pairs:

where are  the  inputs  and is  the output, our task is to design a DCFS in Fig. 1 to match these input-output data pairs.

First, we develop a training algorithm for the general DCFS in  Definition  1  to  match  the  input-output  data  pairs  of  (9) (Training Algorithm 1 below). Then, we show how to design the DCFS with parameter sharing in Definition 2 in Training Algorithm 2. Finally, in Training Algorithms 3 and 4 we show how to do on-line training for the general DCFS and the DCFS with parameter sharing, respectively.

Training  Algorithm  1  (for  general  DCFS): Given  the input-output data pairs of (9), we design the general DCFS in Definition  1  with  the  fuzzy  systems in  the  form  of  (7) through the following steps:

- Step 1: Determine the structure of the DCFS. Specifically:
- 1.1 :  Choose  the  moving  window  size m and  the  moving scheme (such as moving one-variable-at-a-time or other schemes).
- 1.2 : Determine the number of levels L .
- Step 2: Design the Level 1 fuzzy systems in the form of (7) (with m input ), i= 1,2, …, ,  using  the  WM Method  [40,41],  where  the  input-output  data  pairs  used  to design the are:

Specifically:

- 2.1 :  For  each  cell with ,    set the initial values of the weight parameter and the weight-output parameter equal to zero.
- 2.2 : For each input to , consider the q fuzzy sets , , , in Fig. 2 and choose the endpoints as

- 2.3 :  For  each  input-output  data  pair  of  (10)  starting  from , determine the fuzzy sets which achieve the  maximum membership values among the q fuzzy sets , , , at , respectively, i.e., determine

- 2.4 : Update the weight and weight-output parameters for cell , and , through

- 2.5 :  Repeat  2.3  and  2.4  for .  For  the  cells with ,  determine  the  parameters in the fuzzy system of (7) as

We call  the  cells with covered  by data , and define

- 2.6: For each cell not in , search its neighbors to see whether they are in , where two cells and are neighbors to each other if for all except at one location such that or .  For  the  cells not  in that have at least one neighbor in , determine the as the average of the 's of its neighbors in . Define

- 2.7: Repeat 2.6 with replaced by and replaced  by ,  and  continue  this  process  to  get , , …, until which contains all the cells with .  Fig.  4  illustrates  this  process. (More details of the WM Method are given in [41].)
- Step 3: Suppose the fuzzy systems in Level 1 to Level l -1 have already  been  designed,  we  now  design  the  fuzzy  systems , i= 1,2, …, , in Level l , starting from l =2 (in this case the  Level l -1=1  fuzzy  systems , i= 1,2, …, ,  have already been designed in Step 2). Specifically:
- 3.1 : For each input-output data pair of (9) with , put as inputs to Level 1 and compute  upwards  along  the  DCFS  to  get  the  outputs  of Level l -1, denoted as ; view

as the new input-output data pairs for designing the Level l fuzzy systems .

- 3.2 : Use the same procedure in Step 2 to design the Level l fuzzy systems in the form of (7) , i= 1,2, …, , with the original input-output data pairs (9) replaced by the new input-output data pairs (18), and all the Level 1 variables in Step 2 replaced by the corresponding Level l variables (for example, replace by , by , etc.).
- 3.3 : Set l = l +1 and repeat 3.1 and 3.2 until the Level L fuzzy system is designed.

Figs. 5 to 7 illustrate Training Algorithm 1 for the design of a three-level  DCFS  with  15  inputs  and  two-variable-at-a-time moving window scheme, where Figs. 5 to 7 are for the design of Levels 1  to  3,  respectively.  The  MATLAB  code  of  Training Algorithm  1  for  a  11-input  5-level  DCFS  is  given  in  the Supplemental Material, which can be easily modified for other applications.  A  few  remarks  about  Training  Algorithm  1  are now in order.

Remark 1 (layer-by-layer construction) :  As discussed in the Introduction, the DCFS with Training Algorithm 1 may be viewed as a layered combination of weak estimators. Specifically, among  the high-dimensional input variables , , …, to the DCFS, each fuzzy system ( i= 1,2, …,

Fig. 4: Illustration of the WM Method to expend the cells from those covered by data (red) to the whole input space, where red, green, blue, yellow, …, and all the cells.

<!-- image -->

) in Level 1 selects only a very small number of m variables as  its  inputs,  so  each  fuzzy  system may  be  viewed  as  a weak estimator for the output . After these Level 1 weak estimators are  designed,  they  are  fixed  and  their  outputs form  the -dimensional  input  space  to  the Level  2  fuzzy  systems ( i= 1,2, …, ).  Here  again  as  in Level 1, each Level 2 fuzzy system selects  only  a  small number of m variables from as its inputs, and the fuzzy  systems ( i= 1,2, …, )  are  viewed  as  Level  2 weak estimators for the output . This process continues up to the top Level L whose output is the final estimate of the .

Remark 2 (physical  meaning of the parameter design) : From (13)-(15) we see that the parameters in the fuzzy system (7) are designed as the weighted average of the outputs whose corresponding inputs fall into the cell , with the weight equal to the membership value . If no data falls into a cell , then the of the cell is determined through the extrapolation scheme of Steps 2.6 and 2.7 (illustrated in Fig. 4).  We  can  use  this  simple  scheme  to  design  the  parameters because  of  the  clear  physical  meaning  of  the . Specifically, the is the center of  the  THEN  part membership function of the fuzzy IF-THEN rule (5) for the cell , so the may be viewed as the estimate of the desired output based on the fuzzy IF-THEN rule (5) at cell . Therefore, a good way to design the is to put it as the weighted average of the 's whose corresponding inputs fall  into  the  cell .  The optimality of designing the parameters in this way is studied in [59].

Remark  3  (fast  training  with  low  computational  cost) : From 2.3 to 2.5 in Training Algorithm 1 we see that to design each of the fuzzy systems in the DCFS, the N input-output data pairs (10) are used only once (just one-pass through the data).  In  the  popular  gradient-decent-based  back-propagation algorithm,  multiple  passes  through  the  data  are  needed  to ensure the convergence of the parameters, so the computational cost is high and the speed of the algorithm is slow. Since the data are passed through just once in Training Algorithm 1, it  is a very fast algorithm. Specifically, the computational load of Training  Algorithm  1  (for  general  DCFS)  is  approximately ,  where accounts for the one-pass of data in the computation of (12)-(14), accounts  for the computation of the parameters in Steps 2.5-2.7 (illustrated  in  Fig.  4),  and is  the  number  of  fuzzy systems ( i= 1,2, …, , l= 1,2, …, L )  in the DCFS.

Since each fuzzy system (7) in the general DCFS has free  parameters ,  the  total  computational  and  storage requirement  is  proportional  to ,  which  may  be  a large  number  for  high-dimensional  problems.  Therefore,  we introduced the DCFS with parameter sharing in Definition 2. Now we show how to design the DCFS with parameter sharing based on the input-output data pairs (9).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5: Illustration of Training Algorithm 1 for general DCFS in the design of the Level 1 fuzzy systems .

Fig. 6: Illustration of Training Algorithm 1 for general DCFS in the design of the Level 2 fuzzy systems .

<!-- image -->

Fig. 7: Illustration of Training Algorithm 1 for general DCFS in the design of the Level 3 fuzzy system .

<!-- image -->

Fig. 8: Illustration of Training Algorithm 2 for DCFS with parameter sharing in the design of the Level 1 fuzzy systems .

<!-- image -->

Training Algorithm 2 (for DCFS  with parameter sharing): Given the input-output data pairs of (9), the DCFS with parameter sharing in Definition 2 are designed as follows: Step 1: The same as Step 1 in Training Algorithm 1.

Step 2: Design the first Level 1 fuzzy system in the form of (7) with the following input-output data pairs:

using the same procedure 2.1 to 2.7 in Training Algorithm 1. Then, copy this to all the rest ( i= 2, …, ) in Level 1.

Step 3: The same as Step 3 of Training Algorithm 1.

Fig.  8  illustrates  the  Training  Algorithm  2  (for  DCFS  with parameter sharing) for the design of the Level 1 fuzzy systems = (comparing Fig. 8 with Fig. 5 to see the difference between Training Algorithms 1 and 2). The design of  the  fuzzy  systems = in  other  levels ( l= 2, …, ) can be illustrated in a similar way as in Figs. 6 and 7. A remark about the Training Algorithm 2 is as follows.

Remark 4 (low memory requirement and fast training): The  computational  load  of  Training  Algorithm  2  (for  DCFS with parameter sharing) is approximately , where accounts for the one-pass of the data (19) in the computation (13)-(15) for the data-covered 's, and accounts for the computation of the parameters of  the L fuzzy  systems ( l= 2, …, )  in  Steps  2.5-2.7 (illustrated in Fig. 4). Comparing with the computational load of Training Algorithm  1 (for general DCFS), we see that a computational reduction of is  achieved  with  Training  Algorithm  2.

For  memory  requirement  (mainly  for  the  storage  of  the parameters ),  it  is  reduced  from (for general DCFS) to (for DCFS with parameter sharing), a reduction of , which is in the same order as  the  computational  reduction.  For  the  DCFS  in  Fig.  3,  for example,  we  have and ,  so  the  memory requirement is reduced from to , a reduction of .

In Training Algorithms 1 and 2, the N input-output data pairs (9)  are  processed  in  a  batch  fashion.  In  many  real-world situations, the data are collected in real-time, so it is interesting to design the DCFS in a recursive way with new data coming in real-time. This gives Task 2 below.

Task 2 (on-line training): Let the input-output data pairs

be given on-line with being the time index. Suppose a DCFS has already be designed up to , and we denote this DCFS as DCFS( ). Let the initial DCFS( ) be designed either by Training  Algorithm  1  for  general  DCFS  or  by  Training Algorithm 2 for DCFS with parameter sharing, and our task is to  update  the  DCFS( )  based  on  the  new  data  pair to get DCFS( ).

We now show how to do Task 2 for the general DCFS and the DCFS with parameter sharing in Training Algorithms 3 and 4 below, respectively.

Training Algorithm 3 (on-line training for general DCFS): For Task 2, let the initial DCFS( ) be a general DCFS (Definition 1) designed by Training Algorithm 1 and be  the  parameters of the  fuzzy systems in the  form  of  (7)  in  DCFS( ).  Then,  the  parameters of  the in  DCFS( )  are  updated  through  the following steps:

Step  1: Update  the of  the  Level  1  fuzzy  systems in the form of (7) from using the new data pair . Specifically, determine

and update

where is a weighting factor. For other cells not equal to , set

Step  2: Pass  the  new  data through Level 1 to get the new input-output data pair for the Level 2 fuzzy systems .  Update  the of  the  Level  2  fuzzy systems in the form of (7) from using  the  same  (21)-(23)  as  in  Step  1  with replaced by , respectively.

Step 3: Repeat Step 2 for Levels 3, 4, …, until the top Level L.

Training  Algorithm  4  (on-line  training  for  DCFS  with parameter sharing): For Task 2, let the initial DCFS( ) be a parameter sharing DCFS (Definition 2) designed by Training Algorithm 2 and be the parameters of the fuzzy systems in  the  form  of  (7)  in  DCFS( ).  Then,  the parameters of  the in  DCFS( )  are  updated through the following steps:

Step 1: Update the of the first Level 1 fuzzy system in the form of (7) with the following input-output data pairs:

Specifically, for each of the input-output data pairs of (24), update the using (21)-(22); for the rest , keep them the same using (23). Then, copy this to all the rest ( i= 2, …, ) in Level 1.

Steps  2  and  3: The  same  as  Steps  2  and  3  of  Training Algorithm 3, with the Step 1 there replaced by the Step 1 here.

Two remarks about the Training Algorithms 3 and 4 are now in order.

Remark 5 (physical meaning and very low computational cost of the updating law): From (21)-(23) we see that for each new  input-output  data  pair,  only  the that  covers  the new  input  data  point is  updated,  and the rest 's remain unchanged. The new (22) is  a  weighted  average  of  the  output and  the  previous with weight which  is  a  measure  of  the  degree  that  the  input  data  point belongs  to  the  cell .  Since only  one  parameter needs  to  be  updated  and  the computational load of the updating law (21)-(22) is very low, Training  Algorithms  3  and  4  may  be  implemented  on  the simple devices such as a  mobile phone.  Therefore, an initial DCFS designed with the off-line Training Algorithms 1 or 2 may be downloaded to the customer's simple device such as a mobile phone, then the customer may updated the DCFS using the on-line Training Algorithms 3 or 4 with the new data that the customer observes in real life.

Remark 6 (easy error correction): As we discussed in the Introduction  that  a  main  problem  of  the  black-box  DCNN  is that if something goes wrong, we don't know which parts of the DCNN should be corrected so that the same mistake will not take  place  again.  The  DCFS  designed  with  the  Training Algorithms 3 or 4 can easily solve this problem of the DCNN. Specifically, if a DCFS makes a mistake at an input point, say the  point to  the  DCFS  in  Fig.  3,  then  we  can update the 's of the DCFS in Fig. 3 that are responsible for the mistake, using Training Algorithms 3 or 4 with the correct input-output data.

We now apply the DCFS designed with Training Algorithms 1- 4 to the time-series prediction problems in the next section.

## IV. APPLICATION TO HANG SENG INDEX PREDICTION

Before  we  apply  the  DCFS  with  the  Training  Algorithms  to predict the real Hang Seng Index (HSI) of the Hong Kong stock market  in  Examples  2,  4  and  5  below,  we  first  try  it  for  a synthetic chaotic time-series in Examples 1 and 3 to get some feeling about the performance of the method. Specifically, in Examples 1 and 2 below, we test the Training Algorithms 1 and 2 for predicting the Mackey-Glass chaotic time-series and the real Hang Seng Index, respectively. In Examples 3 and 4, we apply the on-line Training Algorithms 3 and 4 to predict the Mackey-Glass  chaotic  time-series  and  the  real  Hang  Seng Index, respectively. In Example 5, we add more related stocks to the inputs to get better performance.

Example 1: Consider the Mackey-Glass chaotic time-series generated by the differential equation:

with .  Let be  the  return  (relative  change)  of  the chaotic time-series plus a white Gaussian noise , i.e.,

and  we  generate  a  synthetic  chaotic  plus  random  time-series whose return is , i.e.,

Fig. 9: The index generated by the Mackey-Glass chaotic time-series plus noise, where the first 2000 points are training data and the last 1000 points are testing data.

<!-- image -->

Fig.  10:  The  training  (blue)  and  testing  (red)  errors  of  Training Algorithm  1  (for  general  DCFS)  as  function  of for  predicting  the Mackey-Glass chaotic time-series.

<!-- image -->

We view the ( of  (27)  as  the  daily  closing prices of a stock index. Fig. 9 plots a realization of 3000 points of .

We  now  use  the  DCFS  of  Fig.  1  with  the Training Algorithms 1 and 2 to predict the return sequence of (26). Specifically, let the n past returns up to day : be the inputs , , …, to the DCFS and the output of the DCFS be the prediction of the return at day , i.e.,

where is the prediction of . In this case, the input-output data pairs of (9) become

where (the current day is ); that  is,  at  day , past  returns constitute the input-output pairs in the form of (29).

With , and  one-variable-at-a-time  moving scheme, a 5-level DCFS is established, where Level 1 to Level 5 have 9, 7, 5, 3 and 1 fuzzy systems , respectively. Using the first 2000 points in Fig. 9 as training data and the last 1000 points as testing data, we simulate the Training Algorithms 1

Fig.  11:  The  training  (blue)  and  testing  (red)  errors  of  Training Algorithm 2 (for DCFS with parameter sharing) as function of for predicting the Mackey-Glass chaotic time-series.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 12: The training (first 2000 points) and testing (last 1000 points) errors  of  the  DCFS  predictor  (top)  and  the  BP  trained  fuzzy  model (bottom) for the 3000 Mackey-Glass chaotic time-series data in Fig. 9.

<!-- image -->

and 2 for different values of ( is  the  number of fuzzy sets covering each input variable, see Fig. 2). Figs. 10 and 11 plot the training (blue) and testing (red) errors of Training Algorithm 1 (for general DCFS) and Training Algorithm 2 (for DCFS with parameter sharing) as function of ,  respectively. We see from Figs. 10 and 11 that for both general DCFS (with Training Algorithm 1) and DCFS with parameter sharing (with Training Algorithm 2), the training errors (blue curves) keep decreasing  as  more  fuzzy  sets  are  used  to  cover  the  input variables. For the testing errors (red curves in Figs. 10 and 11), we  see  that  they  are  first  decreasing  as increases,  but  then begin to increase as the DCFS models overfit the data.

We also compare the DCFS predictor with the fuzzy model trained by the back-propagation (BP) algorithm [60, 61]. For models with similar complexity (roughly the same number of free  parameters), the  training  and testing errors of the DCFS predictor are about 20% less than that of the BP trained fuzzy model, with a training speed at least ten times faster. Specifically, for (roughly free parameters) and the 3000 chaotic time-series data in Fig. 9, the training (first 2000 points) and testing (last 1000 points) errors of the DCFS predictor and the BP trained fuzzy model are plotted in Fig. 12, where the mean square  training and testing errors of the DCFS predictor are 0.0051 and 0.0063, respectively,  and  those  of  the  BP  trained  fuzzy  model  are 0.0061 and 0.0077, respectively.

<!-- image -->

Fig.  13:  The  Hang  Seng  Index  daily  closing  from  2010/7/6  to 2018/8/30, where the first 1500 points are training data and the last 500 points are testing data.

Fig.  14:  The  training  (blue)  and  testing  (red)  errors  of  Training Algorithm 1 as function of for predicting the Hang Seng Index.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 15: (blue line) and (red line) with Training Algorithm 3 in Example 3.

<!-- image -->

Example 2: The same as Example 1 except that the index generated by the Mackey-Glass chaotic time-series plus noise (Fig.  9)  is  replaced  by  the  real  Hang  Seng  Index  (Fig.  13). Specifically,  considering  the  Hang  Seng  Index  daily  closing from 2010/7/6 to 2018/8/30 (2000 data points) plotted in Fig. 13, we use the first 1500 points (from 2010/7/6 to 2016/8/4) as training data and  the last 500  points  (from  2016/8/5  to 2018/8/30) as testing data. Fig. 14 plots the training (blue) and testing (red) errors of Training Algorithm 1 (for general DCFS) as function of . Comparing Fig. 14 with Fig. 10, we see that the real Hang Seng Index is much more difficult to predict than the index generated by the Mackey-Glass chaotic time-series.

Since we view the of (27) as the daily closing prices of a stock index, the value of an Index Fund with the at day , denoted as , is updated daily according to

<!-- image -->

Fig. 16: (blue line) and (red line) with Training Algorithm 4 in Example 3.

Fig. 17: (blue line) and (red line) with Training Algorithm 3 in Example 4.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 18: (blue line) and (red line) with Training Algorithm 4 in Example 4.

<!-- image -->

where , and we  assume  the  initial  investment .

We  now  propose  a  trading  strategy  based  on  the  DCFS prediction of (28).

Trading Strategy based on DCFS Prediction: At day (the most recent return available is ), use the Training Algorithms 3 or 4 in Section III to design a DCFS of (28) to get the prediction of the return at day . If , meaning that  we  predict  the  index will  go  up  in  day ,  then  long (buy)  the  index  at  day ;  if ,  meaning  that  we predict the index will go down in day ,  then short (sell) the index at day .

The  value  of  the  fund  with  this  trading  strategy  at  day , denoted as , is

Fig. 19: The two-level DCFS in Example 5, where the HSI returns and the returns of other four major stocks are used to construct the five fuzzy systems in the first-level whose outputs are combined by the second-level fuzzy system to form the final prediction of the HSI return.

<!-- image -->

where the initial investment and

The  meaning  of (31) and (32) is that: if which means we made the right prediction at day , then our fund value will increase by no matter the index goes  up  or  down  at  day ;  on  the  other  hand,  if which  means  we  made  a  wrong prediction at day , then our fund will decrease in value by no matter the index goes up or down at day .

We now test this trading strategy for the chaotic plus random index  of  Fig.  9  and  the  real  Hang  Seng  Index  of  Fig.  13  in Examples 3 and 4 below, respectively.

Example 3: The same as in Example 1 except that Training Algorithms 3 or 4 is used to build the DCFS predictor (28). Figs. 15 and 16 plot the index fund value of (30) and the  DCFS  fund  value of  (31)  using  Training Algorithms 3 and 4, respectively. We see from Figs. 15 and 16 that: 1) in both cases the DCFS fund performs much better than the  index  fund,  and  2)  the  general  DCFS  with  Training Algorithm 3 is better than the  parameter  sharing  DCFS  with Training Algorithm 4.

Example 4: The same as Example 3 except that the index generated by the Mackey-Glass chaotic time-series plus noise (Fig. 9) is replaced by the real Hang Seng Index (Fig. 13). Figs. 17  and  18  plot  the  index  fund  value and  the DCFS fund value using Training Algorithms 3 and 4, respectively. We see from Figs. 17 and 18 that the DCFS fund performs slightly better than the index fund in both cases, and the general DCFS with Training Algorithm 3 is better than the parameter sharing DCFS with Training Algorithm 4.

To  improve  the  performance  of  the  DCFS  fund,  we  notice that  there  may  be  other  factors  that  influence  the  real  Hang Seng  Index  returns , in  addition  to  the  past  returns used in the DCFS model (28). For example, the returns of the major stocks at the current day may  have  a  stronger  influence  on  the  tomorrow's  HSI

return than  the  HSI  returns long  in  the  past (when is  large).  Indeed,  the  long-past  HSI  returns may  introduce  more  noise  than  useful  information  for  the prediction of tomorrow's HSI return .  Hence, we add the returns of four major stocks in the Hong Kong stock market to the input space of the DCFS model and use only the five most recent returns as the inputs to the prediction model in the next example.

Example 5 :  We use the two-level DCFS in Fig. 19 as the prediction model for the HSI return , where the five fuzzy systems in  Level-1  use  the  five  past  daily returns  of  HSI,  HK0005  (HSBC  Holdings  plc),  HK0700 (Tencent Holdings Limited), HK0388 (Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Limited) and HK0016 (Sun Hung Kai Properties Limited),  respectively,  as  the  inputs  to  produce  five  weak estimators for the HSI return , i.e.,

where , , and are  the returns of the HSI and the stocks HK0005, HK0700, HK0388 and HK0016, respectively, then these five weak estimators are combined by the Level-2 fuzzy system to produce the final prediction:

Fig. 20 plots the HSI fund value of (30) and the DCFS fund value of (31) with this two-level DCFS predictor (33)-(38) using Training Algorithm 3 for the real HSI daily returns over the three years from 31-Aug-2015  to  31-Aug-2018.  Comparing  the  DCFS  fund values in  Figs.  17  and  20  we  see  a  clear performance improvement by adding these four stocks into the input space of the DCFS predictor.

Fig. 20: (blue line) and (red line) with Training Algorithm 3 in Example 5.

<!-- image -->

## V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The deep convolutional fuzzy system (DCFS) models and the Training Algorithms proposed in this paper have the following advantages:

- (i) It is fast: the data are used only once in the design of the fuzzy systems in the DCFS and no iterative training is needed;
- (ii) It is highly interpretable: the fuzzy systems in different levels of the DCFS are weak estimators of the output variable that are constructed in a layer-by-layer, bottom-up fashion;
- (iii) It is very flexible: the size of the moving window, the steps of each move, the number of fuzzy sets to cover the input variables and the number of layers can be easily adjusted for better performance;
- (iv)  It  is  easy  to  correct  mistakes:  because  of  the  clear physical meaning of the parameters, it is easy to redesign the parameters  with  new  data  so  that  the  same  mistake  will  not happen again;
- (v) It may be implemented on simple devices: due to simple computation and low memory requirement, the on-line training algorithms may be run on the user-end simple devices such as a mobile phone;
- (vi)  It  supports  on-line  learning:  users  can  continuously update the DCFS models with their own new data on their own simple devices, so that a wide variety of user-specific intelligent systems would be created;
- (vii) It provides a natural structure for parallel computing: all the fuzzy systems in the same level can be trained in parallel, making the fast training algorithms even faster through parallel computing; and,
- (viii) It is suitable for high-dimensional problems.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The  author  wishes  to  thank  the  reviewers  for  their  very insightful comments that helped to improve the paper.

## REFERENCES

- [1]  LeCun,  Y. et  al .,  'Handwritten  digit  recognition  with  a  backpropagation  network', Proc.  Advances  in  Neural  Information Processing Systems: 396-404, 1990.
- [2] Hinton, G. E., S.Osindero and Y.W.Teh, 'A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets,' Neural Comp. 18 : 1527-1554, 2006.
- [3] LeCun, Y., Y. Bengio and G. Hinton, 'Deep learning,' Nature , vol. 521, pp. 436-444, 2015.
- [4]  Silver,  D.,  et  al.,  'Mastering  the  game  of  Go  with  deep  neural networks and tree search,' Nature , vol. 529, pp. 484-489, 2016.
- [5] Sadeghi, R., T. Banerjee and W. Romine, 'Early hospital mortality prediction using vital signals,' Smart Health , vol. 9, pp. 265-274, 2018.
- [6]  Raju,  G.V.S.,  J.  Zhou  and  R.  A.  Kisner,  "Hierarchical  fuzzy control", Int. J. Contr. , vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 1201-1216, 1991.
- [7]  Wang,  L.X.,  'Universal  approximation  by  hierarchical  fuzzy systems,' Fuzzy Sets and Systems , vol. 93, pp. 223-230, 1998.
- [8] Wang, L.X., 'Analysis and design of hierarchical fuzzy systems,' IEEE Trans. on Fuzzy Systems , vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 617-624, 1999.
- [9]  Campello,  R.J.G.B.  and  W.C.D.  Amaral,  "Hierarchical  fuzzy relational models: linguistic interpretation and universal approximation", IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems , vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 446-453, 2006.
- [10] Joo, M.G.  and J.S. Lee, "Universal approximation by hierarchical fuzzy system with constraints on the fuzzy rule", Fuzzy Sets and Systems , vol. 130, pp. 175, 2002.
- [11]  Zeng,  X.J.  and  J.A.  Keane,  "Approximation  capabilities  of hierarchical fuzzy systems", IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems , vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 659-672, 2005.
- [12] Zeng, X.J., J.Y. Goulermas, P. Liatsis, D. Wang and J.A. Keane, "Hierarchical fuzzy  systems  for  function  approximation  on discrete  input  spaces  with  application", IEEE  Transactions  on Fuzzy Systems , vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1197-1215, 2008.
- [13] Chen, Y., B. Yang, A. Abraham and L. Peng, "Automatic Design of  Hierarchical  Takagi-Sugeno  Type  Fuzzy  Systems  Using Evolutionary Algorithms", IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems , vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 385-397, 2007.
- [14] Dong. J., Y. Chen, B. Yang, "Approach for evolving hierarchical T-S fuzzy systems", Proceedings. ICSP '04, vol. 2, pp. 1530-1533, 2004.
- [15]  Li,  J.,  K.H.  Cheung,  W.  Rattasiri  and  S.K.  Halgamuge, "Self-generating hierarchical fuzzy  systems", Proceedings  of 2004 International Conference on Intelligent Sensing and Information Processing , pp. 348-353, 2004.
- [16]  Salgado,  P.,  "Rule  generation  for  hierarchical  collaborative fuzzy  system", Applied  Mathematical  Modelling ,  vol.  32,  pp. 1159, 2008.
- [17] Baek,  G., J. Cho, M.H. Choi and S. Kim, "On-line monitoring of oil in water using transmitted-scattered lights and clustering-based  hierarchical  TSK  fuzzy  systems", 2010  IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems , pp. 1-8, 2010.
- [18]  Besbes,  R.,  R.  Tourki,  P.  Gorce,  "Engineering  analysis  for educational concepts' assessment", 3 rd Interdisciplinary Engineering Design Education Conference (IEDEC) , pp. 121-128, 2013.
- [19]  Brox,  P.,  I.  Baturone  and  S.  Sá nchez-Solano,  "Tuning  of  a hierarchical fuzzy system  for  video de-interlacing", 2010 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems , pp. 1-6, 2010.
- [20] Fu, X., X.J. Zeng, D. Wang, D. Xu and L. Yang, "Fuzzy system approaches to negotiation pricing decision support", Journal of Intelligent &amp; Fuzzy Systems , vol. 29, pp. 685, 2015.
- [21] Hagras,  H.A.,  "A  hierarchical type-2 fuzzy  logic control architecture for autonomous mobile robots", IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 524-539, 2004.
- [22] Hagras, H.A., R. Ramadan, M. Nawito, H. Gabr, M. Zaher and H. Fahmy,  "A  fuzzy  based  hierarchical  coordination  and  control system for a robotic agent team in the robot Hockey competition", 2010  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ) , pp. 1-8, 2010
- [23] Kammoun,  H.M.,  I. Kallel and A.M.  Alimi, "Accuracy preserving  interpretability  by  a  hierarchical  fuzzy  multiagent design for mobile robot controller", First International Conference on Innovative Engineering Systems (ICIES) , pp. 190-195, 2012.
- [24] Han, Q., H. Wen, G. Feng, B. Wu and M. Ren, "Self-nominating trust model based on hierarchical fuzzy systems for peer-to-peer networks", Peer-to-Peer Networking and Applications , 2015.

[25] He, H. and J. Lawry, "The linguistic attribute hierarchy and its optimisation for classification", Soft Computing , 18:1967, 2014.

[26] Jiang,  Y.,  S.  Jin  and  J.  Peng,  "Hierarchical  Fuzzy  Rule Interpolation and its Application for Hotels Location Selection", International  Journal  of  Cognitive  Informatics  and Natural Intelligence , vol. 10, pp. 55, 2016.

[27] Lin, J., "A vibration absorber of smart structures using adaptive networks  in  hierarchical  fuzzy  control", Journal  of  Sound  and Vibration , vol. 287, pp. 683, 2005.

[28]  Şahin,  M.A.  and  K.  Leblebicioglu,  "A  hierarchical  fuzzy decision maker for the weapon target assignment", IFAC Proceedings Volumes , vol. 44, pp. 8993, 2011.

[29] Salgado, P. and P. Garrido, "Image description by Hierarchical Prioritised Fuzzy Systems", 2009 IEEE International Conference on Computational Cybernetics , pp. 173-178, 2009.

[30] Son, C.S., and G.B. Jeong, "A nutrition evaluation system based on hierarchical fuzzy approach", International Journal of Fuzzy Logic and Intelligent Systems , vol. 8, pp. 87, 2008.

[31]  Sun,  L.  and  W.  Huo,  "Adaptive  fuzzy  control  of  spacecraft proximity operations using hierarchical fuzzy systems", IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics ,  vol.  21,  no.  3,  pp. 1629-1640, 2016.

[32]  Wang,  Y.,  H.  Yang,  A.  Li  and  Y.  Wang,  "Research  of photovoltaic  and  PHEV  hybrid  management  system  based  on hierarchical  fuzzy  control", 8th  International  Conference  on Electrical Engineering Computing Science and Automatic Control (CCE) pp. 1-5, 2011.

[33] Yu, W., X. Li and D.M. Carrillo, "Hierarchical dynamic neural networks  for  cascade  system  modeling  with  application  to wastewater treatment", 2016 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) ,  pp. 483-488, 2016.

[34]  Chang,  C.W.,  C.W.  Tao,  "A  simplified  implementation  of hierarchical fuzzy systems", Soft Computing , 2018.

[35]  Hsueh,  Y.C.,  S.F.  Su  and  M.C.  Chen,  "Decomposed  Fuzzy Systems and Their Application in Direct Adaptive Fuzzy Control", IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1772-1783, 2014.

[36]  Ojha,  V.K.,  V.  Snášel  and  A.  Abraham,  "Multiobjective Programming  for  Type-2  Hierarchical  Fuzzy  Inference  Trees", IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 915-936, 2018.

[37] Razak, T. R., J. M. Garibaldi, C. Wagner, A. Pourabdollah and D. Soria, "Interpretability indices for hierarchical fuzzy systems", 2017 IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE) , pp. 1-6, 2017.

[38] Zhou, T., H. Ishibuchi and S. Wang, "Stacked-structure-based hierarchical  Takagi-Sugeno-Kang  fuzzy  classification  through feature augmentation", IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence , vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 421-436, 2017.

[39] Zhang, Y., H. Ishibuchi and S. Wang, "Deep Takagi-Sugeno-Kang fuzzy classifier with shared linguistic fuzzy rules", IEEE  Transactions  on  Fuzzy  Systems ,  vol.  26,  no.  3,  pp. 1535-1549, 2018.

[40]  Wang,  L.X.  and  J.M.  Mendel,  'Generating  fuzzy  rules  by learning from examples,' IEEE Trans. on Systems, Man, and Cybern. , vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1414-1427, 1992.

[41]  Wang,  L.X.,  'The  WM  method  completed:  A  flexible  fuzzy system approach to data mining,' IEEE Trans. on Fuzzy Systems , vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 768-782, 2003.

[42]  Surowiecki,  J., The  Wisdom  of  Crowds:  Why  the  Many  Are Smarter Than the Few , Abacus, London, 2005.

[43]  Hastie,  T.,  R.  Tibshirani  and  J.  Friedman, The  Elements  of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference, and Prediction (2 nd Edition) , Springer Science+Business Media, 2009.

[44] Breiman, L., 'Bagging predictors', Machine Learning 26:123-140, 1996.

[45]  Breiman,  L.,  'Random  forests', Machine  Learning 45:5-32, 2001.

[46] Freund, Y. and R. Schapire, 'A decision-theoretic generalization of  on-line  learning  and  an  application  to  boosting,' Journal of Computer and System Sciences , vol. 55, pp. 119-139, 1997.

[47] Malkiel, B.G., A Random Walk Down Wall Street (10 th Edition) , W.W. Norton &amp; Co., New York, 2012.

[48] Fama, E., 'Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work,' Journal of Finance 25: 383-417, 1970.

[49] Lo, A.W. and A.C.  Mackinlay, A Non-Random Walk Down Wall Street , Princeton University Press, 2001.

[50] Lo, A.W. and A.C.  Mackinlay, "The stock prices do not follow random walks: Evidence from a simple specification test", The Review of Financial Studies , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 41-66, 1988.

[51] Leinweber, D.J. and A.N. Madhavan, 'Three Hundred Years of Stock Market Manipulations,' The Journal of Investing , Vol. 10, No. 2, 7-16, 2001.

[52]  Rapach,  D.  and  G.  Zhou,  'Forecasting  Stock  Returns,'  in  G. Elliott and A. Timmermann,  eds., Handbook  of  Economic Forecasting Vol. 2A , Elsevier B.V., pp. 327-384, 2013.

[53] Soros, G., The Alchemy of Finance , John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2003.

[54]  Wang,  L.X.,  'Dynamical  Models  of  Stock  Prices  Based  on Technical  Trading  Rules  Part  III:  Application  to  Hong  Kong Stocks,' IEEE  Trans.  on  Fuzzy  Systems, vol.  23,  no.  5,  pp. 1680-1697, 2015.

[55] Wang, L.X., 'Modeling stock price dynamics with fuzzy opinion networks,' IEEE  Trans.  on  Fuzzy  Systems ,  vol.  25,  no.  2,  pp. 277-301, 2017.

[56] Shiller, R.J., Irrational Exuberance , Broadway Books, 2006.

[57]  Wang,  L.X.,  'Dynamical  Models  of  Stock  Prices  Based  on Technical Trading Rules Part II: Analysis of the Model,' IEEE Trans. on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 1127-1141, 2015.

[58] Wang, L.X., A Course in Fuzzy Systems and Control , Prentice-Hall PTR, NJ, 1997.

[59]  Wang,  L.X.  and  C.  Wei,  'Approximation  accuracy  of  some neuro-fuzzy approaches,' IEEE Trans. on Fuzzy Systems , Vol. 8, No. 4, pp. 470-478, 2000.

[60] Wang, L.X. and J. M. Mendel, 'Back-propagation fuzzy systems as  nonlinear  dynamic  system  identifiers,' Proc.  1992  IEEE International Conf. on Fuzzy Systems , pp. 1409-1418, 1992.

[61] Nguyen, S.D.,S.B. Choi and T.I. Seo,'Recurrent mechanism and impulse noise filter for establishing ANFIS,' IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 985-997, 2018.

Li-Xin Wang received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Southern California (USC), Los Angeles, CA,

<!-- image -->

USA,  in 1992.

From  1992  to  1993,  he  was  a  Postdoctoral Fellow with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California at Berkeley. From 1993 to 2007, he was on the faculty of the Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST). In 2007, he resigned  from  his  tenured  position  at  HKUST  to become an independent researcher and investor in the stock and real estate markets in Hong Kong and

China. In Fall 2013, he returned to academia and is now a professor with the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. His research interests  are  stock  dynamics,  market  microstructure,  trading  strategies, fuzzy systems, and opinion networks.

```
THE MATLAB CODE OF TRAINING ALGORITHM 1 FOR THE DCFS IN EXAMPLE 1 (11 INPUTS 5 LEVELS) % The following 13 lines generate data file xx for Example 1 (predict % the Mackey-Glass time-series plus noise). You may use other data % file xx and start from load xx. for k=1:50 p0(k)=0.04*(k-1); end; for k=51:3100 p0(k)=0.9*p0(k-1)+0.2*p0(k-50)/(1+p0(k-50)^10); r0(k-50)=log(p0(k)/p0(k-1))+0.0001*randn; end; for i=1:3000 for j=1:12 xx(i,j)=r0(i+j); end; end; save xx; load xx; % xx is N× 12 matrix containing all the data, the first % 11 columns are inputs and the last column is output. [N,~]=size(xx); ntrain=round(N*2/3); % The first 2/3 are training data, and the % remaining 1/3 are testing data. mm=20; % mm is the q in Fig. 2: the number of fuzzy sets covering % the input variables. for i=1:ntrain for j=1:3 % window size=3 with one-variable-at-a-time moving. x11(i,j)=xx(i,j); x12(i,j)=xx(i,j+1); x13(i,j)=xx(i,j+2); x14(i,j)=xx(i,j+3); x15(i,j)=xx(i,j+4); x16(i,j)=xx(i,j+5); x17(i,j)=xx(i,j+6); x18(i,j)=xx(i,j+7); x19(i,j)=xx(i,j+8); end; % x11,…,x19 are inputs to the 9 fuzzy systems in Level 1. y(i,1)=xx(i,12); % y is the desired output. end; % The following 9 lines train the 9 fuzzy systems in Level 1, where % wmdeepzb trains the fuzzy system to get zb (the in FS (7)) % and rg (the endpoints in (11)). [zb11 rg11]=wmdeepzb(mm,x11,y); [zb12 rg12]=wmdeepzb(mm,x12,y); [zb13 rg13]=wmdeepzb(mm,x13,y); [zb14 rg14]=wmdeepzb(mm,x14,y); [zb15 rg15]=wmdeepzb(mm,x15,y); [zb16 rg16]=wmdeepzb(mm,x16,y); [zb17 rg17]=wmdeepzb(mm,x17,y); [zb18 rg18]=wmdeepzb(mm,x18,y); [zb19 rg19]=wmdeepzb(mm,x19,y); 'Level 1 training done ' % The following computes x21,…,x27 which are inputs to the 7 fuzzy % systems in Level 2, where wmdeepyy computes the output of the % fuzzy system with parameters zb and rg. x21(1:ntrain,1)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb11,rg11,x11); x21(1:ntrain,2)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb12,rg12,x12); x21(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb13,rg13,x13); x22(1:ntrain,1)=x21(:,2); x22(1:ntrain,2)=x21(:,3); x22(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb14,rg14,x14); x23(1:ntrain,1)=x21(:,3); x23(1:ntrain,2)=x22(:,3); x23(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb15,rg15,x15); x24(1:ntrain,1)=x22(:,3); x24(1:ntrain,2)=x23(:,3); x24(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb16,rg16,x16); x25(1:ntrain,1)=x23(:,3); x25(1:ntrain,2)=x24(:,3); x25(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb17,rg17,x17); x26(1:ntrain,1)=x24(:,3); x26(1:ntrain,2)=x25(:,3); x26(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb18,rg18,x18); x27(1:ntrain,1)=x25(:,3); x27(1:ntrain,2)=x26(:,3); x27(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb19,rg19,x19); % The following 7 lines train the 7 fuzzy systems in Level 2. [zb21 rg21]=wmdeepzb(mm,x21,y); [zb22 rg22]=wmdeepzb(mm,x22,y); [zb23 rg23]=wmdeepzb(mm,x23,y); [zb24 rg24]=wmdeepzb(mm,x24,y); [zb25 rg25]=wmdeepzb(mm,x25,y); [zb26 rg26]=wmdeepzb(mm,x26,y); [zb27 rg27]=wmdeepzb(mm,x27,y); 'Level 2 training done ' % x31,…,x35 are inputs to the 5 fuzzy systems in Level 3. x31(1:ntrain,1)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb21,rg21,x21); x31(1:ntrain,2)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb22,rg22,x22); x31(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb23,rg23,x23); x32(1:ntrain,1)=x31(:,2); x32(1:ntrain,2)=x31(:,3); x32(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb24,rg24,x24); x33(1:ntrain,1)=x31(:,3); x33(1:ntrain,2)=x32(:,3); x33(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb25,rg25,x25); x34(1:ntrain,1)=x32(:,3); x34(1:ntrain,2)=x33(:,3); x34(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb26,rg26,x26); x35(1:ntrain,1)=x33(:,3); x35(1:ntrain,2)=x34(:,3); x35(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb27,rg27,x27); % The following 5 lines train the 5 fuzzy systems in Level 3. [zb31 rg31]=wmdeepzb(mm,x31,y); [zb32 rg32]=wmdeepzb(mm,x32,y); [zb33 rg33]=wmdeepzb(mm,x33,y); [zb34 rg34]=wmdeepzb(mm,x34,y); [zb35 rg35]=wmdeepzb(mm,x35,y); 'Level 3 training done ' % x41,x42,x43 are inputs to the 3 fuzzy systems in Level 4. x41(1:ntrain,1)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb31,rg31,x31); x41(1:ntrain,2)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb32,rg32,x32); x41(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb33,rg33,x33); x42(1:ntrain,1)=x41(:,2); x42(1:ntrain,2)=x41(:,3); x42(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb34,rg34,x34); x43(1:ntrain,1)=x41(:,3); x43(1:ntrain,2)=x42(:,3); x43(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb35,rg35,x35); % The following 3 lines train the 3 fuzzy systems in Level 4. [zb41 rg41]=wmdeepzb(mm,x41,y); [zb42 rg42]=wmdeepzb(mm,x42,y); [zb43 rg43]=wmdeepzb(mm,x43,y); 'Level 4 training done ' % x51 is input to the fuzzy system in Level 5. x51(1:ntrain,1)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb41,rg41,x41); x51(1:ntrain,2)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb42,rg42,x42); x51(1:ntrain,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb43,rg43,x43);
```

```
% Train the fuzzy system in Level 5. [zb51 rg51]=wmdeepzb(mm,x51,y); 'Level 5 training done ' 'Training done' 'Computing the training and testing errors' % The meanings of the variables are the same as in training. for i=1:N for j=1:3 x11(i,j)=xx(i,j); x12(i,j)=xx(i,j+1); x13(i,j)=xx(i,j+2); x14(i,j)=xx(i,j+3); x15(i,j)=xx(i,j+4); x16(i,j)=xx(i,j+5); x17(i,j)=xx(i,j+6); x18(i,j)=xx(i,j+7); x19(i,j)=xx(i,j+8); end; y(i,1)=xx(i,12); end; x21(1:N,1)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb11,rg11,x11); x21(1:N,2)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb12,rg12,x12); x21(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb13,rg13,x13); x22(1:N,1)=x21(:,2); x22(1:N,2)=x21(:,3); x22(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb14,rg14,x14); x23(1:N,1)=x21(:,3); x23(1:N,2)=x22(:,3); x23(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb15,rg15,x15); x24(1:N,1)=x22(:,3); x24(1:N,2)=x23(:,3); x24(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb16,rg16,x16); x25(1:N,1)=x23(:,3); x25(1:N,2)=x24(:,3); x25(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb17,rg17,x17); x26(1:N,1)=x24(:,3); x26(1:N,2)=x25(:,3); x26(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb18,rg18,x18); x27(1:N,1)=x25(:,3); x27(1:N,2)=x26(:,3); x27(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb19,rg19,x19); 'Level 1 computing done' x31(1:N,1)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb21,rg21,x21); x31(1:N,2)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb22,rg22,x22); x31(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb23,rg23,x23); x32(1:N,1)=x31(:,2); x32(1:N,2)=x31(:,3); x32(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb24,rg24,x24); x33(1:N,1)=x31(:,3); x33(1:N,2)=x32(:,3); x33(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb25,rg25,x25); x34(1:N,1)=x32(:,3); x34(1:N,2)=x33(:,3); x34(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb26,rg26,x26); x35(1:N,1)=x33(:,3); x35(1:N,2)=x34(:,3); x35(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb27,rg27,x27); 'Level 2 computing done' x41(1:N,1)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb31,rg31,x31); x41(1:N,2)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb32,rg32,x32); x41(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb33,rg33,x33); x42(1:N,1)=x41(:,2); x42(1:N,2)=x41(:,3); x42(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb34,rg34,x34); x43(1:N,1)=x41(:,3); x43(1:N,2)=x42(:,3); x43(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb35,rg35,x35); 'Level 3 computing done' x51(1:N,1)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb41,rg41,x41); x51(1:N,2)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb42,rg42,x42); x51(1:N,3)=wmdeepyy(mm,zb43,rg43,x43); 'Level 4 computing done' yy=wmdeepyy(mm,zb51,rg51,x51); % yy is output of DCFS. 'Level 5 computing done' % The following computes and plots the training and testing errors. for i=1:N e(i)=y(i)-yy(i); end; err_train=0; for i=1:ntrain err_train=err_train+e(i)^2; end; err_train=sqrt(err_train/ntrain); err_test=0; for i=ntrain+1:N err_test=err_test+e(i)^2; end; err_test=sqrt(err_test/(N-ntrain)); plot(e); % Plot the DCFS error curve in Fig. 12. title(['DCFS: Training error = ' num2str(err_train) ', Testing error = ' num2str(err_test)]); % End of main program. function [zb ranges]=wmdeepzb(mm,xx,y) % Train fuzzy system with input xx and output y to get zb and ranges, % where zb is the in FS (7) and ranges is the endpoints in (11). extra=[xx,y]; [numSamples,m]=size(extra); numInput=m-1; for i=1:numInput fnCounts(i)=mm; end; ranges = zeros(numInput,2); activFns = zeros(numInput,2); activGrades = zeros(numInput,2); searchPath = zeros(numInput,2); numCells = 1; % number of regions (cells) for i = 1:numInput ranges(i,1) = min(extra(:,i)); ranges(i,2) = max(extra(:,i)); numCells = numCells * fnCounts(i); end; baseCount(1)=1; for i=2:numInput baseCount(i)=1; for j=2:i baseCount(i)=baseCount(i)*fnCounts(numInput-j+2); end; end; % Generate rules for cells covered by data zb = zeros(1,numCells); % THEN part centers of generated rules ym = zeros(1,numCells); for k = 1:numSamples for i = 1:numInput numFns = fnCounts(i); nthActive = 1;
```

```
for nthFn = 1:numFns grade = meb2(numFns,nthFn,extra(k,i),ranges(i,1),ranges(i,2)); if grade > 0 activFns(i,nthActive) = nthFn; activGrades(i,nthActive) = grade; nthActive = nthActive + 1; end; end; % endfor nthFn end; % endfor i for i=1:numInput if activGrades(i,1) >= activGrades(i,2) searchPath(i,1)=activFns(i,1); searchPath(i,2)=activGrades(i,1); else searchPath(i,1)=activFns(i,2); searchPath(i,2)=activGrades(i,2); end; end; indexcell=1; grade=1; for i=1:numInput grade=grade*searchPath(i,2); indexcell=indexcell+(searchPath(numInput-i+1,1)-1)*baseCount(i); end; ym(indexcell)=ym(indexcell)+grade; zb(indexcell)=zb(indexcell)+extra(k,numInput+1)*grade; end;  % endfor k for j=1:numCells if ym(j) ~= 0 zb(j)=zb(j)/ym(j); end; end; % Extrapolate the rules to all the cells for i=1:numInput-1 baseCount(i)=1; for j=1:i baseCount(i)=baseCount(i)*fnCounts(numInput-j+1); end; end; ct=1; zbb = zeros(1,numCells); ymm = zeros(1,numCells); while ct > 0 ct=0; for s=1:numCells if ym(s) == 0 ct=ct+1; end; end; for s=1:numCells if ym(s) == 0 s1=s; index = ones(1,numInput); for i=numInput-1:-1:1 while s1 > baseCount(i) s1=s1-baseCount(i); index(numInput-i)=index(numInput-i)+1; end; end; index(numInput)=s1; zbnum=0; for i=1:numInput-1 if index(i) > 1 zbb(s)=zbb(s)+zb(s-baseCount(numInput-i)); ymm(s)=ymm(s)+ym(s-baseCount(numInput-i)); zbnum=zbnum+sign(ym(s-baseCount(numInput-i))); end; if index(i) < fnCounts(i) zbb(s)=zbb(s)+zb(s+baseCount(numInput-i)); ymm(s)=ymm(s)+ym(s+baseCount(numInput-i)); zbnum=zbnum+sign(ym(s+baseCount(numInput-i))); end; end; if index(numInput) > 1 zbb(s)=zbb(s)+zb(s-1); ymm(s)=ymm(s)+ym(s-1); zbnum=zbnum+sign(ym(s-1)); end; if index(numInput) < fnCounts(numInput) zbb(s)=zbb(s)+zb(s+1); ymm(s)=ymm(s)+ym(s+1); zbnum=zbnum+sign(ym(s+1)); end; if zbnum >= 1 zbb(s)=zbb(s)/zbnum; ymm(s)=ymm(s)/zbnum; end; end; % endif ym end; % endfor s for s=1:numCells if ym(s) == 0 & ymm(s) ~= 0 zb(s)=zbb(s); ym(s)=ymm(s); end; end; end; % endwhile ct function yy=wmdeepyy(mm,zb,ranges,xx) % Compute the output of fuzzy system with zb and ranges for input xx. exapp=xx; [numSamples,m]=size(exapp); numInput=m; for i=1:numInput fnCounts(i)=mm; end; activFns = zeros(numInput,2); activGrades = zeros(numInput,2); baseCount(1)=1; for i=2:numInput baseCount(i)=1; for j=2:i baseCount(i)=baseCount(i)*fnCounts(numInput-j+2); end; end; for j=1:numInput for i1=1:2^j for i2=1:2^(numInput-j) ma(i2+(i1-1)*2^(numInput-j),j)=mod(i1-1,2)+1; end; end; end; e1sum=0; for k = 1:numSamples for i = 1:numInput numFns = fnCounts(i); nthActive = 1; for nthFn = 1:numFns grade = meb2(numFns,nthFn,exapp(k,i),ranges(i,1),ranges(i,2)); if grade > 0 activFns(i,nthActive) = nthFn; activGrades(i,nthActive) = grade; nthActive = nthActive + 1;
```

```
end; end; end; for i=1:numInput nn(i,1)=activFns(i,1); nn(i,2)=nn(i,1)+1; if nn(i,1) == fnCounts(i) nn(i,2)=nn(i,1); end; end; a=0; b=0; for i=1:2^numInput indexcell=1; grade=1; for j=1:numInput grade=grade*activGrades(j,ma(i,j)); Count(j); end; a=a+zb(indexcell)*grade; b=b+grade; end; yy(k)= a/b; % the fuzzy system output end;  % endfor k function y=meb2(n,i,x,xmin,xmax) % Compute the value of the i'th membership function in Fig. 2 at x. h=(xmax-xmin)/(n-1); if i==1 if x < xmin y=1;
```

```
if x >= xmin & x < xmin+h y=(xmin-x+h)/h; end; if x >= xmin+h y=0; end; end; if i > 1 & i < n if x < xmin+(i-2)*h | x > xmin+i*h y=0; end; y=(x-xmin-(i-2)*h)/h; end; if x >= xmin+(i-1)*h & x <= xmin+i*h y=(-x+xmin+i*h)/h; end; end; if i==n if x < xmax-h y=0; end; if x >= xmax-h & x < xmax y=(-xmax+x+h)/h; end; if x >= xmax y=1; end; end;
```

```
indexcell=indexcell+(nn(numInput-j+1,ma(i,numInput-j+1))-1)*base end; if x >= xmin+(i-2)*h & x < xmin+(i-1)*h
```