## MATHEMATICAL MODELS AND COMPUTATIONAL METHODS

## Using Reinforcement Learning in the Algorithmic Trading Problem

E. S. Ponomarev a ,  *, I. V. Oseledets a , b , and A. S. Cichocki a

a Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia b Marchuk Institute of Numerical Mathematics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia

*

e-mail: Evgenii.Ponomarev@skoltech.ru

Received June 10, 2019; revised June 10, 2019; accepted June 26, 2019

Abstract -The development of reinforced learning methods has extended application to many areas including algorithmic trading. In this paper trading on the stock exchange is interpreted into a game with a Markov property consisting of states, actions, and rewards. A system for trading the fixed volume of a financial instrument is proposed and experimentally tested; this is based on the asynchronous advantage actor-critic method with the use of several neural network architectures. The application of recurrent layers in this approach is investigated. The experiments were performed on real anonymized data. The best architecture demonstrated a trading strategy for the RTS Index futures (MOEX:RTSI) with a profitability of 66% per annum  accounting  for  commission.  The  project  source  code  is  available  via  the  following  link: http://github.com/evgps/a3c\_trading.

Keywords

: algorithmic trading, reinforcement learning, neural network, recurrent neural networks

DOI:

10.1134/S1064226919120131

## 1.  INTRODUCTION

The algorithmic  trading  considered  in  this  paper consists in designing a control system capable of buying or selling a fixed volume of a financial instrument on the stock exchange. The algorithm is intended to maximize the cost of the total portfolio or, in other words, the profit. As the financial instrument, we considered RTS Index futures in our project; the data for the experimental part were obtained from a large Russian exchange. Commission is taken into account according to the prices of this exchange for futures trading.

The design of the algorithm is based on using reinforcement learning since this is most appropriate for problems with delayed reward. In contrast to supervised learning, this does not require creating the rules under which a certain action must be considered true with a certain weight and allows using the metrics calculated  for  each  strategy  for  long  time  intervals,  for instance,  the  Sharpe  ratio  [4].  We  use  a  modified asynchronous advantage actor-critic algorithm [12] in our work. As the approximation function, we studied several artificial neural network (ANN) architectures. We show the dependence of the results on a variation in network depth and number of parameters (neurons) and on the introduction of a recurrent layer, namely, long  short-term  memory  (LSTM)  [2].  Data  in  the form of anonymized bids were aggregated empirically in the vector of attributes. This action is chosen once per sixty seconds.

Note  that  applicability  of  all  developed  methods was confirmed experimentally on real data. We detail the principal results in the next sections.

Today,  there  are  multiple  reinforcement  learning algorithms [5] and parts of them have been applied in algorithmic  trading,  for  instance,  in  Q-learning  [6], Deep  Q-learning  [1, 7], recurrent reinforcement learning,  and  policy  gradient  methods  [8,  6,  9], REINFORCE [10],  and  other  actor-critic  methods [5, 11]. However, this research area is rapidly developing and new algorithms appear.

In this work we construct an environment [3] typical for a reinforcement learning problem, which consists of states ,  a  set  of possible actions ,  and a reward function. In addition, we assume that this process has the  Markov  property.  As  the  learning  method  we applied the asynchronous advantage actor-critic (A3C) algorithm  [12],  which  showed  efficiency  on  many datasets, including Atari 2600 [13]. The application of this  algorithm  to  the  exchange  trading  problem  was not found in the literature. In the improvement process of the algorithm operation, we searched for artificial neuron network architecture lying in the basis of the method, including the study of recurrent neuron networks and several other optimizations. The algorithm was learned and tested on real anonymized data on  the  trading  of  the  RTS  Index  at  the  Moscow Exchange (MOEX:RTSI).

Notable results of the work:

- (1) We studied the application of the reinforcement learning algorithm based on the deep neuron network.
- (2)  The  modern  asynchronous  advantage  actorcritic (A3C) algorithm was applied to these tasks.
- (3)  We  searched  for  artificial  neuron  network architecture.

Fig. 1. τ is the red track, a is the action, s is the state, and r is the reward.

<!-- image -->

- (4) The different architectures of the method were experimentally probed and compared. The best demonstrated a stable winning strategy with a profitability of 66% per annum over six months of testing (accounting for exchange commission).

## 2.  PRELIMINARY INFORMATION

## 2.1. Formulation of the Exchange Trading Problem in Terms of Reinforcement Learning

Consider  the  exchange  trading  process  in  more detail. Let us fix a financial instrument (futures on the RTS index) and its possible volume and let us agree to make a decision on buy/sell once per time quantum, the minute. Thus, we obtain the system where in each step  we  need  to  choose  one  of  three  actions,  the desired  position.  The  position  may  be  either  long, when we possess the futures; neutral, when we turn all assets into money; or short, when we borrow a fixed volume under the obligation to buy it later at the future price. In addition, new data become available at each step, which may be aggregated in the form of a state vector.

We prescribe the environment as the Markov decision-making process [14]: M = {S, A, P, γ , R}, where

- (i) S ∈ R m is the space of observed states . At each step the exchange-agent system is in s t ∈ S. s t is constructively represented in the work as an aggregation of current bids or as an internal state of the LSTM memory cell. In the last case, we may hope to procure the larger informative value.
- (ii) A =  {-1, 0, 1} is the space of actions .  In  the trading  problem,  the  action  is  the  desired  position: long (to keep a unit of the instrument, long, 1), neutral (cash  out,  0),  or  short  (borrow  a  unit  of  the  instrument, short, -1).

At each step we choose the action at ∈ A from the developed politics π ( a | s ),  that  is,  the  probability  to choose a in s .

- (iii)  P( s '| s , a )  is  the transition  probability of  the assumed Markov process.
- (iv) R( s , a ) is the reward function. At each step the agent becomes the reward depending, not only on the current, but also on the previous actions r t = R( s t , at ).
- (v) γ ∈ [0, 1] is the decay multiplier with which the

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Statement 1. The task of the algorithm is to find the strategy π : S → A that  maximizes  the  mathematical expectation of reward ρ π :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the track τ = is the realization of one game/episode (Fig. 1) and R ( τ ) is the total reward . 0 { , } T t t t s a T = ∈

As  the  reward  we  use  its  estimate,  the  function R ( s , a ) of action a and state s

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A π ( s , a ) is the advantage function, which is the value characterizing how much chosen action a is better than the average estimate of the utility value of state s

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and V π ( s ) is the estimate of the cost function of state s for the politics π : S → A :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, the architecture of the actor determines which action a = π ( s )  to  choose. The loss function for this subnetwork is in linear proportion to advantage function A ( s t , at ) = [ r t + γ V π ( s t +1)] V ( s ). The gradient of the loss function for this part of the network will equal (the derivation may be found in [12])

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The architecture of the critic predicts which reward is  anticipated  in  this  state  without  dividing  the  esti- mates into actions V π ( s t ) = E π Rt ( π ). The loss function for the critic is the error in the prediction V π ( s t ):

Fig. 2. Artificial neuron network determining cost function V ( s ) = V ( s | θ ) and politics (actor) function π ( a | s ) = π ( a | s , θ ).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3. Scheme of training and testing system.

<!-- image -->

As a result, the algorithm attempts to maximize the cumulative discounted reward

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the problem considered, P and R are unknown, and the instantaneous reward function reflects variation in the portfolio cost and takes into account the commission  from  the  buy/sell  of  an  instrument.  It means that, if c t is the cost of all assets of the agent at step t (the amount of money from selling everything without regard for commission), then r t = c t -c t - 1 fee · I [ at = at - 1 ].

The  entire  network  is  trained  with  the  error-backpropagation method. The loss function for the entire network is common and is a linear combination of the loss functions for the actor and critic (parameter α ∈ [0, 1]):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r t + i is a variation in the portfolio for a step. The number of steps is T ~  200,  because the majority of terms make no considerable contribution to the estimate ( γ T → 0).

## 3.  PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION

The actor-critic  algorithm  execution  with  several asynchronous flows shows a significant improvement in the quality of operation [12]. For the purposes of study, we constructed the software system of training and testing. We implement the system using Python within  the  TensorFlow  framework  [18].  The  system consists of two global processes: training and testing (Fig. 3). They are associated by storing the model in the  hard  disk  and  loading  the  architecture  and  the trained parameters in the testing system. The choice of architecture is a key task and is discussed in detail in Section 4.

Fig. 4. Training curve of algorithm. Falling into the extremum corresponding to the buy-and-hold strategy is marked.

<!-- image -->

The training of the neuron network is performed every N steps = 200 steps. N worker is the number of parallel processes, which was fixed in this work equal 10. Each epoch of training was conducted on the three-month data containing 50000 one-minute steps. The convergence requires approximately 1000 epochs for a step size of approximately 10 -3.

To accelerate the system testing, we implemented the  testing  subsystem  without  training  and  writing in the history. We replace the probabilistic approach in the testing with the arg max function. We also switch off the dropout function in the testing.

## 4.  NUMERICAL RESULTS

We performed numerical experiments on real historical data (the complete log of the anonymized bids for the RTSI). As the training set we used the bids from September 15, 2015 to December 15, 2015. We carried out  the  test  over  the  following  six  months:  from December 15, 2015 to June 15, 2016.

The  commission  from  buy  or  sell  was  fixed  at 1.25 rubles  for  an  operation,  that  is,  2.50  rubles  for each transaction. It is clear that the strategy must be more  profitable  than  2.50  rubles  for  a  trade.  To increase the profitability of each transaction, we artificially increased the commission  in the  reward model. In addition, we changed the reward function to avoid  coming  into  the  buy-and-hold  trap  (Fig.  4), which means no active trading. To do this we introduced a penalty for the long repetition of an action.

The development of neural network architecture is important. As the initial point we chose the simplest artificial neural network with a single common hidden layer, linear function V , and a linear layer with softmax activation for choosing action π ( s ). As the hypotheses improving  method  quality,  we  made  the  following assumptions:

Assumption 1. Using a different reward function.

Assumption 2. Introducing a recurrent layer (LSTM).

Assumption 3. Adding a dropout layer.

Assumption 4. Increasing the number of neurons in the hidden layers.

Assumption 5. Using a more complicated architecture of the cost function.

Assumption 6. Combining the attributes for several minutes in a common vector.

Following these assumptions, we designed several architectures  from  combinations  of  the  same  layers, but  with  different  parameters,  including  no  layer (Table 1 and Fig. 2). In Table 1 we used the following denotations:

- (1) Depth is the number of serially connected vectors of attributes used as the input vector.
- (2)  Dense  is  the  number  of  neurons  in  the  fully connected first layer (for instance, 128) or the absence of this layer (-).
- (3)  Dropout  is  the  probability  of  dropout  (for instance, 0.5) or its absence (-).
- (4) LSTM is the number of neurons in the LSTM layer connected with the first layer (for instance, 64) or the absence of this layer (-).
- (5) Dense V is the number of neurons in the fully connected layer preceding the output linear critic layer ( V ( s )).

Table 1. Architectures

| Name  Depth Dense Dropout LSTM  Dense  V  Dense  A  5  6  -  0.5  64  -  -  8  6  -  0.5  128  -  -  5coolV  6  -  0.5  64  32  -  9  1  -  0.5  64  32  -  12  1  -  0.5  64  32  32  5noLSTM  20  -  -  -  -  -  6  6  128  -  128  -  -   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Fig. 5. Comparison of 8 and 5 cool V models: effect of linear approximation of cost function of state V ( s ) (to the left) against a two-layer network with activation function tanh at first layer. The remaining parameters are identical (Table 1).

<!-- image -->

(6) Dense A is the number of neurons in the fully connected  layer  preceding  the  output  softmax  actor layer ( π ( a | s )).

To study how the results depend on the presence of the  dropout  layer,  we  chose  the  two  architectures named 6 and 8.  From  the  test  results  (Table  3)  the dropout significantly improves the situation. To compare result dependence of the number of neurons in the LSTM layer, we considered 8 and 5 architectures, and, to compare the dependence on the complicatedness of the cost function approximator, we used 5 and 5 cool V architectures. To check how the results depend on the number of serially connected vectors of attributes used as the input vector, we considered 5 cool V and 9 architectures (the training and testing curves are depicted in Figs. 5-7).

Table 2. Result of execution on three-month test data

| Name  Profit % per  annum  Profit % per  annum (commiss.)  Sharpe ratio  Fraction  of winning  transactions  Average  transaction,  rubles  5  99.0  94.9  3.23  60.32  59.59  8  50.3  16.4  1.73  51.69  3.7  5coolV  44.6  -3.5  1.46  54.14  2.32  9  86.1  47.3  2.18  53.58  5.55  6  22.6  -121.6  0.58  51.14  0.39   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Fig. 6. Comparison of 5 and 8 models: effect of 64 neurons in LSTM layer (to the left) against 128 neurons. The remaining parameters are identical (Table 1).

<!-- image -->

The main difficulty in the experimental optimization of the architecture is the training time of a single model. This varies dependent on the server workload and in general counts to tens of hours. The choice of the training speed is also important for the optimization and convergence of the algorithm [17].

Table 3. Result of execution on six-month test data

| Name  Profit % per  annum  Profit % per  annum (commiss.)  Sharpe ratio  Fraction  of winning  transactions  Average  transaction,  rubles  5  8.8  5.2  0.29  55.82  6.15  8  64.0  28.4  2.14  52.57  4.5  5coolV  75.6  20.7  2.68  53.24  3.44  9  110.5  66.5  3.2  54.21  6.27  6  8.6  -143.7  0.25  50.84  0.14   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Below, we present the tables with the economical metrics  important  for  the  decision  making  on  the investment  attractiveness  of  the  algorithm  reflecting profitability and risk. In Table 2 we use the following denotations:

Fig. 7. Comparison of 5 cool V and 9 models: effect of combination of attributes for six steps in a common vector (to the left) against use of attributes for a single step. The remaining parameters are identical (Table 1).

<!-- image -->

- (1) Profit % per annum is the profitability in percent per  annum,  that  is,  ( profit / begin \_ price )  ·  (365/ number \_ of \_ days ),  where number \_ of \_ days =  90  for  three
2. months and 180 for six months. begin \_ price is the cost of a financial instrument at the beginning of the trading.
- (2) Profit % per annum (commiss.) is the profitability in percent per annum with account for the commission,  that  is,  ( profit -n \_ trades · fee / begin \_ price )  · (365/ number \_ of \_ days ), where fee = 2.5 rubles .

Table 4. Result of execution on three-month training data

| Name  Profit % per  annum  Profit % per  annum (commiss.)  Sharpe ratio  Fraction  of winning  transactions  Average  transaction,  rubles  5  10 -3  139.1  5.11  58.13  47.12  8  5 × 10 -3  1784.5  5.11  68.91  70.28  5coolV  10 -3  1855.4  24.1  67.95  57.22  9  10 -3  1894.9  22.57  70.26  68.21  6  10 -3  7385.5  54.29  88.22  92.11   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

- (3) Sharpe ratio is the Sharpe ratio E ( profit )/ σ ( profit ), which is the ratio of profitability to variability in both directions.
- (4) Average transaction, rubles is the average profit for a transaction. This criterion is crucial in consideration of commissions.

## 5.  CONCLUSIONS

This work has resulted mainly in the creation of an exchange  trading  algorithm  based  on  the  advantage actor-critic  method,  which  is  potentially  profitable and attractive for investments from an economic point of view. Thus, the best architecture achieves a profitability of 110% per annum not accounting for commission or 66% per annum accounting for a commission of 2.5 rubles for transaction on the RTS futures (computed on six months of historical 2016 data).

During algorithm optimization, we experimentally verified  several  hypotheses,  which  allows  significant improvement of method characteristics and creates a view on applicability of several ideas:

- (i)  The  use  of  another  reward function is disputable. On the one side, this helps avoid locking in the local  minimum  of  absence  of  trading,  and,  on  the other side, the goal function of the trader is not optimized here.
- (ii) The unification of attributes for several minutes into a common vector is wrong.
- (iii)  The  addition  of  a  recurrent  layer  (LSTM)  is correct.
- (iv) The addition of a dropout layer is correct.
- (v) The increase in the number of neurons in the hidden layers is disputable.
- (vi) The use of the neuron network in several layers for approximating the cost function is correct.

As a result of the work, we also implemented a convenient environment  for future  experiments  with exchange  trading  sustained  in  the  taken  style.  We believe  that  this  will  allow  easy  experimenting  using various methods to solve this problem. We think that subsequent developments of the work must be geared towards optimizing the architecture and applying it to the real trading system.

## REFERENCES

1. Y. Deng, Y. Kong, F. Bao, and Q. Dai, 'Sparse codinginspired  optimal  trading  system  for  HFT  industry.' IEEE Trans. Industrial Inf. 11 , 467-475 (2015).
2. S. Hochreiter and Jü. Schmidhuber, 'Long short-term memory,' Neural Comput. 9 , 1735-1780 (1997).
3. R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, 'Reinforcement learning: an introduction.' IEEE Trans. Neural Networks Neural Networks 9 , 1054 (1998).
4. W. F. Sharpe, 'The sharpe ratio,' J. Portfolio Manag. 21 , 49-58 (1994).
5. Y.  Li,  'Deep  reinforcement  learning:  an  overview,' Computing  Research  Repository  (CoRR) abs/1701 , 1-30 (2017).
6. J. Moody and M. Saffell, 'Learning to trade via direct reinforcement,'  IEEE  Trans.  Neural  Networks 12 , 875-889 (2001).
7. Y.  Deng,  F.  Bao,  Y.  Kong,  Z.  Ren,  and  D.  Q.  Dai, 'Direct  reinforcement  learning  for  financial  signal representation and trading,' IEEE Trans. Neural Networks &amp; Learn. Syst. 28 , 653-664 (2017).
8. J.  Moody,  L.  Wu,  Y.  Liao,  and  M.  Saffell,  'Performance functions and reinforcement learning for trading systems and portfolios,' J. Forecasting 17 (56), 441-470 (1998).
9. K. L. Xin Du and Jinjian Zhai, 'Algorithm trading using  Q-learning  and  recurrent  reinforcement,'  Learn. Positions 1 , 1 (2009).
10. R.  J.  Williams,  'Simple  statistical  gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning,' Machine Learn. 8 , 229-256 (1992).
11. S.  D.  Bekiros,  Heterogeneous  trading  strategies  with adaptive  fuzzy  Actor-Critic  reinforcement  learning:  a behavioral  approach,'  J.  Economic  Dynamics  and Control. 34 , 1153-1170 (2010).
12. V. Mnih, A. P. Badia, M. Mirza, A. Graves, T. P. Lillicrap, T. Harley, D. Silver, and K. Kavukcuoglu, 'Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning,' in Proc.  Int.  Conf.  on  Machine  Learning,  New  York  City, USA, June 19 -24, 2016 , pp. 1928-1937.
13. Y. Zhan, H. B. Ammar, and M. E. Taylor, 'Theoretically-grounded policy advice from multiple teachers in reinforcement  learning  settings  with  applications  to negative transfer,' in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. on Artificial Intelligence, (IJCAI), New York, NY, USA, July 9 -15, 2016 (IJCAI, 2016), pp. 2315-2321.
14. A. A. Markov, 'The theory of algorithms,' J. Symbolic Logic 18 , 340-341 (1953).
15. R. Bellman, 'A markovian decision process,' J. Math. Mech. 6 , 679-684 (1957).
16. M. Riedmiller and H. Braun, 'A direct adaptive method for faster backpropagation learning: the RPROP Algorithm,' in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Neural Networks, San  Francisco,  Mar.  28 -1  Apr.  1, 1993 (IEEE,  New York, 1993), pp. 586-591.
17. G. E. Hinton, N. Srivastava, and K. Swersky, 'RMSProp: Lecture  6a-  overview  of  mini-batch  gradient  descent COURSERA,' Neural Networks for Machine Learning 31 , (2012).
18. M.  Abadi,  P.  Barham,  J.  Chen,  Z.  Chen,  A.  Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard, M.  Kudlur,  J.  Levenberg,  R.  Monga,  S.  Moore, D. G. Murray,  B.  Steiner,  P.  Tucker,  V.  Vasudevan, P. Warden, M. Wicke, Y. Yu, X. Zheng, and G. Brain, 'A system for large-scale machine learning,' Proc. 12th USENIX Symp. on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI'16), 2016 , pp. 265-284.
19. W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever, and O. Vinyals, 'Recurrent Neural Network Regularization,' in Proc. Int. Conf. on Learning Representations (ICLR), Banff, Canada, April 14 -16, 2014 (ICLR, 2014), pp. 1-8.

Translated by E. Oborin