## Uncertainty-Aware Lookahead Factor Models for Quantitative Investing

Lakshay Chauhan 1 John Alberg 1 Zachary C. Lipton 2 3

## Abstract

On a periodic basis, publicly traded companies report fundamentals , financial data including revenue, earnings, debt, among others. Quantitative finance research has identified several factors , functions of the reported data that historically correlate with stock market performance. In this paper, we first show through simulation that if we could select stocks via factors calculated on future fundamentals (via oracle), that our portfolios would far outperform standard factor models. Motivated by this insight, we train deep nets to forecast future fundamentals from a trailing 5-year history. We propose lookahead factor models which plug these predicted future fundamentals into traditional factors. Finally, we incorporate uncertainty estimates from both neural heteroscedastic regression and a dropout-based heuristic, improving performance by adjusting our portfolios to avert risk. In retrospective analysis, we leverage an industry-grade portfolio simulator (backtester) to show simultaneous improvement in annualized return and Sharpe ratio. Specifically, the simulated annualized return for the uncertainty-aware model is 17.7% (vs 14.0% for a standard factor model) and the Sharpe ratio is 0.84 (vs 0.52).

## 1. Introduction

Public stock markets provide a venue for buying and selling shares, which represent fractional ownership of individual companies. Prices fluctuate frequently, with the drivers of price movement occurring on multiple time scales. In the short run, price movements might reflect the dynamics of order execution (Barclay &amp; Warner, 1993; Bessembinder, 2003) and the behavior of high frequency traders (Menkveld,

1 Euclidean Technologies, Seattle, USA 2 Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 3 Amazon AI, Seattle, USA. Correspondence to: Lakshay Chauhan &lt;lakshay.chauhan@euclidean.com&gt;, John Alberg &lt;john.alberg@euclidean.com&gt;, Zachary Lipton &lt;zlipton@cmu.edu&gt;.

Proceedings of the 37 th International Conference on Machine Learning , Vienna, Austria, PMLR 119, 2020. Copyright 2020 by the author(s).

2016; McGroarty et al., 2018). On the scale of days, price fluctuation might be driven by the news cycle (Boudoukh et al., 2013; Rothenstein et al., 2011; Schumaker &amp; Maida, 2018; Cruz et al., 2013), reports of sales numbers, or product launches (Koku et al., 1997). In the long run, we expect a company's market value to reflect its financial performance as captured in fundamental data , i.e., reported financial information such as income, revenue, assets, dividends, and debt (Goedhart et al., 2005b; Dimson et al., 2017; Goedhart et al., 2005a). One popular strategy called value investing is predicated on the idea that the best features for predicting the long-term returns on shares in a company are the currentlyavailable fundamental data.

In a typical quantitative (systematic) investing strategy, we sort the set of available stocks according to some factor and construct investment portfolios comprised of those stocks which score highest (Dimson et al., 2017). Many quantitative investors engineer value factors , typically a ratio of some fundamental to the stock's price. Examples include book-to-market (the ratio of book value to market value) and EBIT/EV (earnings before interest and taxes normalized by enterprise value). Stocks with high value factor ratios are called value stocks and those with low ratios are called growth stocks-presumably the high prices of these stocks is predicated on anticipated growth in the future. A basic premise of value investors is that the market tends to systematically over-value growth stocks. Academic researchers have demonstrated (empirically) that portfolios that upweight value stocks have historically outperformed portfolios that upweight growth stocks over the long run (Pätäri &amp; Leivo, 2017; Fama &amp; French, 1992).

In this paper, we propose an investment strategy that constructs portfolios of stocks based on predicted future fundamentals . Rather than comparing current fundamentals to the current price, our approach is based on the intuition that the long-term success of an investment depends on how well the stock is currently priced relative to future fundamentals . To verify this hypothesis, we run backtests with a clairvoyant model (oracle) that can access future financial reports.

Our experiments show that from Jan 1, 2000 to Dec 31, 2019, a clairvoyant EBIT/EV factor model that perfectly forecasts future EBIT (12 months out) would have achieved a 40 %compound annualized return (Figure 2). That com- pares to a 14 . 0% annualized return over the same period for a standard factor model using current instead of future earnings. While future EBIT (or earnings) are unknowable, we hypothesize that some of these gains might be realized by plugging in forecasted future earnings. To test this hypothesis, we investigate the use of deep neural networks (DNNs), specifically Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLPs) and Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Hochreiter &amp; Schmidhuber, 1997) Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) to predict future earnings based on trailing time series of 5 years of fundamental data. We denote these models as Lookahead Factor Models (LFMs) .

Figure 1. Actual earnings (orange) plotted against deep LSTM forecasts (blue) and uncertainty bounds for selected public companies Best Buy, Johnson &amp; Johnson, Ebay, and Kroger over different time periods. The LSTM was trained on data from Jan 1, 1970 to Jan 1, 2000.

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. Annualized return for various factor models for different degrees of clairvoyance.

<!-- image -->

Forecasting future fundamentals is a difficult task complicated by substantial uncertainty over both model parameters and inherent noise. Notably, the problem exhibits het- eroscedasticity, with noise levels varying across companies and time periods. For example, a mature consumer goods company may have less uncertainty in its future earnings than a rapidly growing technology company. Moreover, the predictability of earnings might vary across time periods. For example we expect the task to be more difficult in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis than in a comparatively stable period. In Figure 1, we plot the forecast distribution of future earnings against actual earnings for several companies in different time periods.

Classical portfolio allocation theory dictates that both the expectation and variance of returns are essential for making decisions. Therefore, in addition to training DNNs to generate point forecasts to be plugged into our factor models, we also consider methods to forecast the variance of the predicted future earnings. Our uncertainty estimates are derived both via neural heteroscedastic regression (Ng et al., 2017) and a popular dropout-based heuristic (Gal, 2016). To construct our uncertainty-aware factor, we scale the earnings forecast in inverse proportion to the modeled earnings variance. We show that investment portfolios constructed using this factor exhibit less volatility and enjoy higher returns. Simulations demonstrate that investing with LFMs based on the risk-adjusted forecast earnings achieves a Compound Annualized Return (CAR) of 17 . 7 %, vs 14 . 0 % for a standard factor model and a Sharpe ratio . 84 vs . 52 .

## 2. Related Work

Deep neural network models have proven useful for a diverse set of sequence learning tasks, including machine translation (Sutskever et al., 2014; Bahdanau et al., 2015), video captioning (Mao et al., 2015; Vinyals et al., 2015), video recognition (Donahue et al., 2015; Tripathi et al., 2016), and time series modeling (Lipton et al., 2016a;b; Che et al., 2018).

Deep networks for stock market forecasting A number of recent papers consider deep learning approaches for predicting stock market performance. Batres-Estrada (12015) use MLPs for stock market prediction and Qiu &amp; Song (2016) use neural networks to predict the direction of a broad market index using technical indicators such as price. Ding et al. (2015) use recursive tensor nets to extract events from CNN news reports and use convolutional neural nets to predict future performance from a sequence of extracted events. Several researchers have considered deep learning for stock-related predictions (Chen et al., 2015; Wanjawa &amp; Muchemi, 2014; Jia, 2016), however, in all cases, the empirical studies are limited to few stocks or short time periods. To our knowledge, an early version of this paper was the first public work to apply modern deep networks to large-scale time series of financial fundamentals data and the first to introduce lookahead factor models.

Uncertainty Estimation Approaches for estimating uncertainty are differentiated both according to what notion of uncertainty they address and by the methods they employ. For example, some methods address uncertainty in the model parameters (Gal &amp; Ghahramani, 2015b;a; Gal et al., 2017; Blundell, 2017; Heskes, 1997; Nix &amp; Weigend, 1994) while others use neural networks to directly output prediction intervals (Pearce et al., 2018; Su et al., 2018; Khosravi et al., 2011). Prediction uncertainty can be decoupled into model uncertainty (epistemic uncertainty) and the inherent noise due to conditional variability in the label (aleatoric uncertainty) (Der Kiureghian &amp; Ditlevsen, 2009; Kendall &amp;Gal, 2017). Epistemic uncertainty can arise from uncertainty over the value of the model parameters and/or model structure. In contrast, aleatoric uncertainty owes to the inherently stochastic nature of the data. Note that yet other sources exist but are unaccounted for in this dichotomy, e.g., uncertainty due to distribution shift.

Assuming heteroscedasticity, i.e., that the noise is data dependent, Nix &amp; Weigend (1994); Heskes (1997) train two neural networks, one to estimate the target value and another to estimate the predictive variance. More recently, Ng et al. (2017) used a single network to forecast both the mean and the conditional variance when predicting surgery durations. Nix &amp; Weigend (1994); Blundell (2017) use the bootstrap method where multiple networks are trained on random subsets of the data to obtain uncertainty estimates.

Bayesian Neural Networks (BNN), learn an approximate posterior distribution over model parameters, enabling the derivation of predictive distributions and thus estimates of epistemic uncertainty. In one approach to training BNNs, Blundell et al. (2015) employs variational inference, choosing a variational distribution consisting of independent Gaussians-thus each weight is characterized by two parameters. Then, employing the reparamterization trick, they optimize the variational parameters by gradient descent in a scheme they call Bayes-by-backprop . In this paper, we follow the related work of Gal &amp; Ghahramani (2015b); Gal et al. (2017); Gal (2016), who propose Monte Carlo dropout (MC-dropout), a heuristic that obtains uncertainty estimates by using dropout during prediction. Their approach is based on insights from analysis establishing a correspondence between stochastically-regularized neural networks and deep Gaussian processes.

## 3. Data

In this research, we consider all stocks that were publicly traded on the NYSE, NASDAQ, or AMEX exchanges for at least 12 consecutive months between Jan 1, 1970, and Dec 31, 2019. From this list, we exclude non-US-based companies, financial sector companies, and any company with an inflation-adjusted market capitalization value below 100 million dollars in January 1, 2010 terms. The final list contains 12 , 415 stocks. Our features consist of reported financial information as archived by the Compustat North America and Compustat Snapshot databases. Because reported information arrives intermittently throughout a financial period, we discretize the raw data to a monthly time step. Because we are interested in long-term predictions and in order to smooth out seasonality in the data, at every month, we feed a time-series of inputs with a one year gap between time steps and predict the earnings one year into the future from the last time step. For example, one trajectory in our dataset might consist of data for a given company from (Jan 2000, Jan 2001, ..., Jan 2007), which are used to forecasts earnings for Jan 2008. For the same company, we will also have another trajectory consisting of data from (Feb 2000, Feb 2001, ..., Feb 2007) that are used to forecast earnings for Feb 2008. Although smaller forecast periods such as 3 or 6 months may be easier to forecast, we use a forecast period of 12 months as it provides the best trade-off between model accuracy and portfolio performance. We discuss this trade-off in Figure 4 in Section 6.

Three classes of time-series data are used at each time-step t : fundamental features, momentum features, and auxiliary features. For fundamental features, income statement and cash flow items are cumulative trailing twelve months , denoted TTM, and balance sheet items are of the most recent quarter , denoted MRQ. TTM items include revenue; cost of goods sold; selling, general &amp; admin expense; earnings before interest and taxes or EBIT ; and free cash flow, defined as operating cash flow minus capital expenditures. MRQ items include cash and cash equivalents; receivables; inventories; other current assets; property plant and equipment; other assets; debt in current liabilities; accounts payable; taxes payable; other current liabilities; shareholders' equity; total assets; and total liabilities. For all features, we deal with missing values by filling forward previously observed values, following the methods of Lipton et al. (2016a). Additionally, we incorporate 4 momentum features , which indicate the price movement of the stock over the previous 1 , 3 , 6 , and 9 months, respectively. So that our model picks up on relative changes and does not focus overly on trends in specific time periods, we use the percentile among all stocks as a feature (vs absolute numbers).

Finally, we consider a set of auxiliary features that include a company's short interest (% of a company's outstanding shares that are held short); a company's industry group as defined by Standard and Poor's GICS code (encoded as a 27 element one-hot vector with 26 industry groups plus one for indicating an unknown industry classification); and the company's size category of micro-cap, small-cap, mid-cap, and large-cap (encoded as a one-hot vector).

There can be wide differences in the absolute value of the fundamental features described above when compared between companies and across time. For example, Exxon Mobil's annual revenue for fiscal 2018 was $279 billion USD whereas Zoom Video Communications had revenue of $330 million USD for the same period. Intuitively, these statistics are more meaningful when scaled by some measure of a company's size. In preprocessing, we scale all fundamental features in a given time series by the market capitalization in the last input time-step of the series. We scale all time steps by the same value so that the DNN can assess the relative change in fundamental values between time steps. While other notions of size are used, such as enterprise value and book equity, we choose to avoid these measures because they can, although rarely, take negative values. We then further scale the features so that they each individually have zero mean and unit standard deviation.

## 4. Methods

## 4.1. Forecasting Model

We divide the timeline into in-sample and out-of-sample periods. Data in the in-sample period range from Jan 1, 1970 to Dec 31, 1999 (1.2M data points), while out-of-sample test data range from Jan 1, 2000, to Dec 31, 2019 (1M data points). Since we do not want to overfit the finite training sample, we hold out a validation set by randomly selecting 30% of the stocks from the in-sample period. We use this in-sample validation set to tune the hyperparameters including the initial learning rate, model architecture, and objective function weights. We also use this set to determine early-stopping criteria. When training, we record the validation set accuracy after each epoch, saving the model for each best score achieved. We halt the training if the model doesn't improve for 25 epochs and select the model with best validation set performance. In addition to evaluating how well our model generalizes on the in-sample holdout set, we evaluate whether the model successfully forecasts fundamentals in the out-of-sample period.

Financial fundamental data is inherently temporal. Our methods apply LSTM and MLP models to forecast a company's future financial fundamental data from past fundamental data. We choose each input to consist of a five year window of data with an annual time step. Companies with less than five years of historical fundamentals are excluded from the training and testing set. As output, we are interested in predicting EBIT (earnings before interest and taxes) twelve months into the future because forecasted EBIT is required to compute the factor that drives our investment models.

Previously, we tried to predict relative returns directly (using price data) with an LSTM model. While the LSTM outperformed other approaches on the in-sample data, it failed to meaningfully outperform a linear model on the out-of-sample data. Given only returns data as targets, the LSTM easily overfit the training data while failing to improve performance on in-sample validation. While the price movement of stocks is known to be extremely noisy, we suspected that temporal relationships among the fundamental data may exhibit a larger signal to noise ratio, and this intuition motivates us to focus on forecasting future fundamentals.

Although we only need an estimate of the fundamental feature EBIT in order to construct our factor, we forecast all 17 fundamental features. One key benefit of our approach is that by doing multi-task learning (Evgeniou &amp; Pontil, 2004; Ruder, 2017), predicting all 17 fundamentals, we provide the model with considerable training signal so that it is less susceptible to overfitting. We also predict the uncertainty (or risk) for those targets (described in detail in the next section). Since we care more about EBIT over other outputs, we up-weight it in the loss (introducing a hyperparameter α 1 ). For LSTMs, the prediction at the final time step is more important and hence we use hyperparameter α 2 to up-weight the loss for the final time step.

During experimentation we examined several hyperparameters. We clip the gradients, rescaling to a maximum L2 norm to avoid exploding gradients. We constrain the maximum norm of the vector of weights incoming to each hidden unit. We also experiment with L2 regularization and dropout for further regularization. Our MLPs use ReLu activation functions in all hidden layers. Our models tend to be sensitive to the weight initialization hyperparameters. Based on validation performance, we settled on GlorotUniform Intialization (Glorot &amp; Bengio, 2010), which made results more consistent across runs. We also use batch normalization (Ioffe &amp; Szegedy, 2015). Each model is an ensemble of 10 models trained with a different random seed. For LSTM models, in addition to the hyperparameters discussed above, we use recurrent dropout to randomly mask the recurrent units.

We use a genetic algorithm (Goldberg, 1989) for hyperparameter optimization. The optimizer AdaDelta (D. Zeiler, 2012) is used with an initial learning rate of 0 . 01 . It took 150 epochs to train an ensemble on a machine with 16 Intel Xeon E5 cores and 1 Nvidia P100 GPU. The final hyperparameters as a result of the optimization process are presented in Table 1.

Table 1. MLP, LSTM Hyperparameters

| Hyperparameter  MLP  LSTM  Batch Size  256  256  Hidden Units  2048  512  Hidden Layers  1  1  Dropout  0  .  25  0  .  0  Recurrent Dropout  n/a  0  .  25  Max Gradient Norm  1  1  Max Norm  3  3  α  1  0  .  75  0  .  5  α  2  n/a  0  .  7   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 4.2. Uncertainty Quantification

We model the targets as conditionally Gaussian distributed about a mean f θ ( x ) , which is the predicted output. While standard least squares regression relies on the assumption that the noise level is independent of the inputs x , we jointly model the conditional mean and variance, denoting our model variance by g θ ( x ) . Following Ng et al. (2017), we model this heteroscedasticity by emitting two outputs for each target variable in the final layer: one set of outputs corresponds to the predicted means of the target values f θ ( x ) and the second half predicts the variance of the output values g θ ( x ) . We use the softplus activation function for outputs corresponding to the variance g θ ( x ) to ensure non-negativity. The predictors share representations (and thus parameters for all representation layers) and are differentiated only at the output layer. To learn the network parameters θ , we train the neural network with the maximum likelihood objective as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the above loss function, the first term penalizes large uncertainty in the model. This allows the DNN to minimize the prediction interval width and provide meaningful bounds. The second term penalizes an over-confident model (low uncertainty) with high error focusing on model accuracy.

To estimate the epistemic uncertainty, we train the DNN model using dropout and leverage a heuristic by Gal &amp; Ghahramani (2015b) that applies dropout during prediction. Model variance is given by the variance in the outputs across 10 Monte Carlo draws of the dropout mask where the dropout rate is 0 . 25 . The number 10 is selected based on the maximum number of parallel executions that could be launched on the computing infrastructure. Hence the total variance is given by the sum of model variance (variance in the predictions) and noise variance (predicted variance). In summary, the final model is an ensemble of 10 equally-weighed DNN models with different random seeds for dropout. Variance is estimated as a sum of the variance across dropout forward passes and the estimated input-conditioned noise g θ ( x ) .

## 4.3. Quantitative Factor Models

Typical quantitative investment strategies use factors such as EBIT/EV to construct portfolios by investing in the stocks that score highest. Whereas a standard Quantitative Factor Model (QFM) uses current EBIT , we are interested in comparing such investment strategies with strategies that use forecast EBIT . We construct a look-ahead factor EBIT m /EV for each model m , where EBIT m is the model's forecast EBIT . Hence there is a LFM for autoregression (LFM Auto Reg), multivariate linear model point forecast (LFM Linear), multi-layer perceptron point forecast (LFM MLP), LSTM point forecast (LFM LSTM), variance scaled MLP forecast (LFM UQ-MLP), and variance scaled LSTM forecast (LFM UQ-LSTM).

Variance scaled models (UQ-MLP, UQ-LSTM) incorporate uncertainty over the forecasted EBIT to reduce the risk of the portfolio. Two companies with the same EBIT might have very different levels of uncertainty. The one with higher uncertainty around EBIT (higher variance) is more risky for investors. Such a company will not only increase the portfolio risk but also decrease the expected returns due to higher forecast error. Hence, we scale the EBIT in inverse proportion to the total variance for the LFM UQ models. A portfolio created with the risk-adjusted look-ahead factor EBIT σ 2 EV is expected to have lower average volatility of earnings than a portfolio created using the EBIT EV factor.

Figure 3. Simulated returns of a quantitative (systematic) strategy vs. the returns generated from live trading of the same strategy over the period Jan 1, 2009 to Dec 31, 2018. The shaded band represents the distribution of simulated returns generated by varying the initial state of the portfolio at t 0 .

<!-- image -->

## 5. Portfolio Simulation

While we train and evaluate our models using the negative log likelihood objective, for our purposes, this metric is merely a surrogate measure of performance. What investors actually care about is a portfolio's performance in terms of both return and risk (volatility) over some specified time period. To establish a correspondence between predictive performance and investment returns, we employ an industrygrade investment simulator.

The goal of the simulator is to recreate as accurately as possible the investment returns an investor would have achieved had they been using the model over a specific period of time and within a specific universe of stocks. To this end, the simulation must incorporate transaction costs, liquidity constraints, bid-ask spreads, and other types of friction that exist in the management of a real-life portfolio of stocks.

The simulation algorithm works as follows: We construct portfolios by ranking all stocks according to the factor of interest and invest equal amounts of capital into the top 50 stocks, re-balancing monthly. We limit the number of shares of a security bought or sold in a month to no more than 10% of the monthly volume for a security. Simulated prices for stock purchases and sales are based on the volume-weighted daily closing price of the security during the first 10 trading days of each month. If a stock paid a dividend during the period it was held, the dividend was credited to the simulated fund in proportion to the shares held. Transaction costs are factored in as $0 . 01 per share, plus an additional slippage factor that increases as a square of the simulation's volume participation in a security. Specifically, if participating at the maximum 10% of monthly volume, the simulation buys at 1% more than the average market price and sells at 1% less than the average market price. This form of slippage is common in portfolio simulations as a way of modeling the fact that as an investor's volume participation increases in a stock, it has a negative impact on the price of the stock for the investor.

Monthly return values r t are determined by calculating the percentage change in total portfolio value between the beginning and end of each simulated month. From the sequence of monthly portfolio return values and knowledge of the annualized risk free rates of return R f over the same period, we compute standard portfolio performance statistics such as the Compound Annualized Return ( CAR ) and the Sharpe ratio. These are defined as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where σ is the standard deviation of monthly portfolio returns r t . The Sharpe ratio is commonly used as a measure of risk adjusted portfolio performance.

Due to how a portfolio is initially constructed and the timing of cash flows, two portfolio managers can get different investment results over the same period using the same quantitative model. To account for this variation, we run 300 portfolio simulations for each model where each portfolio is initialized from a randomly chosen starting state. The portfolio statistics, such as CAR and Sharpe ratio, that are presented in this paper are the mean of statistics generated by the 300 simulations.

To illustrate the accuracy of the simulator, we compare the returns generated by the simulator with the actual returns generated by a quantitative strategy that was executed between Jan 1, 2009 and Dec 31, 2018 (Figure 3). In this case, it can be clearly seen that the distribution of returns generated by the 300 portfolios with different random initial starting states almost always encompassed the actual returns of the quantitative strategy. Furthermore, the mid-point of the simulated returns tracks the actual returns very closely.

## 6. Experiments

Recall that in Section 1, we demonstrated that if we could forecast EBIT perfectly (the clairvoyant model ), the portfolios built using the lookahead factor would far outperform standard factor models. Of course, perfect knowledge of future EBIT is impossible, but we speculate that by fore- casting future EBIT we can also realize some of these gains, outperforming standard factor models. The question arises as to how far into the future to forecast. Clearly forecasting becomes more difficult the further into the future we set the target. In Figure 4, we plot the out-of-sample MSE for different forecast periods. The further we try to predict, the less accurate our model becomes. However, at the same time, the clairvoyance study (Figure 2) tells us that the value of a forecast increases monotonically as we see further into the future. In our experiments, the best trade-off is achieved with a forecasting period of 12 months as shown by the blue curve in Figure 4. Simulated returns increase as the forecasting window lengthens up until 12 months after which the returns start to fall.

Figure 4. MSE (red) of the out-of-sample period 2000-2019 increases with forecast period length. The forecasting model becomes less accurate the further we go out in the future. Simulated returns of the LSTM model (blue) increase with forecast period up to 12 months and then start decreasing.

<!-- image -->

Motivated by our study with clairvoyant factor models, we first establish a correspondence between the accuracy of DNN forecasts and portfolio returns. While training the LSTM model, we checkpoint our model's parameters after each epoch. These models have sequentially decreasing mean squared error. Once training is complete, for each saved model we generate EBIT forecasts for the out-ofsample period. We then use the forecasts to generate corresponding portfolio returns by simulating the portfolios constructed using the forecast EBIT/EV factors. As a result, we have a sequence of MSE and portfolio return pairs, allowing us to evaluate the correspondence between decreasing MSE and portfolio return.

Figure 5 shows the relationship between increasing model accuracy and improving portfolio returns. This experiment validates our hypothesis that returns are strongly dependent on the accuracy of the forecasting model.

As a first step in evaluating the forecast produced by the neural networks, we compare the MSE of the predicted fundamentals on out-of-sample data with a naive predictor where the predicted fundamentals at time t are assumed to be the same as the fundamentals at t - 12 . In nearly all the months, however turbulent the market, neural networks outperform the naive predictor (Figure 6).

Figure 5. Correspondence between the LSTM model accuracy and portfolio returns. Bottom-rightmost point is evaluated after the first epoch. As training progresses, points in the graph move towards the upper left corner. Portfolio returns increase as the model accuracy improves (out-of-sample MSE decreases).

<!-- image -->

Figure 6. MSE over out-of-sample time period for MLP (red) and QFM or Naive predictor (blue)

<!-- image -->

Table 2 demonstrates a clear advantage of using look-ahead factor models or LFMs over standard QFM. MLP and LSTM LFMs achieve higher model accuracy than linear or autoregression models and thus yield better portfolio performance. Figure 7 shows the cumulative return of all portfolios across the out-of-sample period.

Investors not only care about return of a portfolio but also the risk undertaken as measured by volatility. Risk adjusted return or Sharpe ratio is meaningfully higher for LFM UQ models which reduce the risk by scaling the EBIT forecast in inverse proportion to the total variance.

Figure 7. Cumulative return of different strategies for the out-of-sample period. LFM UQ-LSTM consistently outperforms throughout the entire period.

<!-- image -->

Table 2. Out-of-sample performance for the 2000-2019 time period. All factor models use EBIT/EV. QFM uses current EBIT while our proposed LFMs use predicted future EBIT.

| Strategy  MSE  CAR  Sharpe Ratio  S&amp;P 500  n/a  6  .  05%  0  .  32  QFM  0  .  65  14  .  0%  0  .  52  LFM Auto Reg  0  .  58  14  .  2%  0  .  56  LFM Linear  0  .  52  15  .  5%  0  .  64  LFM MLP  0  .  48  16  .  1%  0  .  68  LFM LSTM  0  .  48  16  .  2%  0  .  68  LFM UQ-LSTM  0  .  48  17  .  7  %  0  .  84  LFM UQ-MLP  0  .  47  17  .  3  %  0  .  83   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 3. Pairwise t-statistic for Sharpe ratio. The models are organized in increasing order of Sharpe ratio values. t-statistic for LFM UQ models are marked in bold if they are significant with a significance level of 0 . 05 .

| Auto-Reg  Linear  MLP  LSTM  UQ-LSTM  UQ-MLP  QFM  0  .  76  2  .  52  2  .  93  2  .  96  5  .  57  6  .  01  Auto Reg  1  .  89  2  .  31  2  .  36  5  .  10  5  .  57  Linear  0  .  36  0  .  46  3  .  12  3  .  66  MLP  0  .  10  2  .  82  3  .  39  LSTM  2  .  66  3  .  22   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

We provide pairwise t-statistics for Sharpe ratio in Table 3, where improvement in Sharpe ratio for LFM UQ models is statistically significant. As discussed in Section 5, we run 300 simulations with varying initial start state for each model. Additionally, we randomly restrict the universe of stocks to 70% of the total universe making the significance test more robust to different portfolio requirements. We aggregate the monthly returns of these 300 simulations by taking the mean and perform bootstrap resampling on the monthly returns to generate the t-statistic values for Sharpe ratio shown in Table 3. The last two columns corresponding to LFM UQ models provide strong evidence that the Sharpe ratio is significantly improved by using the estimated uncertainty to reduce risk.

Table 4. Cross section of monthly returns. The universe of stocks is ranked by the given factor and divided into 10 groups of equally weighted stocks. The top decile (marked as High ) is formed by the top 10% of the stocks ranked by the factor and the bottom decile (marked as Low ) is formed by the bottom 10% of the rankings. H L represents the factor premium.

| Decile  QFM  LSTM  UQ-LSTM  High 1  1  .  39  1  .  38  1  .  47  2  1  .  24  1  .  21  1  .  18  3  1  .  15  1  .  12  1  .  13  4  1  .  16  1  .  08  1  .  04  5  1  .  06  1  .  14  0  .  97  6  1  .  00  1  .  04  0  .  98  7  0  .  95  0  .  94  0  .  98  8  0  .  85  0  .  75  0  .  90  9  0  .  78  0  .  79  0  .  74  Low 10  0  .  73  0  .  57  0  .  64  H - L  0  .  66  0  .  80  0  .  83  t-statistic  2.31  2.78  3.57   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

In addition to providing simulation results of concentrated 50 stock portfolios (Table 2), we also provide the cross section of returns generated for the models LFM-LSTM and LFM UQ-LSTM on the out-of-sample period (Table 4). The cross section is constructed by sorting stocks by each factor and splitting them into 10 equally sized portfolios ranging from the top decile (highest factor values) to the bottom decile (lowest factor values). The portfolios are rebalanced quarterly according to the factor sorts. The cross section shows the efficacy of the factor when looked at across the entire investment universe, where monthly returns increase almost monotonically as we go from the bottom decile to the top decile. The difference between the top and bottom decile (high minus low or H -L ) is called the factor premium. The t -statistic for the factor premium is significant and greater for UQ-LSTM than LSTM and QFM (Table 4).

## 7. Conclusion

In this paper, we demonstrate that by predicting fundamental data with deep learning, we can construct lookahead factor models that significantly outperform equity portfolios based on traditional factors. Moreover, we achieve further gains by incorporating uncertainty estimates to avert risk. Retrospective analysis of portfolio performance with perfect earnings forecasts motivates this approach, demonstrating the superiority of LFM over standard factor approaches for both absolute returns and risk adjusted returns. In future work, we will examine how well the DNN forecasts compare to human analyst consensus forecasts and whether DNN forecasts can be improved by the consensus forecast via an ensemble approach. Finally, observing that there is a great amount of unstructured textual data about companies, such as quarterly reports and earnings transcripts, we would like to explore whether such data can be used to improve our earnings forecasts.

## References

Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2015.

Barclay, M. J. and Warner, J. B. Stealth trading and volatility : Which trades move prices? Journal of Financial Economics , 34(3):281-305, December 1993. URL https://ideas . repec . org/a/eee/ jfinec/v34y1993i3p281-305 . html .

Batres-Estrada, B. Deep learning for multivariate financial time series. Master's thesis, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 12015.

Bessembinder, H. Trade execution costs and market quality after decimalization. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 38(4):747-777, 2003. doi: 10 . 2307/ 4126742.

- Blundell, B. L. A. P. C. Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017.
- Blundell, C., Cornebise, J., Kavukcuoglu, K., and Wierstra, D. Weight uncertainty in neural networks. International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2015.
- Boudoukh, J., Feldman, R., Kogan, S., and Richardson, M. Which news moves stock prices? a textual analysis. Working Paper 18725, National Bureau of Economic Research, January 2013. URL http://www . nber . org/ papers/w18725 .

Che, Z., Purushotham, S., Cho, K., Sontag, D., and Liu, Y. Recurrent neural networks for multivariate time series with missing values. Scientific reports , 8(1):1-12, 2018.

- Chen, K., Zhou, Y., and Dai, F. A lstm-based method for stock returns prediction: A case study of china stock market. In International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) . IEEE, 2015.
- Cruz, F. M. d., Gomes, M. Y. F. S. d., et al. The influence of rumors in the stock market: a case study with petrobras. Transinformação , 25(3):187-193, 2013.
- D. Zeiler, M. Adadelta: An adaptive learning rate method. arXiv:1212.570 , 1212, 2012.
- Der Kiureghian, A. and Ditlevsen, O. Aleatory or epistemic? does it matter? Structural safety , 31(2):105-112, 2009.

Dimson, E., Marsh, P., and Staunton, M. Factor-based investing: The long-term evidence. The Journal of Portfolio Management , 43(5):15-37, 2017. ISSN 00954918. doi: 10 . 3905/jpm . 2017 . 43 . 5 . 015. URL https: //jpm . iijournals . com/content/43/5/15 .

- Ding, X., Zhang, Y., Liu, T., and Duan, J. Deep learning for event-driven stock prediction. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) , 2015.

Donahue, J., Anne Hendricks, L., Guadarrama, S., Rohrbach, M., Venugopalan, S., Saenko, K., and Darrell, T. Long-term recurrent convolutional networks for visual recognition and description. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2015.

- Evgeniou, T. and Pontil, M. Regularized multi-task learning. In Proceedings of the Tenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD '04, pp. 109-117, New York, NY, USA, 2004. ACM. ISBN 1-58113-888-1. doi: 10 . 1145/ 1014052 . 1014067. URL http://doi . acm . org/ 10 . 1145/1014052 . 1014067 .
- Fama, E. F. and French, K. R. The cross-section of expected stock returns. Journal of Finance 47, 427-465. , 1992.
- Gal, Y. Uncertainty in Deep Learning . PhD thesis, University of Cambridge, 2016.
- Gal, Y. and Ghahramani, Z. Dropout as a Bayesian approximation: Insights and applications. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) Deep Learning Workshop , 2015a.
- Gal, Y. and Ghahramani, Z. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Appendix. arXiv:1506.02157 , 2015b.
- Gal, Y., Hron, J., and Kendall, A. Concrete Dropout. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2017.
- Glorot, X. and Bengio, Y. Understanding the difficulty of training deep feedforward neural networks. In In Proceedings of the International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS'10). Society for Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , 2010.
- [Goedhart, M., Koller, T., and Wessels, D. Do fundamentals-or emotions-drive the stock market? https: //www . mckinsey . com/business-functions/ strategy-and-corporate-finance/ our-insights/do-fundamentalsoremotionsdrive-the-stock-market , 2005a.](https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/strategy-and-corporate-finance/our-insights/do-fundamentalsor-emotionsdrive-the-stock-market)
- Goedhart, M., Koller, T., and Wessels, D. Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value of Companies, 4th Edition . Wiley, 2005b.
- Goldberg, D. E. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine Learning . Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, USA, 1st edition, 1989. ISBN 0201157675.
- Heskes, T. Practical confidence and prediction intervals. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) . MIT press, 1997.
- Hochreiter, S. and Schmidhuber, J. Long short-term memory. Neural Computation , 9(8):1735-1780, 1997.
- Ioffe, S. and Szegedy, C. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2015.
- Jia, H. Investigation into the effectiveness of long short term memory networks for stock price prediction. arXiv:1603.07893 , 2016.
- Kendall, A. and Gal, Y. What uncertainties do we need in bayesian deep learning for computer vision? In Advances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS) , 2017.
- Khosravi, A., Nahavandi, S., Creighton, D., and Atiya, A. F. Comprehensive review of neural network-based prediction intervals and new advances. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , 22(9):1341-1356, Sep. 2011. ISSN 1045-9227. doi: 10 . 1109/TNN . 2011 . 2162110.
- Koku, P. S., Jagpal, H. S., and Viswanath, P. V. The effect of new product announcements and preannouncements on stock price. Journal of Market-Focused Management , 2(2):183-199, Nov 1997. ISSN 15728846. doi: 10 . 1023/A:1009735620253. URL https: //doi . org/10 . 1023/A:1009735620253 .
- Lipton, Z. C., Kale, D. C., Elkan, C., and Wetzell, R. Learning to diagnose with lstm recurrent neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2016a.
- Lipton, Z. C., Kale, D. C., and Wetzel, R. Directly modeling missing data in sequences with rnns: Improved classification of clinical time series. Machine Learning for Healthcare (MLHC) , 2016b.
- Mao, J., Xu, W., Yang, Y., Wang, J., Huang, Z., and Yuille, A. Deep captioning with multimodal recurrent neural networks (m-rnn). International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2015.
- McGroarty, F., Booth, A., Gerding, E., and Chinthalapati, V. L. R. High frequency trading strategies, market fragility and price spikes: an agent based model perspective. Annals of Operations Research , Aug 2018. ISSN 15729338. doi: 10 . 1007/s10479-018-3019-4. URL https: //doi . org/10 . 1007/s10479-018-3019-4 .
- Menkveld, A. J. The economics of high-frequency trading: Taking stock. Annual Review of Financial Economics , 8(1):1-24, 2016. doi: 10 . 1146/annurev-financial121415-033010. URL https://doi . org/10 . 1146/ annurev-financial-121415-033010 .
- Ng, N., Gabriel, R. A., McAuley, J., Elkan, C., and Lipton, Z. C. Predicting surgery duration with neural heteroscedastic regression. In Machine Learning for Healthcare (MLHC) , 2017.
- Nix, D. A. and Weigend, A. S. Estimating the mean and variance of the target probability distribution. In Proceedings of 1994 IEEE International Conference on Neural

- Networks (ICNN'94) , volume 1, pp. 55-60 vol.1, June 1994. doi: 10 . 1109/ICNN . 1994 . 374138.
- Pearce, T., Brintrup, A., Zaki, M., and Neely, A. High-quality prediction intervals for deep learning: A distribution-free, ensembled approach. In Dy, J. and Krause, A. (eds.), Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 4075-4084, Stockholmsmässan, Stockholm Sweden, 10-15 Jul 2018. PMLR. URL http://proceedings . mlr . press/ v80/pearce18a . html .
- Pätäri, E. and Leivo, T. A closer look at the value premium. Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 31, Issue 1, pp. 79-168, 2017 , 2017.
- Qiu, M. and Song, Y. Predicting the direction of stock market index movement using an optimized artificial neural network model. PLOS ONE , 11:e0155133, 05 2016. doi: 10 . 1371/journal . pone . 0155133.
- Rothenstein, J. M., Tomlinson, G., Tannock, I. F., and Detsky, A. S. Company Stock Prices Before and After Public Announcements Related to Oncology Drugs. JNCI: Journal of the National Cancer Institute , 103(20):15071512, 09 2011. ISSN 0027-8874. doi: 10 . 1093/jnci/ djr338. URL https://doi . org/10 . 1093/jnci/ djr338 .
- Ruder, S. An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks. ArXiv , abs/1706.05098, 2017.
- Schumaker, R. P. and Maida, N. Analysis of stock price movement following financial news article release. Communications of the IIMA , 16, 2018.
- Su, D., Ting, Y. Y., and Ansel, J. Tight prediction intervals using expanded interval minimization. CoRR , abs/1806.11222, 2018. URL http://arxiv . org/ abs/1806 . 11222 .
- Sutskever, I., Vinyals, O., and Le, Q. V. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing (NeurIPS) , 2014.
- Tripathi, S., Lipton, Z. C., Belongie, S., and Nguyen, T. Context matters: Refining object detection in video with recurrent neural networks. In British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC) , 2016.
- Vinyals, O., Toshev, A., Bengio, S., and Erhan, D. Show and tell: A neural image caption generator. In Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2015.
- Wanjawa, B. W. and Muchemi, L. Ann model to predict stock prices at stock exchange markets. arXiv:1502.06434 , 2014.