## Share Price Prediction of Aerospace Relevant Companies with Recurrent Neural Networks based on PCA

Linyu Zheng a,  and Hongmei He b,1 a AVIC General Huanan Aircraft Industry Co., Ltd., Aviation Industry Zone, Sanzao Town, Jinwan District, Zhuhai City, Guangdong Province, China, 519040 b School of Aerospace, Transport and Manufacturing, Cranfield University, Cranfield,

UK, MK43 0AL 2

## ABSTRACT

The capital market plays a vital role in marketing operations for the rapid development of the aerospace industry. However, due to the uncertainty and complexity of the stock market  and  many  cyclical  factors,  the  stock  prices  of  listed  aerospace  companies fluctuate significantly. This makes the share price prediction challengeable. To improve the  prediction  of  share  price  for  aerospace  industry  sector  and  well  understand  the impact of various indicators on stock prices, we provided a hybrid prediction model by the combination of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Recurrent Neural Networks.

We investigated two types of aerospace industries (manufacturer and operator). The experimental  results  show  that  PCA  could  improve  both  accuracy  and  efficiency  of prediction. Various factors could influence the performance of prediction models, such as  finance  data,  extracted  features,  optimisation  algorithms,  and  parameters  of  the prediction model. The selection of features may depend on the stability of historical data: technical  features  could  be  the  first  option  when  the  share  price  is  stable,  whereas fundamental features could be better when the share price has high fluctuation. The delays  of  RNN  also  depend  on  the  stability  of  historical  data  for  different  types  of companies.  It  would  be  more  accurate  through  using  short-term  historical  data  for aerospace  manufacturers,  whereas  using  long-term  historical  data  for  aerospace operating airlines.

The  developed  model  could  be  an  intelligent  agent  in  an  automatic  stock  prediction system,  with  which,  the  financial  industry  could  make  a  prompt  decision  for  their economic strategies and business activities in terms of predicted future share price, thus improving  the  return  on  investment.  The  study  is  for  the  prediction  of  aerospace industries at pre-COVID-19 time. Currently, COVID-19 severely influences aerospace industries. The developed approach can be used to predict the share price of aerospace industries at post COVID-19 time.

1  Corresponding author: Dr Hongmei He is with Cranfield University, h.he@cranfield.ac.uk

Keywords: Share  Price  Prediction,  Principal  Component  Analysis,  Recurrent  Neural  Networks,

Fundamental Analysis, Technical Analysis, Aerospace Industry

## 1. Introduction

As  part  of  the  transportation  industry,  the  aerospace  industry  has  become  an indispensable part of human life. Aerospace is the most active and influential field of science and technology in the 21st century. The outstanding achievements in this field mark  the  level  of  development  of  human  civilisation.  It  also  reflects  the  level  of comprehensive national strength and science and technology of a country.

In the aerospace sector, the most representative industries are aerospace manufacturers  (e.g.  Boeing,  Airbus)  and  aerospace  operating  sector  (e.g.  Alaska Airlines, United Airlines). To expand financing, invest in new projects or new businesses, and increase market competitiveness, many companies choose to be listed on stock market. This is because that entering the stock market is a straightforward approach to raising more capital for aerospace companies, expanding international market share, gaining  higher  public  trust,  and  creating  more  transparent  and  measurable  company values.

The price of stock markets is the critical indicator of economic growth in a country. In 2015, there were more than 60 stock exchanges in the world. At the mid-2017, the total stock market value size in the world was around $76.3 trillion US dollars. The stock price prediction is trying to confirm the future values of the stocks or other financial tools traded in the stock exchanges (Malkiel, 1991). The investors and traders are interested in share price  prediction  because  accurate  prediction  may  produce  high  profit  through  stock trading. However, the share prices of aerospace companies fluctuate significantly due to many cyclical and non-cyclical factors. Each factor has a significant impact on profit, but these elements are not synchronised. Due to the uncertainty and complexity of the stock market, the prediction of share prices is a critical challenge, and thus the stock trading is a high-risk financial activity. Therefore, a slight improvement of share price prediction could bring a substantial return of rate for investors.

Although financial market analysis requires knowledge, intuition, and experience, the automation process has been growing steadily because of the availability of large finance data and the development of machine learning technology. There are two conventional methods  for  stock  price  prediction:  fundamental  analysis  and  technical  analysis. Fundamental analysis is to concern the stock itself (Harrington, 2003),   while technical analysis  is  to  predict  the  future  trend  of  the  transaction  values  and  volumes  by researching  the  past  market  data  without  concerning  any  fundamental  aspect  and financial  condition  ratios  of  the  company  itself  (Kirkpatrick  &amp;  Dahlquist , 2015).

Correspondingly,  the  two  sets  of  data,  used  in  the  two  analysis  methods,  are  called fundamental  stock  data  and  technical  stock  data,  respectively.  Moreover,  various machine-learning techniques have been widely used in the finance industry.

This research is to improve the accuracy of share price prediction in aerospace industry using advanced machine learning techniques, to provide decision-makers with references about their stock price as well as various factors that could affect the stock price in future for their economic strategies and business activities. We develop a hybrid approach with two stages of PCA and recurrent neural network for stock price prediction. Two types of aerospace industries are studied based on their history data. One is a manufacturing  company,  denoted  as  MFG,  and  the  other  is  an  operating  company, denoted  as  OPR.  We  select  15  fundamental  features  and  15  technical  features, respectively. The three groups of experiments will be conducted based on the different data types: fundamental data, technical data and their combination.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 provides a brief literature review on the research of computational finance, especially the methods and techniques on share price analysis and prediction. Section 3 describes the hybrid model for share price prediction. Section 4 provides the experiments and comprehensive evaluation. Finally, Section 5 provides conclusions and future work.

## 2. Existing Work

## 2.1. Fundamental and Technical Analysis for Stock Price Prediction

Fundamental  analysis  is  the  process  of  looking  at  a  business  at  the  most  basic  or fundamental financial level. It examines the key ratios of a business to determine its financial  health.  Fundamental  analysis  can  provide  an  idea  of  the  value  of  what  a company's stock should be. Hence, fundamental analysis concerns the stock itself, such as the assets, liabilities, and incomes of the target companies by analysing their financial statements, as well as the ratios of previous performance, such as Price-to-Earnings Ratio (P/E ratio) (Harrington, 2003), which is the ratio for valuing a company that measures its  current share price, related to its earnings per-share (EPS). Fundamental analysis is based  on  the  belief  in  the  business  needs  for  the  capital  to  keep  operating.  If  the company runs well, it should obtain additional capital awards which will lead to stock price soared (Fundamental Focus, 2011).  Fundamental analysis is conducted from the global economy firstly and then national economy before analysing a specific industry and a specific  company.  It  is  a  top-down  process.  As  the  fundamental  analysis  is  a relatively reasonable and objective method, it is used extensively (Harrington, 2003).

Technical analysis is to predict the future stock price and makes the trade decisions of financial derivatives based on the position and the seasonal change theory of the market trend. The principles of technical analysis are that the price will reflect all the relevant information of the market and the history trend will repeat itself (Edwards et al., 2012).

Both analyses can predict stock price to some extent. The main difference between these two methodologies is that the datasets of fundamental analysis could update very slow. For example, return on assets (ROA) and return on equity (ROE) are likely to upgrade every three months, rather than daily as with technical analysis dataset, e.g. stock price data (Larkin, 2014).

For the fundamental analysis, there are lots of indicators in stock analysis processes. 42 features based on the fundamental analysis were extracted by different analysts for the prediction of share price. The 5 feature vectors, such as profitability, growth, liquidity, solvency and operational efficiency, were used for tackling the value stock analysis of IT stocks  in  Taiwan.  The  profitability  vector  includes  ROA,  operational  gross  profit, operational profit, net profit after tax; the growth vector includes net profit after tax growth rate, ROA growth rate, total assets growth rate, revenue growth rate, gross profit growth rate; the liquidity vector includes quick ratio, liquidity ratio, cash ratio; the solvency vector includes debt ratio, interest coverage ratio; and operational efficiency vector includes asset  turnover  rate,  inventory  turnover  rate,  average  days  for  sales  (Shen  &amp;  Tzeng, 2015a). Besides, the rate of return, the number of transactions, gross profit, gross loss, the number of profitable transactions, the number of consecutively profitable transactions, the  number  of  unprofitable  consecutive  transactions,  Sharpe  ratio,  the  average coefficient  of  volatility,  the  average  rate  of  return  per  transaction,  the  value  of  the evaluation have been used in the decision system on FOREX market (Korczak et al., 2016). In order to select optimal stocks from the stock market and predict the future price trends,  Chen  et  al.  (2017)    developed  an  improved  fundamental  approach  with  14 features that were widely used as indicators in the analysis of finance and investment, such  as  long-term  funds  to  fixed  assets,  current  ratio,  interest  guarantee,  average inventory  turnover,  average  collection  turnover,  fixed  assets  turnover,  total  assets turnover, return on total assets, total stockholders' equality, operating income to capital, pre-tax  income,  net  income,  earnings  per  share,  and  the  price-earnings  ratio.  More features can be extracted from the daily stock market data. Moving averages and relative strength index (RSI) have been used in a mobile app to classify stock market (Larkin, 2014). To support investment decision, night days K value (KD), psychology indicator (PSY),  moving  average  convergence  and  divergence  (MACD),  and  RSI  have  been applied in a rough set approach (Shen &amp; Tzeng, 2014; Shen &amp; Tzeng, 2015b). Besides, to  determine  the  future  share  price  predictability  of  Hong  Kong,  South  Korea  and Singapore,  such  features  as  20  days  simple  moving  average,  20  days  exponential moving average, moving average crossover, MACD, Kaufman adaptive moving average, and  the  most  optimised  moving  average  have  been  used  to  analyse  the  increasing profitability (Phooi M'ng, 2018). For the Morgan Stanley Capital International Emerging Market,  in  terms  of  moving  average,  relative  strength  index,  and  moving  average convergence divergence, the prediction of transaction costs, using technical analysis, provided evidence against the efficient market hypothesis for emerging market index (Metghalchi et al., 2019). Technical analysts always consider the influencing factors from various aspects. With the continuous increase in the number and spread of social web media, the stock market volatility is affected by information release, dissemination and public acceptance (Li et al., 2018).

## 2.2. Machine Learning Techniques for Computational Finance

To take full  advantage  of  the  strengths  of  advanced  machine  learning  techniques  to produce broader impacts, effective practical implementations of predictive systems must incorporate the use of innovative technologies. Stock prices prediction can be transferred to two types of problems: (1) decision making or classification problems for price trend prediction, such as fuzzy rule-based systems (ElAal et al., 2012),  neural networks (ElAal et al., 2012, Lertyingyod &amp; Benjamas, 2017), and random forests with imbalance learning (Zhang  et  al.,  2018),  and  (2)  time  series  prediction  (TSP)  problems  for  price  value prediction. Various machine learning techniques have been applied for TSP problems (Jadhav et al., 2015,He &amp; Qin, 2010).  Especially, neural networks (e.g. recurrent neural networks and feed-forward neural networks (Chandra &amp; Chand, 2016; Khare et al., 2017)) have been proven to be very promising for solving TSP problems in the literature.

Classic artificial neural networks (ANNs) have been widely used for predicting stock price (Khare et al. 2017, Göçken et al. 2019), digital content stocks (Chang, 2011), and the closing price of PETR4 stocks (Andrade De Oliveira et al., 2011). Various types of neural networks were developed for the stock price prediction, such as Bat-neural networks based on the quarterly data for eight-year DAX stocks (Hafezi et al., 2015), nonlinear autoregressive with exogenous inputs (NARX) neural networks based on the data from the NASDAQ stock AAPL (Wei &amp; Chaudhary, 2016), Recurrent Neural Networks based on the data from NASDAQ stock exchange (Chandra &amp; Chand, 2016), and Radial basis function (RBF) neural network on the average prices of previous 8 months (Liu, 2018), Recently, deep learning techniques have been widely used for stock price prediction, for example,  the  deep  direct  reinforcement  learning  algorithm (Deng  et  al.,  2017), Convolutional neural networks (CNN) (Cao &amp; Wang, 2019) and deep Q-learning (Jeong &amp; Kim, 2019). Support vector machine (SVM) was also widely used in this area.  For example, Long et al. (2019) developed SVM based on different kernels to predict stock price trend based on based on financial news semantic and structural similarity.

Hybrid  models  always  perform  better  than  single  machine  learning  models,  and  the neural networks and SVMs are often an important component in many hybrid models, for example, the combination of neural network and decision tree for the prediction of digital game content stocks price (Chang, 2011), the integration of gray algorithm and RBF neural network, trained by four different learning strategies (Lei, 2018), fuzzy time series  analysis  with  neural  networks  for  the  forecast  of  the  Taiwan  Stock  Exchange Capitalization  Weighted  Stock  Index  (Yolcu  &amp;  Alpaslan,  2018),  the  integration  of piecewise linear representation (PLR) and support vector machine (SVM) (Luo &amp; Chen, 2013), and the combination of CNN and SVM (Cao &amp; Wang, 2019).

Evolutionary optimization with wrapper techniques are often used to optimize machine learning  models  or  select  features  for  stock  price  (trend)  prediction.  For  example, Harmony Search and Genetic Algorithm was used to find the best structure of neural network (Göçken et al., 2016), neural network with greedy algorithm based on the feature reduction with wrapper techniques for the prediction of stock price trend (Lertyingyod and Benjamas, 2017), simulated annealing algorithm was used to optimise feature space and model parameters (Torun &amp; Tohumolu, 2011), and a Markov decision process was incorporated on genetic algorithms to develop stock trading strategies (Chang &amp; Lee, 2017).

Many other techniques were used to improve the performance of computational finance. For example, principal component analysis (PCA), as data pre-processing, was used to reduce the dimensions of feature space to improve prediction accuracy (Lin et al., 2009), and it was applied to clean up the original data set and produce a new data structure (Chen &amp; Hao, 2018), an analytic hierarchy process was used for feature ranking and selection for a weighted kernel LS-SVM (Marković et al., 2017), and the information gain oriented feature selection was run before the Genetic Algorithm with SVM in wrapper for credit scoring (Jadhav et al., 2018).

## 3.  Methodology

## 3.1. Problem Modelling

This  research  focuses  on  the  classic  TSP  problem  for  stock  price  prediction.  It  is  to explore the advanced methods of share price prediction in the aerospace industry by using some historical finance data. A set of features, 𝑥1, … , 𝑥 𝑗 , can be extracted from raw date to feed into a proposed model to predict the future close price, y .

Due to the uncertainty and dynamics of stock markets, the TSP problem is a strong nonlinear  regression  problem.  The  value  of  the  time  series  at  time t  +  τ is  predicted  or forecast based upon the properties of the historical time series t , t 1, ….., t - n+ 1 (where n is  the  number  of  time  steps  within  the  duration  of  the  time  series).  The  non-linear regression can be expressed as shown in Equation (1) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To solve this problem and accurately predict the future share price, two challenges need to be overcome. The first one is to choose proper features, and the other is to develop an  appropriate  model  that  represents  the  function f (*),  mapping  the  non-linear relationship between the historical data and the future stock price to be predicted, and it should  be  robust  for  the  uncertainty  and  complexity  of  data.  There  are  hundreds  of finance features for share price prediction and each feature has different influence levels in various industries, even has different influence levels for different companies in the same industry sector. The parameter τ could be different for different industries, due to their different data properties.

## 3.2. Feature Selection and Data Processing

After  decades  of  stock  research,  more  than  100  indicators  and  ratios  have  been developed for fundamental and technical analysis, respectively. In this research, data is collected from the Bloomberg databases, which is the most popular stock database. 30 features are selected, as they are the most popularly used in existing research. For the fundamental analysis, 15 features in 6 categories are selected, whereas for the technical analysis, 15 features in 10 groups are selected. The description and calculation formula of the 30 features are listed in Tables A1 and A2 in Appendix. The collected raw data will go through two stages of data processing.

For  the  fundamental  features,  data  is  collected  every  quarter  after  the  companies publishing  their  financial  reports.  For  the  technical  features,  data  is  collected  every trading day, synchronised with the close price. A sample is the data on every trading day. To  compare  the  impact  of  two  sets  of  features  on  technical  analysis,  the  quarterly fundamental data is transformed to daily data by using the univariate linear processing, which is decided  by the beginning and the ending values of the feature in the quarter, as shown in Fig. 1, where, assume all the change of a fundamental feature in a quarter is linear.

Fig. 1. Fundamental Features Processing Rule

<!-- image -->

When processing the technical data, to keep the integrity of the sample data, the samples that miss some feature values are deleted. At the same time, the corresponding trading day samples transferred from the fundamental data  are also deleted to maintain the consistency of the fundamental data and technical data.

## 3.3. Dimension Reduction with PCA

To overcome the curse of dimensionality, the technique of classic Principal Components Analysis  (PCA)  is  used.  The  idea  of  PCA  is  to  project n -dimensional  data  onto k -dimensional ( n &gt; k ) hyperplane, thus minimising the projection distance from each sample point to the hyperplane and maximise the variance. The implementation of PCA mainly includes five steps (Groth et al., 2013):

- (i) Standardise the data samples by mean normalisation;
- (ii) Calculate the covariance matrix of the data;
- (iii)  Find the eigenvalues and the eigenvectors of the covariance matrix above;
- (iv)  The obtained eigenvectors are combined according to the size of the eigenvalues to form a mapping matrix, and the largest number of the top k rows or the top k columns of the mapping matrix are extracted as the final mapping matrix;
- (v) Mapping  the  original  data  with  the  mapping  matrix  of  step  (iv)  to  achieve  the purpose of data dimensionality reduction.

## 3.4. Recurrent Neural Network (RNN)

## 3.4.1. The structure of an RNN

In  the  financial  prediction  problem,  the  current  share  price  is  highly  related  to  the historical values of indicators and its historical values. RNN is a type of neural network that  includes  internal  memory  function  through  the  feedback  loops.  It  can  store information while processing new inputs. This kind of memory makes it ideal for the tasks that need to consider history inputs, e.g. the TSP problem for share price. To predict the share price several days later, it may need to consider the features and share price a few days ago. Therefore, a target delayed RNN is proposed. The structure of target delayed RNN is shown in Fig. 2, where,

𝑥 (𝑡) is a j -dimensional vector input ( j features) in the time-step t ;

ℎ (𝑡) is the hidden state vector with n hidden layers in the time-step t ;

𝑦 (𝑡+𝜏) is the output on the τ th day after current time t ;

τ is the trading days of delay 1 &lt; τ ≤ t

𝑈𝑡 is the direct weight from the input layer at time t to the hidden layer at time t ; 𝑉𝑡 is the weight from the hidden layer at time t to the output layer at time t+τ ; 𝑊𝑡-1 is the weight from the output at time t1 +τ to the hidden layer at time t , which means the historical memory;

Fig. 2. The Structure of Target Delayed RNN

<!-- image -->

Therefore, the RNN output can be calculated in Eqs. (2) and (3)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3.4.2. The Training of the RNN

There are many different algorithms for training an RNN. To obtain good performance of RNNs,  three  training  algorithms  are  investigated,  such  as  Levenberg-Marquardt Algorithm (Ranganathan, 2004), Bayesian Regularisation BP Algorithm (Mahajan et al., 2015; Burden &amp; Winkler, 2008) and Scaled Conjugate Gradient Algorithm (Zhou &amp; Zhu, 2014; (Møller, 1993).

Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) is the most widely used optimization algorithm. LM, as the damped least-squares method, is an estimation method for the regression parameter least squares estimation in the nonlinear regression. This method combines the GaussNewton algorithm and the Gradient Descent algorithm and converts the nonlinear least squares problem into a series of linear least squares problems, then solves the problem by iteration. Hence, it outperforms simple gradient descent and other conjugate gradient methods in a wide variety of problems. The details of LM is provided in (Ranganathan, 2004).

Bayesian Regularisation nets have been proved to be more robust than standard BP nets (Burden &amp; Winkler, 2008). The idea of the BR Algorithm is to retain all the features but  to  avoid  the  excessive  influence  of  a  specific  feature  by  reducing  the  underlying population parameter θ , which obeys the Gaussian distribution, to improve the problem of  overfitting.  By  using  the  Maximum  A  Posteriori  (MAP)  method  to  estimate  the parameter θ , and then obtain the cost function. Denote the prior distribution before the training set being trained and calculate the posterior distribution through the Bayesian formula. It is considered that the value of θ should maximise the MAP so that the cost function will be minimum. The details of the BR-BP algorithm was provided in (Mahajan et al., 2015).

The performance of the Scaled Conjugate Gradient (SCG) Algorithm is benchmarked against that of the standard BP algorithm (Møller, 1993). The basic idea of the SCG is to combine  the  conjugate  property  with  the  steepest  descent  method.  It  constructs conjugate directions of 𝐧 two-conjugates by using the gradients at the known points. The minimum  value  in  one  direction  is  obtained  by  searching  and  optimising  along  the direction. It does not affect the minimum value in the obtained direction when searching the  minimum  value  in  other  directions.  After  finding  the  minimum  values  for  all 𝒏 directions, the minimum value of the 𝐧 -dimensional problem is obtained. The details of SCG is provided in (Zhou &amp; Zhu, 2014).

## 3.5. Evaluation Method of Prediction

The mean square error (MSE) on the testing data is used to evaluate the prediction accuracy of different models. The smaller the value of MSE, the better the accuracy of the prediction model.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4. Experiments and Evaluation

## 4.1. Data Processing

The aim of this research is to analyse the share price of the aerospace industry. There are two kinds of companies in in the aerospace sector: the aerospace manufacturers and the aerospace operators. Two world's famous companies, MFG, one of the largest companies  in  aerospace  manufacturing  sector,  and  OPR,  a  famous  airline  holding company in the world, are analysed in this study.

The financial data of these two companies for the period of 5 years from 1 st  July 2013 to 29 th   June  2018,  containing  1260  trading  days,  are  collected  from  the  Bloomberg database. As those samples missing some values in BA are removed, there totally are 1254  MFG  samples  for  the  experiments.  All  1260  OPR  samples  are  used  for  the experiments. In the experiments, 70% of the samples are used to train the model, 15% of samples are used for validation and 15% of samples are used for testing.

## 4.2. Experiment Conduction

The  experiments  are  carried  out  on  a  laptop  with  Intel  Core  i5-7200U@2.50GHz, RAM4.00GB and Windows 10. 216 experiments of RNN are conducted on the platform of MatLab with different sets of the features, training algorithms, neurons, delay days and  target  companies.  A  ten  folder  crossing  validation  is  used  for  each  experiment, taking 10 times of random training, validation and testing, and calculating the average performance (arithmetic mean) of the 10 times of tests. Fig. 3 depicts the experimental parameter setting.

Fig. 3. The Parameters of Conducted Experiments

<!-- image -->

Before running RNN for prediction, all the datasets are processed with PCA to reduce the data dimensions. Six studies are implemented in Python on the PyCharm platform with 15 fundamental features, 15 technical features and 30 mixed features of data for MFG and OPR. Two and three components are kept in each study for easy visualisation of PCA results.

The two termination criteria and the learning rate of the developed RNN are set  as below:

- 1) The training ends when it reaches convergence;
- 2) If it does not converge within 1000 epochs, automatically ends at the 1000th epoch;
- 3) The learning rate is 0.02; the number of hidden layer is 1.

## 4.3. Results on MFG

## 4.3.1. Data Dimensionality Reduction with PCA

Fig. 4 (1) - (3) illustrate the results of PCA on the MFG data. Fig. 4 (1) plots several lines connected to form the 2D and 3D graphs for fundamental data, while Fig. 4 (2) and (3) are scatter plots for technical features and mixed features, respectively. This is because that  fundamental  data  is  transferred  from  quarterly  to  daily  through  univariate  linear function,  while  technical  data  is  the  actual  daily  financial  data  gathered  from  the database. Fig. 4 (3) is similar to Fig. 4 (2) in both 2D and 3D graphs. This indicates that the fundamental data of MFG has a small influence on the results of PCA, when it is combined with technical data.

Fig. 4. 2D and 3D Visualisation of PCA components

<!-- image -->

In PCA, the loss of detailed information is inevitable. The variance explained ratio is used to indicate the cumulative contribution rate of the first few principal components extracted by the PCA.  Table 1 shows the variance explained the ratio for MFG.

Table 1 The Explained Variance of Principle Components on the MFG data

| PC  The Explained Variance of Principle Components  Fundamental  Technical  Mixed  Individual  Cumulative  %  Individual  Cumulative  %  Individual  Cumulative  %  1  0.66067  53  66.07%  9.9999999  7e-01  99.99%  9.9999999  7e-01  99.99%  2  0.23031  35  89.10%  2.00097504  e-09  99.99%  2.0024329  5e-09  99.99%  3  0.06845  19  95.94%  4.9788162  3e-10  99.99%  5.4898628  1e-10  99.99%   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 4.3.2. Convergence of RNN training

Fig. 5 illustrates the training process of RNN with BR. It can be seen that the MSE falls to the lowest position sharply at epoch 10, and then the error almost does not change. The training process continues until epoch 683, with the best performance 4.2123 at epoch 675. Through observing all the training processes of RNN with BR, it is shown that BR always converges very quickly, but the adjustment process is slow. Namely, the MAP in the Bayesian algorithm finds a set of approximate optimal parameters very fast, and then the fine adjustment of weights is slowly.

Fig. 5. The MSE evolution of the best RNN on the MFG training data

<!-- image -->

## 4.3.3. The prediction results of RNN on the MFG data

The most accurate prediction of the share price of MFG is produced by the RNN on the experimental parameters: 'BR Algorithm, Mixed Features, 15 Neurons and 5 Delays' with the average MSE of 3.482006. Fig. 6 shows that the errors are increased from time- step  1000  to  1200.  It  means  that  although  the  RNN  obtained  by  BR  has  the  best performance, the accuracy is reduced from June 16 2017 to April 4 2018. Namely, the dynamics of the stock market prices has changed very much in the past year.

Fig. 6. The outputs and errors of the best RNN on the MFG test data

<!-- image -->

## 4.4. Results on OPR

## 4.4.1. Data Dimensionality Reduction with PCA

Fig. 7 (1) shows a unique trend for the fundamental data of OPR, which is different to Fig. 4 (1) for the fundamental data of MFG, and Fig. 7 (2) looks more compact for the technical data of OPR than Fig. 4 (2) for the technical data of MFG. Furthermore, the most significant difference is the result of PCA on the mixed data of OPR. As can be seen in Fig. 7 (3), the data in the 3D graph is divided into two clusters for the mixed data of OPR, deferring to the 3D graph in Fig. 4 (3) for the mixed data of MFG. This means both fundamental data and technical data affected the results of PCA for OPR.  Namely, fundamental data could play different roles for the stock price prediction in aerospace manufacturer and operator.

<!-- image -->

(3) PCA with Mixed Features of OPR

Fig. 7. 2D and 3D visualisation of PCA components

Table 2 shows that 99.82% of details can be represented with 3 components for OPR. The percentage for OPR is larger than the percentage of 95.94% for MFG. It should be noticed that technical data and mixed data can be explained close to 100% in the first component. This means the data with 3 components after PCA can correctly explain all the raw data with 15 or 30 features. In addition, the results of PCA on the mixed data are similar  with  that  on  the  technical  data for  both MFG  and  OPR.  This means that the technical data has more influence on the results of PCA on the mixed data.

Table 2 The Explained Variance of Principle Components on the OPR data

| PC  The Explained Variance of Principle Components  Fundamental  Technical  Mixed  Individual  Cumulative  %  Individual  Cumulative  %  Individual  Cumulative  %  1  0.9880090  98.80%  9.999999  88e-01  99.99%  9.99999974  e-01  99.99%  2  0.0071197  99.51%  1.081459  16e-08  99.99%  1.35294546e  -08  99.99%  3  0.0030929  99.82%  1.19720  806e-09  99.99%  1.06595881e  -08  99.99%   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 4.4.2. The convergence of RNN Training

Fig. 8 is the convergence curve of the best RNN on OPR. The convergence speed of RNN, trained by the SCG algorithm with the ending epoch at 33 for OPR, is faster than that for MFG, and the downward trend is relatively flat. This result shows that the SCG algorithm,  combined  gradient  descent  and  conjugation,  does  not  need  a  onedimensional search that costs time.

Fig. 8. The MSE evolution of the best RNN on the OPR training data

<!-- image -->

## 4.4.3. Results of RNN on the OPR data

For OPR, the best RNN is produced with the experimental parameters: 'SCG Algorithm, Mixed Features, 5 Neurons and 15 Delays' with the average MSE of 1.319737. Fig. 9 shows the model outputs and errors for OPR. The error for OPR is evenly distributed and smaller than that for MFG, as in the SCG algorithm, every direction has a conjugated direction and all the directions could be searched.

Fig. 9. The Outputs and Errors of the Best RNN on the OPR Test Data

<!-- image -->

## 4.5. Evaluation

The best results of the PCA and RNN for the share price prediction of MFG and OPR have been shown in the last section. The experimental outcomes will be further assessed with more dimensions as follows.

## 4.5.1. Principal Components Analysis

The benefits of PCA lie in the running time reduction, data visualisation and compression to free up the computer memory space. The most important is the benefit of reducing the computing complexity, when a large number of features is dealt with for the specific problem.  In  this  research,  although  there  are  only  15  (fundamental,  technical)  or  30 (mixed)  features,  the  average  running  time  of  each  test  can  be  from  1  second  to maximum 92 seconds. Hence, PCA is necessary for this model.

Firstly, the running time of RNN depends on its structure. When the number of hidden neurons and delays of RNN is increased, its running time is increased. The total running time of data processing, results extraction and analysis of the 2160 tests are around 6 days within only 5-years financial samples. When expanding the feature sets or adding the financial samples, the running time could be increased sharply.

Besides the improved efficiency, the PCA can keep more than 95.94% details, but the number of data dimensions is reduced from 15 or 30 to 3. For the technical and mixed features  of  both  MFG  and  OPR,  more  than  99.99%  variance  is  explained  with  one- component.  This means that data redundancy is reduced, and the significant information of data is kept.

Additional 20 verification tests for the two test sets are done to examine the effects of PCA further. The parameters are set the same as the best-performed tests of MFG and OPR:

-  For MFG: BR Algorithm, Mixed Features, 15 Neurons and 5 Delays
-  For OPR: SCG Algorithm, Mixed Features, 5 Neurons and 15 Delays

But, the input data of RNN is the initial data without PCA processing. Tables 3 and 4 show the assessment results for MFG and OPR, respectively. From both tables, the average MSE with PCA is lower than average MSE without PCA. This means that the prediction accuracy with PCA is better than without PCA. Moreover, the average running time with PCA is lower than or similar to that without PCA. The results have proved that PCA can improve both efficiency and accuracy of the prediction model.

Table 3

## PCA Assessment Result of MFG

| Average Total  Epochs  Average Best  Performance Epochs  Average  MSE  Average  Running  Time (s)  With PCA  614.7  533.9  3.482006  5.4  Without PCA  764.4  649  4.013047  6.4   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 4 PCA Assessment Result of OPR

| Average Total  Epochs  Average Best  Performance Epochs  Average  MSE  Average  Running  Time (s)  With PCA  49.4  43.4  1.319737  1  Without PCA  76.8  70.8  7.517148  1   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 4.5.2. Optimization Algorithms of Weights

BR and LM account for the majority of the top 50 test sets for MFG, while SCG and LM perform better than BR for OPR. For the MFG data, LM obtains the lowest average MSE and running time among the three algorithms. Although the best performance is obtained by BR algorithm, the average MSE obtained by BR is higher than that obtained by LM, and the average number (773.1) of convergent epochs for BR is the largest among the three algorithms.

Table 5 Testing Results of Optimization Algorithms of MFG

| Algorithms  Average Total  Epochs  Average Best  Performance Epochs  Average  MSE  Average  Running  Time (s)  LM  21.4  15.4  5.445273  1.0  BR  773.1  714.3  10.369097  19.5  SCG  60.6  54.6  9.581278  1.0   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Fig. 10. Average MSE of Different Training Algorithms of MFG

<!-- image -->

For OPR, the best algorithm is SCG with the average MSE of 4.057354 and average running time of 1 second.

Table 6 Testing Results of Optimization Algorithms of OPR

| Algorithms  Average Total  Epochs  Average Best  Performance Epochs  Average  MSE  Average  Running  Time (s)  LM  15.7  9.7  5.374760  1.0  BR  859.5  777.2  6.981070  19.7  SCG  65.9  59.9  4.057354  1.0   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Fig. 11. Average MSE of Different Training Algorithms on the OPR Data

<!-- image -->

When analysing the different algorithms separately, the BR algorithm is the only one that does not converge within 1000 epochs when testing. Especially in the tests for OPR, 33 of 36 tests with BR are ended at the 1000 epoch, while this number is 12 of 36 in the test for  MFG. All these tests are carried out, using the RNN models with over 15 hidden neurons and over 10 delays. This indicates that the threshold value of convergence may not be suitable for the BR algorithm with many hidden neurons and delays.

To sum up, from the average value of MSE and running time, LM is the best algorithm for MFG while SCG is the best one for OPR. Even BR performs very well in the single test  for  MFG,  it  costs  a  lot  of  running  time  and  has  a  high  average  MSE  when  the convergence threshold of BR is set to the same threshold as in LM and SCG. Hence, the convergence threshold should be refined.

## 4.5.3. Analysis Features

The experiments on the technical analysis features obtain the lowest average MSE for MFG,  regardless  of  algorithms,  and  the  experiments  on  the  fundamental  analysis features obtain the best for OPR, as shown in Fig. 12 and Fig. 13.

Table 7 Testing Results on the Three Groups of Features for MFG

| Features  Average Total  Epochs  Average Best  Performance  Epochs  Average  MSE  Average  Running  Time (s)  Fundamental  287.4  262.2  8.401831  7.0  Technical  283.0  263.2  8.257568  7.0  Mixed  284.6  258.8  8.736249  7.5   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Fig. 12. Average MSE of Different Analysis Features of MFG

<!-- image -->

Table 8 Testing Results of Analysis Features of OPR

| Features  Average Total  Epochs  Average Best  Performance  Epochs  Average  MSE  Average  Running  Time (s)  Fundamental  306.0  269.2  5.399674  7.2  Technical  314.9  280.4  5.588128  6.6  Mixed  320.2  297.1  5.425381  7.9   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Fig. 13. Average MSE on The Three Sets of Features for OPR

<!-- image -->

For  the  MFG  Company,  as  the  dynamics  of  information  is  approximated  as  a  linear variation, fundamental data misses details of daily information, so the accuracy of the prediction  is  not  as  good  as  the  technical  data,  which  represents  daily  information. Besides, even though fundamental data occupies a small percentage of the influence on mixed data, these filled fundamental features may conflict with the technical features, thus producing negative impact on the prediction of stock price. Hence, the prediction accuracy of the model on mixed features is reduced.

However, for the OPR Company, the stability of historical share price is poor, as shown in Fig. 9. That will cause a high fluctuation of the prediction accuracy if the technical data is  used.  The  prediction  accuracy  can  be  improved  and  the  high  fluctuation  could  be mitigated by using mixtures of fundamental  and technical features. This indicates the quarterly data has the positive impact on the prediction accuracy when the stock market is  strongly  dynamic.  This  might  be  because  that  the  linear  approximation  of  daily information from quarterly data could compromise with the dynamics of technical daily data.

Briefly,  technical  features  can  be  selected  when  the  share  price  is  stable,  while fundamental features are better when the share price has a high fluctuation.

## 4.5.4. The Number of Neurons

Many parameters  can be adjusted for improving the prediction accuracy of a  neural network.  Appropriately  adjusting  the  parameters  plays  a  vital  role  in  share  price prediction. The method of trial  and  error  is  used  to find  the  most  suitable  parameter values of RNN on different feature sets for different companies.

Fig. 14 shows the relationship between the number of neurons and the average MSE on the test data for MFG. The value of the average MSE increases for testing data as the number of neurons increases. The best-performed number of neurons is 5. This might be because that the more the neuron numbers, the stronger of the neural network's learnability, which might increases the risk of over-fitting with the training data.

Table 9 Testing Results for Different Numbers of Neurons in RNN for MFG

| Neurons  Average Total  Epochs  Average Best  Performance  Epochs  Average  MSE  Average  Running  Time (s)  5 neurons  241.9  219.6  6.839601  1.8  10 neurons  268.5  246.6  8.192021  3.6  15 neurons  312.6  285.5  9.193409  8.5  20 neurons  317.0  294.0  9.635832  14.8   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Fig. 14. Average MSE for Different Numbers of Neurons in RNN for MFG

<!-- image -->

As to  the  OPR,  the  MSE  continues  decreasing  when  the  number  hidden  neurons  is changed from 5 to 20. With the increasing number of neurons, the learnability of the RNN is improved, but the complexity of the network is increased. It can be seen that the MSE value has a tiny change when the number of hidden neurons is changed from 15 to 20. Therefore, the best-performed RNN is with 15 hidden neurons for OPR.

Table 10 Testing Results of Different Number of Neurons of OPR

| Neurons  Average Total  Epochs  Average Best  Performance  Epochs  Average  MSE  Average  Running  Time (s)  5 neurons  303.8  275.0  6.255731  2.3  10 neurons  317.9  298.4  5.401003  4.5  15 neurons  318.6  293.3  5.124511  8.2  20 neurons  314.5  262.4  5.103000  14.0   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Fig. 15.

<!-- image -->

Average MSE of Different Number of Neurons of OPR

Briefly, it is vital for improving prediction accuracy to set the number of hidden neurons appropriately. The experimental results indicate that there exists an optimal number of hidden neurons for RNN, and the number of hidden neurons depends on the nonlinearity of the training data. When the linearity of the training data is strong, the number of hidden neurons could be small, and when the nonlinearity of the training data is strong, the number of neurons could be large. When the number of hidden neurons is not enough, the trained model cannot well represent the mapping function between the data and the predicted value, the prediction accuracy will be not good enough. When the number of neuron is larger than the best number, the prediction accuracy on the test data set could be dropped, as the trained model might over-fit with the noise in the training data.

## 4.5.5. The Number of Delays

The delays is  another  important  parameter  of  RNN  to  be  adjusted  for  improving  the performance of RNN. It also determines the time looking back of the history data for the prediction  of  share  prices.  As  to  the  financial  analysis,  the  most  commonly  used indicators are 5-days moving average, 10-days moving average and 15-days moving average. Correspondingly, the delays are set to 5, 10 and 15 delays. From Table 11 and Fig. 16, it can be seen that the MSE of RNN outputs for MFG is increasing as the number of delays of RNN is increasing.

Table 11 The Performances of RNN for Different Delays for MFG

| Delays  Average Total  Epochs  Average Best  Performance  Epochs  Average  MSE  Average  Running  Time (s)  5 delays  243.8  215.5  5.920882  2.3  10 delays  301.0  281.8  9.397919  6.1  15 delays  310.2  286.9  10.076847  13.1   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Fig. 16. The Average MSE of Prediction for Different Delays of RNN for MFG

<!-- image -->

However, the prediction accuracy of RNN for OPR has the opposite trend, compared to the case of MFG. The MSE is decreasing, as the number of delays is increasing for OPR (Fig. 17). Similar with the case of MFG, the running time of RNN is increasing, due to the increasing complexity of RNN (Table 12).

Table 12 The Performance of RNN for Different Delays for OPR

| Delays  Average Total  Epochs  Average Best  Performance  Epochs  Average  MSE  Average  Running  Time (s)  5 delays  294.3  245.2  5.935670  2.8  10 delays  320.1  294.2  5.593137  6.2  15 delays  326.6  307.3  4.884377  12.7   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Fig. 17. The Average MSE of Prediction for Different Delays of RNN for OPR

<!-- image -->

Compared  Fig.  16  with  Fig.  17,  for  MFG,  the  short-term  historical  data  could  have positive impacts on its share price because the historical data is stable and do not need to consider long-term historical data by data processing of fundamental data. In contrast, for OPR, the long-term historical data could have positive impacts on its share price, as the  long-term  historical  data  could  compensate  for  the  high  fluctuation  of  short-term historical data of OPR.

In brief, the relationship between MSE and the number of delays varied with the stability of the historical data of different companies. Hence, the delays should be adjusted to the optimal value for different companies.

## 5. Conclusions

The  research  developed  a  hybrid  approach  to  predicting  share  price  of  aerospace industry companies by using the combination of PCA and RNNs, trained with LM, BR, and SCG algorithms, respectively.  The proposed approach could help create automatic prediction of share prices for different industries, not only aerospace industry sectors, but also other industry sectors.

The share prices for two types of aerospace industries, manufacturing and operating companies, are investigated,  and  a  comprehensive  assessment  is  provided.  Various factors,  e.g.  training  algorithms,  structure  of  RNN,  and  features,  could  affect  the prediction  performance.  The  experimental  results  show  that  PCA  could  improve  the performance of prediction not only in efficiency, but also in prediction accuracy. For MFG, the best prediction accuracy was obtained by the RNN with 15 hidden neurons and 5 delays on the mixed features, optimised by the BR Algorithm, whereas, for OPR, the best prediction accuracy was obtained by the RNN with 5 hidden neurons and 15 Delays on the  mixed  features,  optimised  by  the  SCG  algorithm.  Regarding  the  robustness,  LM obtained the best average MSE and shortest running time for MFG.

More importantly, the experimental results show that feature selection is related to the stability of share market. Technical features could be selected when the share price is stable,  whereas  fundamental  features  are  better  when  the  share  market  has  a  high fluctuation. The delays of RNN are different for different types of companies. It would be more accurate through using short-term historical data for MFG, whereas using longterm historical data for the OPR Airline.

The developed approach to predicting stock prices could provide decision-makers with a  reference  or  evidence  for  their  economic  strategies  and  business  activities,  thus helping the financial industry to increase the return on investment. Although the research was done based on the data in aerospace industry at pre-COVID-19 time, the developed approach can be used for the share price analysis of aerospace industry at post COVID19 time.

The combination of fundamental and technical analysis in this research fills the gap in the  studies  of  stock  prices  that  used  to  use  only  fundamental  or  technical  analysis individually. However, simply combination of technical and fundamental data may not be good enough for the prediction of stock price for aerospace industries. Hence, feature selection  with  optimisation  algorithms  will  be  future  work.  Currently,  COVID-19  is severely  influencing  aerospace  industry,  so,  we  will  investigate  the  prediction  of aerospace share price at post-COVID-19 time.

## Acknowledgements

This research has been accomplished based on an MSc dissertation of Linyu Zheng, supervised by Hongmei He, at Cranfield University, UK.

## REFERENCES

- Andrade De Oliveira, F., Enrique Zárate, L., De Azevedo Reis, M., &amp; Neri Nobre, C. (2011). The use of artificial neural networks in the analysis and prediction of stock prices. Conference Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics . https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSMC.2011.6083990
- Burden, F., &amp; Winkler, D. (2008). Bayesian regularization of neural networks. Methods in Molecular Biology . https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-60327-101-1\_3
- Yolcu, O. C. &amp; Alpaslan, F. (2018). Prediction of TAIEX based on hybrid fuzzy time series model with single optimization process. Applied Soft Computing Journal . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2018.02.007
- Cao, J., &amp; Wang, J. (2019). Stock price forecasting model based on modified convolution neural network and financial time series analysis. International Journal of Communication Systems . https://doi.org/10.1002/dac.3987
- Chandra, R., &amp; Chand, S. (2016). Evaluation of co-evolutionary neural network architectures for time series prediction with mobile application in finance. Applied Soft Computing Journal . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2016.08.029
- Chang, T. S. (2011). A comparative study of artificial neural networks, and decision trees for digital game content stocks price prediction. Expert Systems with Applications . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2011.05.063
- Chang, Y. H., &amp; Lee, M. S. (2017). Incorporating Markov decision process on genetic algorithms to formulate trading strategies for stock markets. Applied Soft Computing Journal . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2016.09.016
- Chen, Y., &amp; Hao, Y. (2018). Integrating principle component analysis and weighted support vector machine for stock trading signals prediction. Neurocomputing , 321 , 381-402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2018.08.077
- Chen, Y. J., Chen, Y. M., &amp; Lu, C. L. (2017). Enhancement of stock market forecasting using an improved fundamental analysis-based approach. Soft Computing , 21 (13), 3735-3757. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-016-2028-y
- Deng, Y., Bao, F., Kong, Y., Ren, Z., &amp; Dai, Q. (2017). Deep Direct Reinforcement Learning for Financial Signal Representation and Trading. IEEE Transactions on

Neural Networks and Learning Systems . https://doi.org/10.1109/TNNLS.2016.2522401

- Edwards, R. D., Magee, J., &amp; Bassetti, W. H. C. (2012). Technical Analysis of Stock Trends. In Technical Analysis of Stock Trends . https://doi.org/10.1201/b14301
- ElAal M.M.A., Selim G., Fakhr W. (2012) Stock Market Trend Prediction Model for the Egyptian Stock Market Using Neural Networks and Fuzzy Logic. In: Huang DS., Gan Y., Premaratne P., Han K. (eds) Bio-Inspired Computing and Applications. ICIC 2011. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol 6840. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-24553-4\_13
- Fundamental Focus. (2011). Profit Margin Analysis . Third Quarter 2011. http://search.credoreference.com.ezproxy.westminster.ac.uk/content/entry/ultimat ebusiness/profit\_margin/0/ Accessed 6 January 2020.
- Göçken, M., Özçalici, M., Boru, A., &amp; Dosdoʇru, A. T. (2016). Integrating metaheuristics and Artificial Neural Networks for improved stock price prediction. Expert Systems with Applications . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2015.09.029
- Göçken, M., Özçalıcı, M., Boru, A., &amp; Dosdoğru, A. T. (2019). Stock price prediction using hybrid soft computing models incorporating parameter tuning and input variable selection. Neural Computing and Applications . https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-017-3089-2
- Groth, D., Hartmann, S., Klie, S., &amp; Selbig, J. (2013). Principal components analysis. Methods in Molecular Biology . https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-62703-059-5\_22
- Hafezi, R., Shahrabi, J., &amp; Hadavandi, E. (2015). A bat-neural network multi-agent system (BNNMAS) for stock price prediction: Case study of DAX stock price. Applied Soft Computing Journal . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2014.12.028
- Harrington, C. (2003). Fundamental vs. Technical Analysis. CFA Institute Magazine . https://doi.org/10.2469/cfm.v14.n1.2789
- He, H., &amp; Qin, Z. (2010). A k-hyperplane-based neural network for non-linear regression. Proceedings of the 9th IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics, ICCI 2010 . https://doi.org/10.1109/COGINF.2010.5599808

- Jadhav, S., He, H., &amp; Jenkins, K. (2015). Prediction of earnings per share for industry. IC3K 2015 - Proceedings of the 7th International Joint Conference on Knowledge Discovery, Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management . https://doi.org/10.5220/0005616604250432
- Jadhav, S., He, H., &amp; Jenkins, K. (2018). Information gain directed genetic algorithm wrapper feature selection for credit rating. Applied Soft Computing Journal . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2018.04.033
- Jeong, G., &amp; Kim, H. Y. (2019). Improving financial trading decisions using deep Qlearning: Predicting the number of Shares, action Strategies, and transfer learning. Expert Systems with Applications , 117 , 125-138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2018.09.036
- Khare, K., Darekar, O., Gupta, P., &amp; Attar, V. Z. (2017). Short term stock price prediction using deep learning. RTEICT 2017 - 2nd IEEE International Conference on Recent Trends in Electronics, Information and Communication Technology, Proceedings . https://doi.org/10.1109/RTEICT.2017.8256643
- Kirkpatrick II, C. D., &amp; Dahlquist, J. R. (2015). Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource for Financial Market Technicians. (3rd ed.). Financial Times/ Prentice Hall, (Chapter 1).
- Korczak, J., Hernes, M., &amp; Bac, M. (2016). Fundamental analysis in the multi-Agent trading system. Proceedings of the 2016 Federated Conference on Computer Science and Information Systems, FedCSIS 2016 , 8 , 1169-1174. https://doi.org/10.15439/2016F238
- Larkin, H. (2014). A human readable language for stock market technical analysis on mobile devices. 12th International Conference on Advances in Mobile Computing and Multimedia, MoMM 2014 , 131-136. https://doi.org/10.1145/2684103.2684131
- Lei, L. (2018). Wavelet Neural Network Prediction Method of Stock Price Trend Based on Rough Set Attribute Reduction. Applied Soft Computing Journal . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2017.09.029
- Lertyingyod, W., &amp; Benjamas, N. (2017). Stock price trend prediction using Artificial Neural Network techniques: Case study: Thailand stock exchange. 20th International Computer Science and Engineering Conference: Smart Ubiquitos

- Computing and Knowledge, ICSEC 2016 . https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSEC.2016.7859878
- Li, Q., Chen, Y., Wang, J., Chen, Y., &amp; Chen, H. (2018). Web Media and Stock Markets : A Survey and Future Directions from a Big Data Perspective. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering . https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2017.2763144
- Lin, X., Yang, Z., &amp; Song, Y. (2009). Short-term stock price prediction based on echo state networks. Expert Systems with Applications . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2008.09.049
- Long, W., Song, L., &amp; Tian, Y. (2019). A new graphic kernel method of stock price trend prediction based on financial news semantic and structural similarity. Expert Systems with Applications , 118 , 411-424. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2018.10.008
- Luo, L., &amp; Chen, X. (2013). Integrating piecewise linear representation and weighted support vector machine for stock trading signal prediction. Applied Soft Computing Journal . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2012.10.026
- Mahajan, R., Gupta, S. K., &amp; Bedi, R. K. (2015). Design of software fault prediction model using BR technique. Procedia Computer Science . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2015.02.154
- Malkiel, B. G. (1991). Efficient Market Hypothesis. In The World of Economics . https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-21315-3\_28
- Marković, I., Stojanović, M., Stanković, J., &amp; Stanković, M. (2017). Stock market trend prediction using AHP and weighted kernel LS-SVM. Soft Computing . https://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-016-2123-0
- Metghalchi, M., Hayes, L. A., &amp; Niroomand, F. (2019). A technical approach to equity investing in emerging markets. Review of Financial Economics . https://doi.org/10.1002/rfe.1041
- Møller, M. F. (1993). A scaled conjugate gradient algorithm for fast supervised learning. Neural Networks . https://doi.org/10.1016/S0893-6080(05)80056-5

- Phooi M'ng, J. C. (2018). Dynamically Adjustable Moving Average (AMA') technical analysis indicator to forecast Asian Tigers' futures markets. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications , 509 , 336-345. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2018.06.010
- Ranganathan, A. (2004). The Levenberg-Marquardt Algorithm. Internet Httpexcelsior Cs Ucsb Educoursescs290ipdfL MA Pdf , 142 (June), 1-5. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1.1.10.2258
- Shen, K. Y., &amp; Tzeng, G. H. (2014). VC-DRSA for knowledge retrieval based on technical analysis and investment practice. IFUZZY 2014 - 2014 International Conference on Fuzzy Theory and Its Applications, Conference Digest . https://doi.org/10.1109/iFUZZY.2014.7091244
- Shen, K. Y., &amp; Tzeng, G. H. (2015a). Combined soft computing model for value stock selection based on fundamental analysis. Applied Soft Computing Journal , 37 , 142-155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2015.07.030
- Shen, K. Y., &amp; Tzeng, G. H. (2015b). Fuzzy Inference-Enhanced VC-DRSA Model for Technical Analysis: Investment Decision Aid. International Journal of Fuzzy Systems . https://doi.org/10.1007/s40815-015-0058-8
- Liu, S. (2018). Prediction and analysis of stock price based on GM-RBF neural network. Computer and Modernization, 8, 2018, pp.8-11. https://doi.org/10.3969/j.issn.1006-2475.2018.08.002
- Torun, Y., &amp; Tohumolu, G. (2011). Designing simulated annealing and subtractive clustering based fuzzy classifier. Applied Soft Computing Journal . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2010.07.020
- Wei, Y., &amp; Chaudhary, V. (2016). The influence of sample reconstruction on stock trend prediction via NARX neural network. Proceedings - 2015 IEEE 14th International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications, ICMLA 2015 . https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMLA.2015.210
- Zhang, J., Cui, S., Xu, Y., Li, Q., &amp; Li, T. (2018). A novel data-driven stock price trend prediction system. Expert Systems with Applications , 97 , 60-69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2017.12.026

Zhou, F., &amp; Zhu, X. (2014). Alphabet recognition based on Scaled Conjugate gradient BP algorithm. Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering . https://doi.org/10.1007/9783-642-40640-9\_3

Appendix Table. A1. Fundamental Features

| Categories  Features  Descriptions  Formulas  Profitability  Ratios  Return on  Invested  Capital  ROIC is the ratio between the funds invested  and the related returns. It is used to assess  the historical performance of a company or its  business unit.  EBIT x (1 - tax rate) / (interest  bearing liabilities +  shareholders' equity - cash  and its equivalent)  Operating  Margin  Operating Margin is the ratio of operating  profit to operating income of the company  operating profit / operating  income * 100%  Return on  Assets  ROA is an indicator used to measure how  much net income is generated per unit of  assets. It is used to assess the profitability of  a company relative to its total asset value.  net income / total asset  Growth  Revenue  Growth  Revenue growth is an indicator to measure  the growth of revenue. Here the calculation  period is one year.  revenue - revenue of last year  Total Assets  Growth  Total assets growth is an indicator to measure  the growth of total assets. Here the calculation  period is one year.  total assets - total assets of  last year  Total Debt  Growth  Total debt growth is an indicator to measure  the growth of total debt. Here the calculation  period is one year.  total debt - total debt of last  year  Leverage  Ratios  Debt/Assets  The debt/assets ratio is a measure of the  ability of an enterprise to use creditors to  provide funds for its business activities and  reflects the security level of creditors' loans.  total debt/total assets  Equity Ratio  It is the ratio of shareholders' equity to total  assets. This ratio reflects how much of the  company's assets are invested by the owner  and also shows the use of the company's  financial leverage.  Equity/Total Assets  Efficiency  Ratios  Accounts  Receivable  Turnover  The accounts receivable turnover rate is the  average number of times that the company's  accounts receivable are converted into cash  within a specified period.  current sales net income /  average balance of accounts  receivable   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

| Quick Ratio  The quick ratio is one of the indicators for  measuring the liquidity of a company's assets,  reflecting the ability of the company's cash or  immediately realisable assets to repay their  current liabilities.  (current assets - inventory) /  current liabilities  Current  Ratio  The current ratio is the ratio of current assets  to current liabilities. It is used to measure the  ability of a company's current assets to  become cash for repayment of liabilities  before the short-term debt expires.  current assets / current  liabilities  Earnings  Earning Per  Share  EPS is the net profit or net loss per share of  the company. It is often used to reflect the  company's operating results, measure the  profitability of common stocks and investment  risks.  (gross profit for the period -  Dividend of preferred shares)  / Total equity at the end of the  period  Price  Earnings  Ratio  The P/E ratio reflects the fact that when the  dividend per share is unchanged, and the  dividend pay-out ratio is 100% and the  dividends received are not reinvested, how  many years the investment can be fully  recovered through dividends.  current market price per share/earnings per share of the period   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table. A2. Technical Features

| Categories  Features  Descriptions  Formulas  Volume  Volume  The total amount of securities or contract  transactions during a specific period.  The sum of all the stock trade  Bollinger  Bands  BB Width  Bollinger Bands uses statistical principles to  determine the standard deviation of stock prices and  their confidence intervals to determine the range of  stock price fluctuations and future trends. It uses the  waveband to display the safe, high and low price of  the stock price. The upper and lower limits are not  fixed and change with the rolling of the stock price.  %b is mainly the position of the current price in the  Bollinger Band, which is a crucial indicator when  making trading decisions.  100 * ((upper band price -  lower band price) / 20 days  moving an average of price)  %B  (close price - lower band price)  / (upper band price - lower  band price)  Commodity  Channel Index  CCI  The CCI indicator specifically measures whether  stock price, foreign exchange or precious metal  trading have exceeded the normal distribution  range.  （  (high price + low price +  close price) / 3  －  average of 13  days close price  ）  / ( average  of 13 days close price minus  close price * 0.015)  Rate of  Change  ROC  ROC is the price of the day compared to the stock  price of a specific day before a certain number of  days. The speed of change reflects the degree of  change in the stock market.  (current price - the price of 1  day ago) / price of 1 day ago  Relative  Strength Index  RSI  RSI calculates the strength of market movements by  calculating the magnitude of the stock price  fluctuations and predicts the trend's persistence or  turn.  100 - [ 100 / (1 + (14 days  smoothed moving average of  up closes / 14 days smoothed  moving average of down  closes))]  Directional  Movement  Index  +DMI  The DMI indicator is a technical indicator that  provides a basis for judging the trend by analysing  the changes in the equilibrium points of the buyers  and sellers during the ups and downs of the stock  price. It has three indicators: +DMI, -DMI and ADX  100 * (14 days smoothed  moving average of + DM) / 14  days smoothed moving  average of the true range  -DMI  100 * (14 days smoothed  moving average of - DM) /  14 days smoothed moving  average of the true range  ADX  100 * (14 days smoothed  moving average of DX)  where DX = 100 *   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## abs((+DMI)-(-DMI))/((+DMI) +(-DMI))

| Simple  Moving  Average  SMA  SMA refers to the simple averaging of the  closing price of a specific period.  SMA (5) = [price (1) + price  (2) + ... + price (5)] / 5  Moving  Average  Convergence  and  Divergence  MACD  The MACD is a technical indicator for judging  the timing of buying and selling by using the  short-term (usually 12-days) exponential  moving an average of the closing price and the  long-term (typically 26-day) exponential  moving average.  12 days exponential  moving average - 26 days  exponential moving  average  MACD  Signal  Line  9 days exponential moving  average of MACD Line  KDJ Index  %K  KDJ calculates the immature random value  RSV of the last calculation period by the  highest price, the lowest price and the closing  price of the last calculation period and the  proportional relationship between the three.  Then calculate the K value and the D value  according to the method of smoothing the  moving average and draw a graph to judge the  stock trend.  100 * (close price - range  minimum) / (range  maximum - range  minimum)  %D  3 days moving an average  of %K  Williams %R  WR  WR is a technical indicator that uses the  oscillation point to reflect the phenomenon of  overbought and oversold in the market. It  predicts the highs and lows in the cycle and  then proposes active signals to analyse the  market's short-term market trends and  determines the market's strength and  weakness.  100 * (14 days highest  price - close price) / (14  days highest price - 14  days lowest price)   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|