## Market laws

## Çağlar Tuncay (*)

More than one billion data sampled with different frequencies from several financial instruments were investigated with the aim of testing whether they involve power law. As a result, a known power law with the power exponent around -4 was detected in the empirical distributions of the relative returns. Moreover, a  number of new power law behaviors with various power exponents were explored in the same data. Further on, a model based on finite sums over numerous Maxwell-Boltzmann type distribution functions with  random  (pseudorandom)  multipliers  in  the  exponent  were  proposed  to  deal  with  the  empirical distributions involving power laws. The results indicate that the proposed model may be universal.

It is known that power laws with various exponents can be interpreted as strong correlations in random data. Hence, that  issue  increasingly  attracted  attention  from  academic community  as  the amount  and  diversity of the data displaying  power  law  behaviors  increased  with  time.  For example, the 1/f noise in electromagnetic signals from stars is one of the widely studied power law behaviors in science. Another  example  of  power  law  with  the  power  exponent around -1 can be found in human activities. The living world cities exhibit the mentioned power law behavior when they are  organized  in  decreasing  rank  order  with regard  to  the population sizes. That is known as Pareto distributions or Zipf's law [1].

Actually, the self-organized criticality approach was one of the  early  attempts  to  show  that  dynamical  systems  with spatial  degrees  of  freedom  naturally  evolve  into  a  selforganized critical point [2].

In  the  next  important  approach,  referred  to  as  highly optimized tolerance in literature, a mechanism for generating power law distributions was introduced, where the focus was on the systems which are optimized, either through  natural  selection  or  intentional  design  [3].  It  was suggested  that  power  laws  in  those  systems  are  due  to tradeoffs between yield, cost of resources, and tolerance to risks.

The reader is referred to the cited Newman papers in [1] and [4] for comprehensive treatments of power laws, and several points of comparison between self-organized criticality and highly optimized tolerance approaches.

Recently,  Stanley's  group  investigated  a  large  amount  of data from several stock exchanges and they came up with an assertion  saying  that  markets  may  be  involving  several power laws [5]. A particular form of those empirical laws is about the relative returns which will be outlined under the next heading.

In another important approach, Yakovenko's group studied the financial subjects after assuming that money is conserved in a closed economic system. Hence, by analogy with  energy,  the  equilibrium  probability  distribution  of money would follow Boltzmann-Gibbs law characterized by an  effective  temperature  equal  to  the  average  amount  of money per economic agent [6].

Moreover, Yakovenko group derived an analytical solution for the empirical probability distributions of relative returns as a function of time lags in Heston model of a geometrical Brownian  motion  with  stochastic  variance.  They  applied their formula to three major stock-market indices, NASDAQ,  S&amp;P500  and  Dow-Jones  from  1982  to  1999 inclusive, and concluded that the formula fitted a group of empirical  probability  distributions  for  various  time  lags between one day and one year inclusive.

Afterwards, they studied the probability distribution functions;  precisely,  cumulative  distribution  functions,  of stock returns at mesoscopic time lags ranging from an hour to  a  month.  They  used  the  data  from  four  shares  of  the NYSE; Microsoft Corporation (MSFT), Merck &amp; Co. Inc. (MRK), International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) and Intel Corporation (INTC), and they found that the probability  distribution  of  financial  returns  interpolates between exponential and Gaussian laws.

In summary, both Stanley and Yakovenko groups found that distributions of several financial parameters, such as relative returns follow power law. Moreover, exponential and Gauss distributions can be found in financial data. Furthermore, a function  can  be  used  for  approximating  several  types  of empirical  distributions,  but  with  different  parameters.  It means that, one may obtain the approximation of a specific type of empirical distributions from another approximation but after using a suitable set of parameters. That process is known as data collapsing. Hence, various  distributions  of derivatives can be collapsed onto other ones in terms of a formula. Those findings will be tested in further sections of this work.

## FINANCIAL DERIVATIVES

Let us concern a time series for the historical values of a financial instrument r(τ;t) where τ is the sampling period of the data and the t is time. Thus, several relevant parameters can be defined as follows.

The plain  returns  (profits  or  losses)  D(  ;t)  are  simply  the differences  of  the  closing  prices  of  the  successive  time intervals of length 

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, the relative returns (percentages of profits or losses) R(  ;t) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar  expressions  to  those  in  Eqs.  (1)  and  (2)  can  be written  for  the  traded  (tick-)  volume.  For  example,  if  the number of executed buy or sell positions in a time interval of length  is V(  ;t), then the variation in the traded volume W(  ;t) is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, the relative change ω(  ;t) in the traded volume within the time term of length  at t can be written as that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Another  financial  derivative  object  can  be  defined  as  the simultaneous  ratios  of  the  relative  returns  to  the  relative changes in the traded volumes per  as that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In further sections, it will be tested whether the empirical distributions  of  D(  ;t),    R(  ;t),  W(  ;t),  ω(  ;t)  or  S(  ;t) involve power law behaviors. It is worth noting that a power law with the power exponent around -4 was detected in the empirical distributions of R, from various stock exchanges in [5].

## DATA SET

In  order  to  achieve  the  above  asserted  aims  a  data  set consisted  of  more  than  one  billion  raw  data  points  being sampled with different periods from forex market is used [7]. The used sampling periods  are 1, 5, 10, 60, 100, and 250 all  in  minute. The  price  steps  are  nearly  equal  to  the rounded numbers of (1/100) th of  a  1%  of  the  prices  (pip) which amounts to one or two digits  in  the fourth or fifth decimal places. Further details about the investigated  data are given in Table 1.

## MODEL

Let  us  concern  a  finite  set  of  uniformly  distributed random numbers {  i}  with  0≤  i&lt;1 and i=1,2, .., I. Let us define another set of uniformly distributed random numbers {  j} with 0≤  j&lt;1 and j=1,2, .., J. which is obtained from the first set after organizing the elements in the increasing order; i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, let us define a new set of uniformly distributed and finite random numbers {Bj} with Bmin≤Bj&lt;Bmax in terms of {  j}, and Bmin and Bmax as that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is obvious that the random numbers Bj are in increasing order due to Eq. (6).

Let  us  now  assume  that  the  sizes  X  in  an  agglomeration follow  a  function  similar  to  Maxwell-Boltzmann  type probability distribution function OM-B as that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Z stands for the partition function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In other words, Z is the total probability, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Uniformly distributed random variables

Suppose that the integer J in Eqs. (6)-(10) is large enough to assume continuity for the random variable  Bj  B.  Hence, the summation in Eq. (10) can be converted ( ∑j=1 J  ∫dB ) to the following integration

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the limits of Bmax and Bmin. As a result,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is worth noting that Z depicts horizontal behavior for small sizes; i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

due  to  l'Hôpital's  Rule  or  since  e -X ~  1-X  for  small magnitudes (absolute values) of X. Moreover, Z in Eq. (12) can be approximated by a power function with the power exponent equals -1 for large sizes if further Bmin has a very small value and Bmax » Bmin. In this case, exp(-XBmin) ~ 1 and exp(-XBmax) ~ 0. Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, suppose that the Bj in Eq. (7) are defined alternatively as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In other words

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for 1 ≤ j ≤ J-1 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the new situation Eq. (9) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The geometric series in Eq. (17) has the constant (common) ratio of  e -XB , and the result is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is interesting that Z in Eq. (12) can be obtained from that Z'  in  Eq.  (18)  by  treating  that  B  in  Eq.  (16)  as  a  uniform random variable.

Let us take the integral of Z' in Eq. (18)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which can be written as that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the integral limits of (Bmax) and (Bmin). As a result,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is similar to that Z in Eq. (12); i.e., Z'' ~ Z.

The argument of the natural logarithm function in Eq. (21) is positive for finite values of X and B. Moreover,

if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for both of the following cases, B=Bmin and B=Bmax.

Another interesting result is that if the multiplication XB can be  neglected  in  the  sum  with  unity  then  the  following approximation is meaningful

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

because e XB ~ 1 + XB, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is worth underlining that Eq. (25) is valid only if 1»XB which indicates power law behavior.

Another  important  note  may  be  that  X  in  Eq.  (8)  can  be replaced by β n (Y-y) n . Moreover, the parameters y and β may satisfy the following equations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, they may be called the mean (expectation value of Y) and standard deviation, respectively. If, in this case, y=0 and β=1 then the corresponding distribution is called standardized. The reader may investigate the standardized distributions in a text book for probability theory, such as the one recommended in [8].

Generally speaking, one may use the following expression to approximate various empirical distributions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and Z'' ~ Z. Moreover, β n can be absorbed in Bmin and Bmax in Eq. (28). Furthermore, one may write Eq. (19) as that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note  that  Eq.  (29)  does  not  involve  a  power  term  in  the exponential exponent, which is because of Eqs. (7), (15) and (16).

It is claimed  that Eqs. (28) and  (29) are useful for investigating various cumulative probability distributions of net wealth, those of tax returns, or Adjusted Gross Income of  several  countries  which  are  discussed  by  the  group  of Yakovenko, but in terms of a different approach [6].

## Collapsing data

The  parameters  Bmin  and  Bmax  may  well  attain  different values  in  different  distributions.  For  example,  they  may depend on the sampling period  . With the aim of testing that possibility, the following assumptions will be made;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C and α are real constants, and β is absorbed in C. The value for the α in Eq. (30) will be defined empirically in this work.

As a result, that Z in Eq. (28) can be written under the recent assumptions as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if y=0.

Now,  if  Ψ(Y)  represents  the  empirical  distributions  of  a derivative Y  or the magnitudes of them, then those distributions can be collapsed on the number unity in terms of the proposed model as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the symbol  is used instead of the equality sign since Eq.  (32)  involves  empirical  distributions.  The  previous claim  can  be  reformulated  as  the  following.  For  a  given empirical  distribution  Ψ(D),  Ψ(R),  Ψ(W),  Ψ(ω)  or  Ψ(S), there exists a positive number (n) for which Eq. (32) holds.

Another collapsing method may be that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and this finishes the model. Results of the applications will be  presented  in  the  following  section.  The  last  section  is devoted to discussion and conclusion.

## APPLICATIONS AND RESULTS

Primarily,  each  of  the  downloaded  one-year-long  time series (see Table 1) sampled with different frequencies was investigated  for  whether  they  are  problematic  due  to  a reason. In the meantime, they were plotted in the OHLC-V (open,  high,  low,  and  close,  and  volume)  fashion  and compared to the graphs of the same instruments supplied by at least two independent sources, such as www.investing.com and a forex house.

Afterwards,  the  derivatives  D,  R,  W,  ω,  and  S  were computed from  each  yearly  segment  with  a  time  span  of nearly 375,000 trading minutes. Then, the empirical distributions of those derivatives from all of the investigated instruments  sampled  with  different  τ  were  plotted  with various  bin  sizes  (not  showed).  Summations  of  the  event frequencies of those yearly distributions  with specific  bin sizes  were  used  to  obtain  the  total  event  frequencies  per instrument.

## iBilateral symmetry and power law

The observations made on inspection of the plots mentioned in the previous paragraph can be outlined as the following. Distributions are unimodal, and the modes occur at around zero.  They  display  almost  bilateral  symmetry  about  the vertical  axis.  This  means  that  the  event  frequencies  are nearly the same for the studied derivatives or negatives of those.

The magnitudes of the means, as defined in Eq. (26), are very close to zero as exemplified for the available data from several instruments in Table 2. Thus, the means can be taken practically zero since their magnitudes are smaller than the bin size used for the computed data.

Moreover, the yearly distributions of the positive values of the  D,  R,  W,  ω  and  S  with  τ=1  minute  usually  displayed almost power laws with indices around -4, -4, -2, -2, and -2, respectively. Furthermore, the mentioned power law distributions  showed  nearly  similar  behaviors  when  the studied parameters are multiplied by -1. This means that, if a power law can be detected in the empirical distributions of a derivative and negative of that then the same power law can  be  detected  in  the  distributions  of  the  magnitudes. However, no clear power law behavior could be detected in the  empirical  distributions  of  the  relative  returns  from several instruments. Another important note is that no clear power laws could be observed in the distributions of several studied  parameters,  such  as  W  and  ω  from  lightly  traded instruments or from early years when the related instruments were less popular.

Bilateral  symmetric  distributions  of  the  R(  =1min;t) from the available data for two groups of forex instruments are exemplified in Figures 1 (a) and (b). On inspection of those figures it can be observed that the exemplified distributions are  almost  bilateral  symmetric,  unimodal  and  the  modes occur at around zero. Those results can be attributed to the following reasons.

The  profits  or  losses  (0&lt;D(  ;t)  or  0&gt;D(  ;t),  respectively) occur with nearly the same event frequencies in lengthy time intervals.  Therefore,  the  empirical  distributions  for  the relative returns R(  ;t) are expected to depict almost bilateral symmetry  if  the  D(  ;t)  distribute  with  almost  bilateral symmetry and r(  ;t) varies smoothly with time. Moreover, if the distributions of D(  ;t) follow a power law with the power exponent close to minus four then also the distributions of R(  ;t) follow a power law with the power exponent close to minus  four  but  only  for  horizontal  trends  in  prices.  It  is because  the  r(  ;t)  terms  can  be  taken  constant  in  the simultaneous ratios D(  ;t)/r(  ;t) thus, D(  ;t)  R(  ;t).

Distributions of the R(  =1min;t) from the available data of several forex  instruments depicting  the  known  power law with the index of -4 or those from several other instruments with no clear power law are exemplified in Figures 2 (a) and (b), respectively. On inspection of Figs. 2 (a) and (b) it can be observed that the recently mentioned power law cannot be  treated  as  universal  because  it  occurs  not  in  all  of  the investigated time intervals.

It is worth underlining that the symmetry relations mentioned  for  D(  ;t)  and  R(  ;t)  in  the  previous  three paragraphs are detected in the distributions of  W(  ;t)  and ω(  ;t), too. Here, the basic reason is that the W(  ;t) distribute symmetrically and V(  ;t) vary smoothly but only if they are obtained  from  heavily  traded  instruments.  Further  on,  a number of extra power law behaviors are  explored in the distributions of the simultaneous ratios (R  /ω  ) with various values for  the  integers  and  .  However,  further  dealing with symmetric distributions or the algebra for ratios of the power law distributions is  not  relevant  to  this  paper.  The interested reader may be referred to the papers cited in [9] for the differences or ratios of distributions.

## iiDistributions in rank order

It  is  known  that  if  the  power  exponent  of  a  power  law distribution is less than or equal to minus two then that of the cumulative distribution of the same random variable is greater  by  one.  Moreover,  the  cumulative  distribution  is simply proportional to the rank of that variable [1]. Thus, the power  exponents  for  the  rank/frequency  plots  can be expected to attain the values close to -3, -3, -1, -1, and -1 for the D, R, W, ω, and S, respectively. With the aim of testing that claim, the event frequencies of the D, R, -R, W, ω, and S from the EURUSD in 2012 with τ=1 min are organized in the  decreasing  rank  order  and  presented  in  Figure  3.  The reader  may  utilize  the  Supplemental  Material  I,  which  is available for download from the link given in [10], to study various relevant rank/frequency plots.

On inspection  of  Fig.  3  (and  the  figures  displayed  in  the Supplemental Material I) it can be observed that the power exponents of the rank distributions of the derivatives D, -R, and R with τ=1min are commonly around -3. Note that those exponents come out around -3 also for the absolute values of  the  same  derivatives  as  can  be  found  in  Supplemental Material  I.  Moreover,  the  power  exponents  for  the  same derivatives or magnitudes of those are commonly around -4 in  the  empirical  distributions  which were  discussed under the previous heading. Furthermore, the computed data for R and -R follow each other closely which is due to the almost bilateral symmetry observed in the related empirical distributions.  It  is  worth  underlining  that  similar  plots  are obtained from the asserted derivatives or negative of them which were computed using the data sampled in different years. However,  important  alterations occurred in the distributions as a result of the varied sampling periods. For example, less clear power law behaviors occurred in the data obtained  with  long  sampling  periods  as  exemplified  in Figure 4.

Therefore,  the  power  law  behaviors  are  sensitive  to  the sampling  periods.  Moreover,  the  power  exponents  in  the empirical distributions are known to depend on the utilized bin sizes [11].  Further  on,  disregarding  a  number  of contrastive  data  may  cause  unreliable  estimations  of  the related power exponents [1].

Hence, the known processes for estimating power exponents of the power laws lack confidence. In other words, power law  approaches  for  investigating  a  number  of  empirical distribution  types,  such  as  the  distributions  of  financial derivatives are open to dispute, if not totally meaningless.

## iiiCollapsing

The Supplemental Material II [12] is used to obtain several simulations exhibited under this heading, such as those in Figures  5  -  8.  On  inspection  of  those  figures  it  can  be observed that the proposed model is capable of simulating various  distributions  involving  power  law  regimes  with positive or negative power exponents. It is obvious that the fluctuations at the tails of the simulations obtained using Eq. (9) after assuming X  Y n (with y=0) can be decreased by increasing the value of J in the same equation.

Now,  let  us  test  whether  the  novel  model  is  useful  for approximating the very financial distributions of the investigated derivatives with various τ. It is known that least squares  fitting  is  one  of  the  most  favored  processes  for approximating discrete distributions with continuous functions. But instead, the above described data collapsing processes will be followed in this section. Another aim is to test whether it is possible to obtain an approximate function for the empirical distributions of a specific financial parameter obtained from a given instrument with a certain sampling period in terms of another approximate function for  the  empirical  distributions  of  the  same  or  different financial  parameter  obtained  from  the  same  or  different instrument  with  the  same  or  different  sampling  period.  It should  be  noted  that  the  distributions  of  the  R(τ=1min;t) calculated from the available data  of  EURUSD  and XAGUSD are used to exemplify the application of Eq. (32) in  the  Supplemental  Material  III  (a)  and  (b),  respectively [13].

Let us consider Ψ(R) from the available data specific to a financial instrument. The model parameters will be n=4 and Bmin=0.  The Bmax will be defined for each instrument as the value of the mode of the empirical distributions Ψ. However, the extreme values Bmax are found to depend on the sampling periods (τ) as exhibited in Figures 9 (a) and (b), Figure 10, and Table 3. On inspection of Table 3 and Fig. 10 it can be observed  that  Bmax  for  the  investigated  forex  instruments commonly  follow  a  clear  power  law  with  the  common power exponent around 1.4 as a function of the sampling frequencies (1/τ) in Hz. Hence, Eq. (30) can be written as that  Bmax  8.5/  1.4 but  only  approximately.  The  actual relations used for the collapsing applications are;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where τ is in seconds.

The result of the data collapsing process following Eq. (32) and using the parameters in Table 2 is exemplified for the eleven-year-data from EURUSD and XAGUSD in Figures 11 (a) and (b), respectively. On inspection of Figs. 11 (a) and  (b),  and  the  applications  presented  in  Supplemental Material III (a) and (b) it can be observed that the proposed model is reliable for precise approximations of the empirical distributions of the R(τ;t) from EURUSD and XAGUSD. It is worth noting that each of the distributions plotted in Figs. 11 (a) and (b) involve nearly 4.125 million computed data.

Also, one can test the reliability of Eq. (33). Results of the collapsing processes for the R(τ;t) from the available data of EURUSD and XAGUSD are displayed in Figures 12 (a) and (b), respectively. The reader is referred to the Supplemental Material III (c) and Material III (d) for investigating other examples of the current collapsing process [14].

On inspection of Figs. 11 (a) and (b), and Figs. 12 (a) and (b) it can be observed that the recent results support each other. Moreover, it is obvious that the applications of Eqs. (32)  and  (33)  are  not  limited  to  distributions  involving power law behaviors with power exponent around -4. They can be used for the distributions of S(τ,t) from various forex instruments, too. The  reader may  note  that the rank distributions of the S(τ=1 min,t) involve power law behavior with  the  power  exponent  around  -1  as  mentioned  several times, previously. For that reason, Eq. (29) can be used to approximate  the  rank  distributions  of  the  S(τ=1  min,t)  as exemplified in Figures 13 (a) and (b). The reader may utilize the Supplemental Material IV for various new simulations for the most recently mentioned approximating process [15].

## ivMixed behaviors

The  above  presented  results  indicate  that  the  proposed model is capable of approximating various mixed behaviors in the empirical distributions. For example, the R- and Sdistributions commonly involve horizontal and power law behaviors near the modes and tails, respectively. Moreover, they can be approximated in terms of the function defined in Eq. (28).

Another type of mixed distributions may involve Gaussian, exponential and power law behaviors at a time. For example, the cumulative probability distributions of net wealth in the UK and those of tax returns for USA in 1997, both of which involve different regimes are exhibited in Figures 14 (a) and (b), respectively.

A  simulation  in  terms  of  Eq.  (28),  and  with  n=1,  y=7, Bmin=0,  Bmax=1,  and  β=1  can  be  generated  to  cover  the power-law and exponential regimes in the same distribution as exemplified in Figures 15 (a) and (b).

The  reader  may  use  the  Supplemental  Material  V  for generating various simulations exhibiting different regimes at a time [16].

## DISCUSSION and CONCLUSION

It  is  empirically  predicted  that  frequency  distributions  of various  financial  parameters,  such  as  simple  and  relative changes of prices and traded volumes, and their simultaneous ratios  involve  mixed  behaviors. They depict horizontal behaviors around the modes, almost power law decays shaping the tails as well. Moreover, the whole body of those behaviors can be well approximated in terms of the proposed three-parameter model, one of which may be taken zero. Another parameter stands for the mode value, and the third one stands for the power exponent of the related power law behavior. Hence, the model can be used to obtain an approximating  function  for  a  specific  type  of  empirical distributions  in  terms  of  that  for  another  type.  Therefore, empirical distributions of several financial parameters obtained from various instruments using various sampling periods can be collapsed onto one another or an arbitrary real number, as well.

Similarities and dissimilarities between physics and finance

The above presented theory and its results indicate that the proposed  model  works,  especially  if  the  uniform  real random variables follow exponentially decreasing probabilities. For example, it is known that the time rate of nuclear disintegrations in a specific radioactive material is constant.  Thus,  the  transmutations  occur  exponentially  in time.  Suppose  further  that  a  number  of  atom  types  are present  in  the  material,  and  the  disintegration  rates  attain uniformly distributed random values. Then, the radioactive abundances will follow Eq. (12) but only after replacing the X with time t. Moreover, the rates may vary following Eqs. (15)  and  (16);  that  is,  with  constant  differencing.  In  that case, the distributions will follow that Z' in Eq. (19) which is similar to Bose-Einstein occupancies in quantum statistics. The recently mentioned differencing values occur due  to  the  price  steps  which  may  well  be  different  in different time intervals for a forex market. More specifically, the prices and thus the price steps are defined as  an  integer  times  a  small  fraction  (~10 -5 )  of  unit  of  the related currency. In that case, the result for the distributions is that Z'' in Eq. (22).

It should be noted that the binning sizes used for obtaining the empirical distributions must be around the price steps. If those sizes are smaller than the price steps then several bins will be empty. On the other hand, large bin sizes may cause passing over various relevant information about the distributions. Moreover, number of the executed data must be near the reciprocal of the related price step for obtaining full bins. Otherwise, the results may be misleading.

Conclusively, natural and human-made systems may depict similar  behaviors  if  the  underlying  mechanisms  for  the related event frequency distributions occur similarly. That may explain why a diversity of empirical distribution types involve almost power law behaviors, and why those laws are ubique in physics, finance and several more disciplines.

With the aim of explaining the financial power laws it can be argued that each of the numerous traders follow a specific strategy or an agent follows a number of different strategies equally  well,  while  trading  a  voluminous  instrument.  For example, the stop-loss or take-profit levels (in percentages) may be diverse. Moreover, those levels may be uniformly distributed  around  the  prices  at  a  time.  Furthermore,  the number of those levels may be increasing exponentially as they come close to the current prices. Hence, the realizations of the fails and successes may be distributed in a bilateral symmetric manner in event frequencies per unit of capital. Due to those reasons, the model parameters y and n in Eq. (28) are expected to be equal to zero and an even integer, respectively.

Specifically  speaking,  the  buying  and  selling  processes occur with almost equal probabilities within a considerable time interval normally; i.e., away from transition eras. Also, the probabilities for profits and losses are almost equal in the same interval. Therefore, the growth and regression of the used  capitals  are  reversible  processes  with  almost  equal magnitudes  for  the  process  rates.  Thus,  the  parameters defined  in  Eqs.  (1)-(5)  distribute  in  a  bilateral  symmetric manner  involving  almost  power  law  behaviors  with  the power exponents in even integers. However, nuclear disintegrations  are  not  reversible  and  they  depict  almost power law behavior with odd integer which is unity. Note that  this  situation  can  be  observed  in  various  phenomena, such as 1/f noise and population distributions of the living cities. In other words, the occurrence of Pareto distribution or  Zipf  law  in  urban  may  be  attributed  to  an  irreversible process, such as population growth.

## Conclusion

Distributions of several financial parameters, such as relative returns involve power law behaviors. That conclusion is in agreement with the results presented in [5]. Moreover, power law, exponential and Gauss behaviors can be observed in different parts of an investigated distribution [6]. Furthermore, a function can be used for approximating several types of empirical distributions, but with different parameters. It means that one may obtain the approximation of  a  specific  type  of  empirical  distributions  from  another approximation  but  after  choosing  a  suitable  set  of  model parameters. Thus, various distributions of derivatives can be collapsed onto other ones in terms of a formula. Note that the formula proposed in Eqs. (28) and (29) is simple with regard to that used in [6]. This author challenges that there may  be  a  class  of  equivalent  formulas  for  collapsing  the financial data.

## APPENDIX

Supplemental  Material  I  is  composed  of  two  Microsoft Office  Excel  sheets.  The  historical  data  sampled  with  1 minute period from the EURUSD in different years can be found in Sheet2 and the distributions of the derivatives D, R, W, ω and S in Eqs. (1)-(5) and those of their magnitudes in decreasing rank order can be found in Sheet1 which are indicated in yellow and blue, respectively. The data in the columns A and B of Sheet1 can be deleted and new data can be copied from the Sheet2 and pasted in a special manner for  the  values  within  the  A  and  B  columns  in  Sheet1. Depending on the configuration of Excel program used by the reader, the new computations take some time and the graphs get updated.

Supplemental  Material  II  involves  the  simulations  of  the proposed model in Eq. (29) with y=0 in logarithmic and loglog  scales  in  Sheet1  and  Sheet2,  respectively.  The  reader will enter a real number in A1 cell in a sheet to define the power exponent and wait for a while (as in the previous case) for the updates to be completed.

Supplemental Material III (a) and (b), and (c) and (d) can be used  with  the  aim  of  investigating  the  results  of  the performed data collapsing process  for  EURUSD  and XAGUSD  in  terms  of  Eqs.  (32),  and  for  EURUSD  and XAGUSD in terms of (33), respectively.

Supplemental Material IV involves various applications of that Z' in Eq. (19).  The data in the A and B columns can be copied down from the Sheet2 of the Supplemental Material I, as described above. The parameters D, R, W, ω and S will be computed automatically. The parameters in Y3 and Y4 cells can be varied for obtaining a diversity of results.

Supplemental Material V involves simulations for the mixed behaviors of exponential and power law. The value of the b in the cell of E4 can be used to multiply the values of the (Bmin) and (Bmax) instead of changing them manually.

## Acknowledgments

This paper is dedicated to the etched memories of Dietrich Stauffer who was always eager for friendly discussions. The author is thankful to Victor Yakovenko for his permission for reproduction of two figures used in Figs. 14 (a) and (b). A special thank goes to Mr. Murat Duman from Orta Doğu Teknik Üniversitesi Bilgi İşlem Daire Başkanlığı, who assisted recording and sampling data.

## REFERENCE LIST (*) caglart@metu.edu.tr

1. Newman M., E., J., Power laws, Pareto distributions and Zipf's law, Contemporary Physics, 46 , 323-351 (2005). (arXiv:cond-mat/0412004). Also, Clauset A., Shalizi C. R., and Newman M., E., J., Power-Law Distributions in Empirical Data, SIAM Rev., 51 , 661-703 (2009). Also, Reed W., J., The Pareto, Zipf and other power laws, Economics Letters 74 , 15-19 (2001).
2. Bak, P., Tang, C. &amp; Wiesenfeld, K., Self-Organized Criticality: An Explanation of 1/f Noise, 59 , 381-384 (1987).
3. Carlson, J., M., &amp; Doyle, J., Highly optimized tolerance: A mechanism for power laws in designed systems, Phys. Rev., 60 , 1412-1427 (1999). (arXiv:cond-mat/9812127)
4. Newman, M., The power of design, Nature, 405 , 412413 (2000).
5. Liu Y., et al. The statistical properties of the volatility of price fluctuations. Phys. Rev. E 60, 1390-1400 (1999). (arxiv:cond-mat/9903369). Also, Gabaix X et al., A theory of power-law distributions in financial market fluctuations. Nature, 423, 267-270 (2003).
6. Dragulescu A. A. and Yakovenko V. M., Statistical mechanics of money, The European Physical Journal B 17 , 723-729 (2000). Also, Silva A. C. and Yakovenko V. M., Comparison between the probability distribution of returns in the Heston model and empirical data for stock indexes, Physica A 324 , 303-310 (2003). Also, Silva A. C., Prange R. E. and Yakovenko V. M, Exponential distribution of financial returns at mesoscopic time lags: a new stylized fact, Physica A 344 , 227-235 (2004). Also, Yakovenko V., M., Econophysics, Statistical Mechanics Approach to, arXiv:0709.3662, (2008).
7. URL: http://www.tickstory.com
8. See pages 69-75 in Haigh J., Probability Models (Second Edition, Springer-Verlag London 2002, 2013).
9. Fama E., F., and Roll R., Some Properties of Symmetric Stable Distributions, Journal of the American Statistical Association 63 , 817-836, (1968). Ramberg J., S., and Bruce W., S., An Approximate Method for Generating Symmetric Random Variables, Communications of the ACM (Association for Computing Machinery), 15 , 987990 (1972). Dynkin E., B., Mandelbaum A., Symmetric Statistics, Poisson Point Processes, and Multiple Wiener Integrals, The Annals of Statistics, 11 , 739-745, (1983). Gregory L., P., et. al., Computational Methods for measuring the Difference of Empirical Distributions, Amer. J. Agr. Econ. 87 , 353-365 (2005).
10. Supplemental Material I; worksheet, 196,205kB, URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1HfMVfyuUl89mSiBkmGr p2GHLb6ga1XA8/view?usp=sharing
11. Virkar Y., and Clauset A., Power-Law Distributions in Binned Data, The Annals of Applied Statistics, 8 , 89-119 (2014).
12. Supplemental Material II; worksheet, 1,570kB, URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1sF1eudcsGbrpxBUBMaUe rn4\_acjHkETb/view?usp=sharing

13. Supplemental Material III (a) and (b); worksheets, 12,111kB and 12,934kB, respectively, URLs:

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1OfVpZvjramHGozFmSVI 72\_sSbH6-VjTd/view?usp=sharing and https://drive.google.com/file/d/1OaBg65n8PSAU2mkrwL mIKVSzW\_t5OsBG/view?usp=sharing, respectively.

14. Supplemental Material III (c) and (d) ; worksheets, 10,581kB and 11,009kB, respectively, URLs:

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1kXGxnQHOxdBrdaEl6jpQ fnq0WyEzbcBl/view?usp=sharing and https://drive.google.com/file/d/1kf1OmvnV8bp0j2kGCRJ4 exdC4Nfv5rJI/view?usp=sharing, respectively.

15. Supplemental Material IV; worksheet, 205,187kB, URL:

https://drive.google.com/file/d/1\_1lCWg1Cz7tijMJNgPddi E8OMs5MPWyn/view?usp=sharing.

16. Supplemental Material V; worksheet, 14,610kB, URL: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1tD\_n2ItQ\_rwjCw5HHqvL A3tuI0PFh0Pn/view?usp=sharing.

TABLES

| year (20 . .)  Symbol  Name  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  AUDCAD  Australian Dollar/Canadian Dollar  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  AUDCHF  Australian Dollar/Swiss Franc  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  AUDJPY  Australian Dollar/Japanese Yen  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  AUDNZD  Australian Dollar/New Zealand Dollar  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  AUDSGD  Australian Dollar/Singapore Dollar  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  AUDUSD  Australian Dollar/US Dollar  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  CADCHF  Canadian Dollar/Swiss Franc  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  CADHKD  Canadian Dollar/Hong Kong Dollar  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  CADJPY  Canadian Dollar/Japanese Yen  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  CHFJPY  Swiss Franc/Japanese Yen  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  CHFPLN  Swiss Franc/Polish Zloty  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  CHFSGD  Swiss Franc/Singapore Dollar  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURAUD  Euro/Australian Dollar  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURCAD  Euro/Canadian Dollar  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURCHF  Euro/Swiss Franc  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURDKK  Euro/Danish Krone  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURGBP  Euro/Pound Sterling  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURHKD  Euro/Hong Kong Dollar  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURHUF  Euro/Hungarian Forint  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURJPY  Euro/Japanese Yen  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURMXN  Euro/Mexican Nuevo Peso  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURNOK  Euro/Norwegian Krone  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURNZD  Euro/New Zealand Dollar  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURPLN  Euro/Polish Zloty  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURRUB  Euro/Russian Ruble  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURSEK  Euro/Swedish Krona  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURSGD  Euro/Singapore Dollar  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURTRY  Euro/Turkish Lira  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURUSD  Euro/US Dollar  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  EURZAR  Euro/South Africa Rand  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  GBPAUD  Pound Sterling/Australian Dollar  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  GBPCAD  Pound Sterling/Canadian Dollar  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  GBPCHF  Pound Sterling/Swiss Franc  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  GBPJPY  Pound Sterling/Japanese Yen  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  GBPNZD  Pound Sterling/New Zealand Dollar  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  GBPUSD  Pound Sterling/US Dollar  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  HKDJPY  Hong Kong Dollar/Japanese Yen  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  MXNJPY  Mexican Nuevo Peso/Japanese Yen  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 1   The investigated data are obtained from the indicated instruments in the indicated years.

| NZDCAD  New Zealand Dollar/Canadian Dollar  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  NZDCHF  New Zealand Dollar/Swiss Franc  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  NZDJPY  New Zealand Dollar/Japanese Yen  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  NZDSGD  New Zealand Dollar/Singapore Dollar  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  NZDUSD  New Zealand Dollar/US Dollar  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  SGDJPY  Singapore Dollar/Japanese Yen  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDBRL  US Dollar/Brazilian Real  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDCAD  US Dollar/Canadian Dollar  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDCHF  US Dollar/Swiss Franc  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDDKK  US Dollar/Danish Krone  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDHKD  US Dollar/Hong Kong Dollar  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDHUF  US Dollar/Hungarian Forint  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDJPY  US Dollar/Japanese Yen  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDMXN  US Dollar/Mexican Nuevo Peso  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDNOK  US Dollar/Norwegian Krone  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDPLN  US Dollar/Polish Zloty  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDRUB  US Dollar/Russian Ruble  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDSEK  US Dollar/Swedish Krona  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDSGD  US Dollar/Singapore Dollar  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDTRY  US Dollar/Turkish Lira  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  USDZAR  US Dollar/South Africa Rand  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  XAGUSD  Silver/US Dollar  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  XAUUSD  Gold/US Dollar  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  ZARJPY  South Africa Rand/Japanese Yen  -  -  -  -  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2   The mean (y) and standard deviation (1/β) values for the empirical distributions of the available data (see, Table 1) from the asserted forex instruments.

| τ (min)  1  5  10  60  100  250  EURUSD y  4.28x10 -5  3.01x10 -5  2.28x10 -5  2.44x10 -5  2.55x10 -5  2.53x10 -5  EURUSD 1/β  304  308  308  304  303  302  XAGUSD y  -1.46x10 -3  7.42x10 -4  4.88x10 -4  2.61x10 -4  2.39x10 -4  2.10x10 -4  XAGUSD 1/β  12.5  26.4  35.4  63.3  69.8  79.2   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 3   A least squares fitting results for the parameters of Eq. (30); (ars) stands for the adjusted coefficient of determination (Adj. R-Square) and (se) is the standard error.

| parity  EURUSD  EURJPY  GBPUSD  USDJPY  ars  0.99904  0.99968  0.99921  0.99934  property  C  α  C  α  C  α  C  α  value  8.99124  1.4481  8.93249  1.4624  9.02088  1.44562  8.95906  1.44871  se  0.06407  0.02003  0.03733  0.01167  0.058  0.01813  0.05343  0.01671  parity  EURTRY  USDTRY  XAGUSD  XAUUSD  ars  0.99914  0.99782  0.99994  0.99904  property  C  α  C  α  C  α  C  α  value  8.41786  1.40538  8.46095  1.40524  7.97702  1.40292  8.63618  1.44639  se  0.05882  0.01839  0.09387  0.02935  0.01578  0.00494  0.06407  0.02003   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Figure 1   Empirical distributions of relative returns R(τ=1min;t) obtained from several financial instruments with bin size of 0.0001. Note that the vertical axes are logarithmic.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 2   The same as in Figs. 1 (a) and (b) but the results are presented in log-log scales. Note that the two sided arrow in (a) has a slope around -4 which indicates the index of the power law involved in the related distributions for large magnitudes.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 12   Data collapsing after Eq.(33) and using the parameters given in Tables 2 and 3 are exemplified in log-log scales for EURUSD and XAGUSD in (a) and (b), respectively. The same plots are displayed in logarithmic scales in the related insets.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 13   Approximating the rank distributions of the S(1min,t) from EURUSD in 2006 in terms of that Z' defined in Eq. (29) is displayed in (a) and a measure for the success of that trial is given in (b). The used parameters are y=0, B=1 and 1/β=524,000.

<!-- image -->

Figure 14   Cumulative probability distributions of net wealth in the UK are shown in (a) and those of tax returns for USA in 1997 are shown in (b) where the plots are in log-log scales in the main panels and in log-scale in the insets. (From ref [6], used with permission.)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->