## Trading Signals In VIX Futures*

M.  Avellanedat, T.  N.  Li+, A.  Papanicolaou§, G.  Wang1

November 22,  2021

## Abstract

We propose a  new approach for  trading VIX futures.  We assume that the term structure of VIX futures follows  a Markov model.  Our trading strategy selects a position in VIX futures by maximizing the expected utility for a  day-ahead horizon given the current shape and level of the term structure.  Computationally, we model the functional dependence between the VIX futures curve, the VIX futures positions, and the expected utility as a deep neural network with five  hidden layers.  Out-of-sample backtests of the VIX futures trading strategy suggest that this approach gives rise to reasonable portfolio performance, and to positions in which the in­ vestor will be either long or short VIX futures contracts depending on the market environment.

Keywords: Contango, Cross Validation, Deep Learning, Feedforward Neural Networks, Trad­ ing Signals, VIX Futures.

AMS Subject Codes: 62P05,  68T05,  91B28.

## 1 lntrod  uction

The shape of the VIX futures  curve is  informative if it shows a  shape that is  likely  to persist for  only  a  short  period of time. In this situation,  there  may be a  simple VIX futures  trade that will produce profits when the curve reverts to a  more typical shape.  For example, if the curve has a hump then there may be a long-short VIX futures position, or a calendar spread, with zero entry cost, which will pay a positive amount when the curve reverts to contango.  Ideally, such a reversion will  happen  quickly so  that  the trade generates  a  profit  with near certainty. In practice there is some  risk  because  most  trades  involve  non-zero  probability  of losses. Nevertheless,  over  long­ term horizons  with multiple trading opportunities,  losses  can be  diminished if trading strategies are constructed to optimize the expected value of a  suitable  utility function. VIX futures  are  a good choice for  such trading strategies because their curves have a  propensity to quickly revert to contango, which allows for fast turnaround before the next trading opportunity.  1

We use a stationary VIX futures curve model, as done in Avellaneda and Papanicolaou (2019), to  generate  day-ahead  scenarios  of VIX  futures. Let U (  ·) denote  a  chosen  utility  function. A

*The authors would like to thank Brian Healy and Xunyang Wu for their feedback and support.

tDepartment  of  Mathematics, New  York  University. 251 Mercer  Street, New  York, NY,  10012. avel­ lane@cims. nyu. edu

+Department of Mathematics, New York University. 251 Mercer Street, New York, NY, 10012. thomli@cims. nyu. edu

§Department of Mathematics,  North  Carolina State  University. Campus Box 8205,  Raleigh,  NC  27695. apa­ pani@ncsu.edu. The author is partially supported by NSF grant DMS-1907518.

'lrDepartment of Mathematics, Columbia University.  2990 Broadway New York, NY 10027. gw2376@columbia.edu 1  Here,  "quickly"  means relative to other curves such as crude oil or treasuries.

trading signal is  the optimal trading action that maximizes expected utility under the probability distribution of the model,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where t denotes time, lE  denotes expected value,  and where

X t = VIX futures curve at time t, vector valued,

A= a  set of possible trades/actions a, vector valued,

Rt+l (a) = change in position from  time t  tot+ 1 if action a EA is taken.

The action space A consists of various positions in VIX futures,  and Rt+1 (a) is  a  function  of the action a and the transition occurring in the VIX futures curve,

We take A to be a  finite  set of trades that are predetermined, and we  assume that the transition distribution for Xt is  also  given.  We estimate the expected value in equation  (1.1)  using  a  deep neural network,  see Goodfellow et al.  (2016).  Historical VIX futures  data are applied to estimate the parameters for  the model of Xt, and then the neural network is trained using simulated data generated  by  this  estimated  model. In  our  model,  the  most  likely  curve  is  a  contango,  and  all other  curve  shapes  will  revert  toward  this  most  likely  state. To  illustrate,  Figure  1.1  shows  a contango  and  a  backwardation curve  of VIX  futures. We  construct  a  trading  signal  by  solving the optimization problem  (1.1)  with A consisting of four  different  allocations  in one-month  and five-month rolling VIX futures strategies (see Section 2.1  where we  define these rolling strategies). For  most  contango  curves,  the  action  suggested  by the  trading  signal  is  to  long  the  one-month strategy and to short the five-month  strategy.  In backwardation,  the suggested trade is  to short the one-month and go  2x  long the five-month.  In backtesting of this trading signal,  we  find  that if transaction costs are  not too high,  then for  a  trading period of around 200  days,  there can be profits of double-digit percentage and Sharpe ratios significantly higher than one.

## 1.1 Literature of Related Research

The VIX has been the  "fear gauge"  for  the financial  markets of the United States since  1993, see Whaley (2000) and Whaley (2009).  Since 2004, the market for VIX futures has made it possible to gain exposure to VIX,  and the creation of exchange-traded notes  (ETNs)  has made it possible to gain exposure with greater ease, see Alexander et al.  (2015).  The significance of mean reversion and contango in VIX futures and ETNs is analyzed in Avellaneda and Papanicolaou (2019).  Mean reversion is also the key assumption in the class of stochastic volatility models driven by stationary factor  processes,  see  for  instance  Fouque  et  al.  (2000). Historically,  volatility  models  in  finance have relied on the Markov property, but recently there has been a trend toward VIX pricing driven by  fractional  Brownian  motion,  see  Bayer  et  al.  (2016). A  Markovianization  of the  fractional­ curve  model  is  achieved  by  considering  the  infinite-dimensional  futures  curve  in  its  entirety,  see Euch and Rosenbaum (2018).  Foundational concepts in machine learning such as convergence and deep learning extensions can be found  in Mohri et al.  (2018)  and Sutton and Barto  (2018).  The implementation of high-dimensional  learning has  been made  possible  by  recent  developments  in neural  network  software  such  as  TensorFlow  and  PyTorch. An example  of note  is  the  deep-Q neural network  (DQN)  algorithm,  see  Mnih et al.  (2015)  and Fan et al.  (2020).  For applications to finance see  Aldridge and Avellaneda (  2020),  Sirignano and Spiliopoulos  (  2017),  Casgrain et al. (2019),  and Ruf and Wang (2021).  Studies on high-dimensional deep learning have highlighted the improvement in out-of-sample prediction when large neural networks are utilized, see Zhang et al. (2017),  Belkin et al.  (2018),  and Hastie et al.  (2022).  Evaluation of out-of-sample performance is often done using cross-validation methods, but special care needs to be taken when applying these methods to financial  data, see  Arlot  and Celisse  (2010),  Arnott et  al.  (2019),  and Ruf and Wang (2020).  In particular,  with times series  data there can be significant  auto-correlations,  yet  cross­ validation methods are still applicable so long as the time series are assumed to satisfy some basic assumptions  such  as  zero  auto-correlations  in  the  noise  process,  see  Burman  and  Nolan  (1992), Bergmeir and Benitez (2012),  and Bergmeir et al.  (2018).

Figure 1.1:  The VIX futures' contango curve seen on 2019-11-11  (left) and the backwardation seen on 2020-03-11  (right).  A trading signal is constructed based on the value and shape of this curve.

<!-- image -->

## 1.2 Main Results and Structure of the Article

The focus  of this article is  on a  new method for  trading VIX futures,  wherein trading signals are the  optimal action function  given  by equation  (1.1).  We implement this new  approach on a variety of utility functions  and utilize deep neural networks to estimate the objective in equation (1.1).  We conduct cross-validation studies using a k-fold procedure.  We use historical VIX futures data consisting of end-of-day VIX futures curves from January 2008 to February 2021.  In out-of­ sample tests we find that trading signals constructed with deep neural networks have the potential to produce reasonable profits and Sharpe ratios.  These findings are an indication that VIX futures curves contain useful predictive information for trading, and that deep neural networks are able to filter  and apply the relevant information from the curves.

The article is  organized  as  follows: Section  2  introduces the VIX curve  model,  explains  how parameters  are  estimated,  and  describes  the  futures  positions  that  we  optimize  over;  Section  3 presents  cross-validation  studies  of the  neural  network  method on historical  VIX  futures  data - both  with  and  without  transaction  costs;  Section  4  concludes;  Appendix  A  shows  a  real-time backtest  that we  conducted with weekly  re-training of the  neural network  from  December  28th, 2020 through February 19th, 2021; Appendix A also provides a detailed account of how the outputs of the neural network map to exact trading positions in VIX futures;  Appendix B provides metrics for  various non-neural network benchmarks.

## 2 A  Model for  Trading VIX Futures

Let t denote  time  and  let  VIXt  denote  the  value  of VIX  on  that  date. Let d be  an  integer such that d + 1 is  the number of VIX futures contracts 2 ,  and let T1 &lt; T2 &lt; ·  ·  ·  &lt; Td+1 denote the expiration dates of these VIX futures contracts.  Let us denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where t = 0, 1, 2, ·  ·  · , Ti is  the current date.  A term-structure of constant-maturity VIX futures (CMFs),  each with  horizon  0i-many  months,  for  i  =  1,  2,  3,  ·  ·  · , d, are  constructed  as  a  linear interpolation of the VIX futures,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where t :S Ti :S t + 0i :S Ti+ 1 and w: = T~::~~:t; note now that ½i is  defined for  all t. Note also that VIXt is like a zero-horizon CMF. CMFs are preferable for statistical estimation because they do not have non-stationary effects that are caused by contract expiry.

## 2.1 Rolling VIX Futures Strategies

A rolling VIX futures strategy maintains the CMF weights of equation (2.2)  for  fixed  maturity 0i. For each i,  we  let Ji denote the value of the rolling VIX futures strategy with horizon 0i, for which returns are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where !Hf = If+ 1 -If,  D.Ff = Ff+l -Ff,  r ~ 0  is  the  interest  rate,  and D.t = 2 ~ 2 . Simple calculation leads to an equivalent expression to equation (2.3)  in terms of the CMFs,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

. wi -wi where w; = '+lt ' &lt; 0  for  all t &lt; Ti. The drift  term in  equation  (2.4)  contains  the  quantity referred to as the roll yield,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

2 The VIX futures term structure is a  collection of VIX futures contracts with nine monthly maturities, and six weekly contracts that are not very liquid.

which we  utilize to re-write equation (2.4)  as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From equation (2.5)  we see that if ½i is  a stationary process then the return rate of the i th rolling VIX futures strategy has a  most likely value equal to the risk-free rate plus the mode of Roll~+l · As shown in Avellaneda and Papanicolaou (2019), the most likely VIX futures curves are contango and the most likely roll yields are negative, which explains why the value of the rolling VIX futures strategies decay.

In the  past  there have  been some  attempts to apply  statistical arbitrage  techniques  to VIX. One idea is  to  use  the Engle-Granger test  to find  co-integrated pairs  among rolling VIX futures strategies,  see  Engle  and  Granger  (1987). For the one-month rolling  VIX  futures  strategy (0 = one  month)  and  the  five-month  strategy (0 =  five  months),  a  simple  linear  regression  of  one set  of  returns  on  the  other  suggests  that  we  should  short  the  one-month  and  long  0.9x  five­ month.  However,  this is  not a  good pair to trade because the residual is  not stationary; for  daily data between  2008  and  2020  the  values  of these  positions  do  not  reject  a  unit  root  hypothesis. In  addition,  historical  backtesting  shows  that  these  trades  have  large  drawdowns  and  negative returns  at  the  most  inopportune times. Another possibility is  to match volatility levels  between the one-month and five-month  rolling VIX futures  portfolios,  which suggests  a  position 1  x  short the  one-month  and  2x  long  the five-month,  respectively. This  was  a  popular  trade  during  the decade of 2010,  but also had large drawdowns.  The conclusion is that allocations in these rolling VIX futures portfolios are useful but there needs to be a  rule for  deciding when to open and close the trade.

Remark 2.1 (Exchange Traded Notes). Rolling  VIX futures  portfolios  represent  the  underlying redemption  value  for  several  VIX ETNs. Such  notes  are  among  the  more  liquid  instruments for gaining  exposure  to  VIX,  see  Alexander et  al.  (2015). Some  of the  more  liquid  ETNs include  the iPath  VXX  (long  one-month),  the  iPath  VXZ  (long  five-month),  the  VelocityShares  TVIX (2x long  one-month),  and the  iPath XIV (short  one-month). Trading  in these  notes  can  be  replicated with  trades  in  the  rolling  VIX futures  strategies. However in practice,  replication  is  not  entirely accurate.  Firstly,  the  issuer of a note  may have  call-back features  embedded,  which  can  terminate the  note  at  any  time.  Secondly,  the  rolling  VIX futures  strategy is  technically just the  redemption value  and  the  notes  are  free  to  trade  at  market  value, which  means  that  there  may  be  a  slight discrepancy  between the  ETN's returns  and its  respective  rolling futures  formula.

## 2.2 Vector Auto-Regressive Model

The two main quantities that we consider are the CMFs  (½i):=o and the roll yields  (RollD:=i· As  seen from  equation  (2.5),  these  quantities can be used to make short-term predictions on the rolling VIX futures  strategies.  For  example,  the roll  yield  and the anticipated direction of mean reversion could be the basis for  a  trading strategy that performs well in the long term.

For the t th day of a given time period, the VIX futures curve is described by the following state vector,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where all entries of this vector are directly computable from  (VIX 8 , F;, F;, ·  ·  ·  , F8 d+l L'5.t" Given data at times t =  1,  2,  ·  ·  · , T, let X* denote the mode,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

that is, X* is the most likely curve, which is illustrated in Figure 2.1.  The figure displays the mean of the state given  by ,p, Li=l X t, and the mode of the state. Statistical  analysis  in  Avellaneda and Papanicolaou  (2019)  shows  that Xt is  a  stationary stochastic process  whose  historical  time series  exhibits a  tendency to mean revert  towards a  contango curve.  In its most  likely state,  the VIX future is  around 12%-14%, the long-term VIX future is  around 17%-20%, and all in-between CMFs lie on an upward sloping curve.

Figure  2.1:  The mean and modal curves of VIX CMFs (left)  and the mean and modal curves of the roll  yields  (right).  The VIX futures  curves  are usually  in contango,  with the possibility of a volatility spike causing an upward skew in the distributions of VIX futures.  Therefore,  the mean CMF curve is  above the modal curve,  and a  similar relationship appears in the mean and modal curves of the negative roll yields.

<!-- image -->

We take the state vector Xt fort= 1, 2, · ·  ·  , T, center it around the mode, and then place it in a  larger matrix

Note that we  are  centering around the  mode rather than the mean,  which  we  do  for  robustness because CMFs have a heavy right skew.

The vector auto-regressive  (AR)  model for  the state vector is  the following,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Zt is  an  independent  and identically distributed  Gaussian random vector with mean zero and covariance ~The least-squares estimator of A is  given by

-1 T where 'IP= T I:t=l 'IPt· The covariance matrix~ can be estimated by

We can write the returns on the rolling VIX futures strategies from equation (2.5)  as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which will  be useful  in the sequel where we  draw samples from  a  distribution for X t and use  to simulate trading returns.  That is,  we  will  use the vector AR model that is described by equation (2.6)  to simulate Xt, which we  insert into equation (2.7)  for  computing the returns of rolling VIX futures strategies.  Figure 2.2  shows the simulations of the one-month and five-month rolling VIX futures strategies, with each simulation including its respective historical portfolio value.

Figure 2.2:  Simulations of the one-month rolling VIX futures strategy and the five-month rolling VIX futures strategy, which are generated from the vector AR model in equation (2.6).  The dark line  in  each  plot  is  the  historical  value  of the  respective  strategy. The declining  value  in  these rolling strategies is  studied in Avellaneda and Papanicolaou (  2019).

<!-- image -->

3

## 2.3 Trading-Signal Construction

We consider the following  quantity,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This represents the profit or loss for a position in rolling VIX futures strategies 3 . Let A denote the space of admissible actions.  An optimal action is determined by maximizing the expected utility,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the action is  decided by the trader at time t immediately before Rt+1 (a) is  realized,  and where U (R) is  the utility function.

We  denote  by Pt the  value  of  the  trading-signal  portfolio  at  time t, for  which  returns  are computed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a(Xt) =  argmaxaEAlE[U(Rt+1 (a))IXt]In  testing,  we  use  the  time  series  of Pt to compute performance metrics, such as profit percentages and Sharpe ratios.

## 3 Computing the Trading Signals with Historical Data

We  carry out  the method described in  Section 2 on historical VIX futures  data.  Our data is daily,  beginning  April  14 th  of 2008  and  going  until  November 6 th of 2020,  and  consists  of one­ month,  two-month,  three-month,  fourth-month,  five-month,  and six-month VIX futures,  in other words, i  = 1, 2,  ·  ·  · , 6 and d = 5 in equation (2.1).  The data is downloadable from the VIX Central website. 4 Using these data, we  construct the time series of VIX CMFs and VIX rolls as given by equation  (2.2)  and equation  (2.4),  respectively.  We take the weights wi that appear in equation (2.2)  to  be wi = w for  all  i  such  that  there  is  100%  in  the  front-month  contract  as  soon  as  the prior future matures, and then 0%  in this front-month at the next maturity date.  We analyze the time series of portfolio value utilizing the following performance metrics:  annualized expected rate of return denoted by lE [Rt (a (Xt))], volatility denoted by std[Rt (a (Xt))], trading profit, Sharpe ratio 5 , and maximum drawdown.

A standard procedure for in-sample training and out-of-sample testing is straightforward:  divide the  data into two  blocks,  with the  first  block  designated  for  in-sample  training,  and the  second block designated for  out-of-sample testing.  More specifically,  we  take the VIX futures curves from April 14 th of  2008  to  August  7th of 2019  for  in-sample  training,  and then  utilize  the remaining curves from August 8 th of 2019 to November 5 th of 2020  for  out-of-sample testing.  But this out­ of-sample  test  is  based  on  a  single  portfolio  run,  which  means  that  good  performance  could  be attributable to luck.  Therefore, to make full  usage of the data, we  apply the method of the k-fold cross-validation.

3 Of course, every strategy of rolling VIX futures is equivalent to an allocation of futures contract  (see equation (2.3)).

4 The VIX Central website:  http://vixcentral.com

5 We compute the Sharpe ratios  by annualized excess  return  being divided  by annualized standard  deviation, where the annualized excess return is  [  TTi=l  (1 + Rt (a (X  t))) r 52 /T (1 + r), and annualized standard deviation is  std [Rt (a (Xt))] v'252.

We  divide the data into k = 10  folds,  each with 316 or 317 days,  and then utilize these folds to conduct ten separate in-sample trainings and out-of-sample testings.  More specifically, we  train on a  configuration of nine  folds,  and then upon the remaining fold  we  conduct  an out-of-sample test,  see  chapter four  of Mohri et  al.  (2018)  for  details on k-fold  cross  validation.  Table 3.1  gives the precise demarcation dates for  the folds.  When we  paste non-contiguous folds,  we  exclude the pasting outlier when estimating the vector AR model (2.6).  For example, in order to out-of-sample test on fold  #5, we  need to paste fold  #4 to fold  #6 for training, and in doing so we  make sure to exclude the data point at the jump from fold  #4 to #6.

Table  3.1: The start date and end date for  each of the ten backtesting folds  in the  k-fold  cross validation.

| Fold#  Time Interval  Fold#  Time Interval  0  2008-04-16 to 2009-07-17  5  2014-07-31  to 2015-10-29  1  2009-07-20 to 2010-10-19  6  2015-10-30 to 2017-02-01  2  2010-10-20 to 2012-01-23  7  2017-02-02 to 2018-05-04  3  2012-01-24 to 2013-04-29  8  2018-05-07 to 2019-08-07  4  2013-04-30 to 2014-07-30  9  2019-08-08 to 2020-11-05   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Our  approach  is  to  utilize  the  training  data  to  estimate  the  parameters  of the  vector  AR model  (2.6)  proposed  in  Section  2.2,  and  then  to  draw  samples  from  the  vector  AR  model  to train  the  neural  network. The  neural  network  is  an  approximation  of  the  functional  form  of lE  [U (Rt+1 (a)) IXtl, see Cybenko (1989)  and Pinkus (1999), for each action a in the action space,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the individual actions are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and  where  I 1 and  I 5 denote  the  one-month  and  the  five-month  rolling VIX futures  strategies, respectively,  as  defined by equation (2.5)  in Section 2.1  .

The  k-fold  cross  validation  described  above  is  susceptible  to  data  leakage  because  utilizing a  vector  AR  model  implies  some  dependence  between  folds,  see  Arnott  et  al.  (2019),  Ruf and Wang (2020).  In the literature,  it  is  argued that cross  validation methods can effective for  auto­ regressive models when noise is uncorrelated,  see  Arlot and Celisse  (2010),  Bergmeir and Benitez (2012),  Bergmeir et  al.  (2018),  Burman and  Nolan  (1992),  and  Cerqueira et  al.  (2020). To  test for  data leakage in our cross-validation studies, we  re-run our cross-validation studies utilizing the non-adjacent block configurations that are proposed in Bergmeir et al.  (2018).  More specifically, we  in-sample train  the  model  utilizing  data from  folds  #2 through  #8,  and then  out-of-sample test the model utilizing data of fold  #0; we  in-sample train the model utilizing data from folds  #3 through #9, and then out-of-sample test the model utilizing data of fold #1; we  in-sample train the model utilizing data from fold  #0 and folds  #4 through #9, and then out-of-sample test the model utilizing data of fold  #2;  and etc.  The purpose for  doing the k-fold  cross-validations with this configurations is  to eliminate the contiguous training folds  that may have information about the testing fold. However,  when we  re-run with these non-contiguous configurations,  we  observe almost no difference compared with the numbers resulting from standard k-fold cross validation.

## 3.1 Neural Network Approach

For general concave utility functions,  there is not an explicit calculation for the expected utility lE  [U (Rt+l (a)) IXt]Therefore,  we  use a  neural network to find  an approximating function.  The architecture of the neural network that we implement is a deep feed-forward neural network (DFN), as  described  in  Goodfellow  et  al.  (2016). For  a  discrete  set  of  actions A = {a1,  a2, ·  ·  · , ap}, the universal  approximation theorem,  see  Cybenko  (1989)  and Pinkus  (1999),  is  a  mathematical theorem to ensure that DFN is  an effective way to estimate the nonlinear mapping

where Q (x, aj) is optimized to approximate lE [U (Rt+ 1 (aj)) IXt = x].  Our approach is to sample X t from  the  vector  AR  model  (2.6)  that  is  proposed  in  Section  2.2,  and  then  use  these  sam­ ples  to train the neural network,  and finally  perform k-fold  cross  validation to test out-of-sample performance of the optimal neural-network trading actions.

The DFN we use has the specifications depicted in Figure 3.1.  We utilized a  dense connective structure between layers,  in other words,  all layers have neurons that are fully connected with the neurons in the previous layer.  It has eleven neurons on the input layer,  each of which represents an element X~ for  a  given i.  The number of neurons on the output layer is  five,  which represents the five  actions in the action space A. We set the number of the hidden layers to five,  each of them containing J = 50 x  11  neurons.  In in-sample training, we  generate 10 5 days of data and run the back-propagation for  15  epochs with a  batch size of 160.  We  used a  tableau method to determine the number of hidden layers and the number of neurons per layer.  The results of this tableau show that portfolio performance has noticeable decline when we  use a dense DFN with too few  neurons and layers  (e.g.,  2 layers with only 20  neurons per layer), and also performs poorly when we  use a dense DFN with too many layers and (e.g.,  8 layers and 1000 neurons per layer).

In the dense DFN, we choose the activation function f (x) to be the Parametric Rectified Linear Unit  (PReLU)  function,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a&gt; 0 with a= 0.1.  For all results that we  present, we  take the PReLU activation function for  both the hidden layers and the output layer of the DFN.  We  repeat all tests using hyperbolic tangent activation function f (x)  = tanh (x)  and linear activation function f (x)  = wx + b for  the output layer,  but the results from  PReLU are slightly better.

Given  the  neurons,  the  layers,  and  the  activation  function,  the  underlying  structure  of Q

## Neural Network Schematic Diagram

Figure 3.1:  Schematic diagram of the deep neural network.  In our studies we  took J = 550,  i.e., 550 neurons in each hidden layer.

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Wt, £ =  l,  2,  ·  ·  · ,  6 is  a  matrix of weights connecting the neurons on the (£ l) th layer to the £ th layer,  and bt, £ = l, 2,  ·  ·  · ,  6  is  a  vector of biasing values for  each layer;  here subscript 6 represents the terminal output layer.

We  train  the  dense  DFN  using  samples  that  are  drawn  from  the  vector  AR  model  (2.6)  of Section  2.2  with  Gaussian  noise. We  generate  independent  and  identically  distributed  samples X6i)  for  i  = 1, 2, ·  ·  · , N from the stationary distribution of the vector AR model (2.6).  We take N =  10 5 . For  each X6i), we  simulate  a  batch of one-step  forward  samples  to  approximate  the conditional expected utility, which we label as R~i,i') (a) for  i'  =  1,  2,  ·  ·  · , M for  each a EA. We took M =  300.  We then fit  the dense DFN to the sample averages by minimizing the quadratic loss  function with respect to the parameters W and b,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

After training, the optimally fitted neural network is then used to compute optimal trading actions, namely, a (Xt) = argmaxa Q (Xt,  a).

## 3.2 Piece-Wise Linear and Exponential Utility Functions

We first  test trading signals constructed using a  piece-wise linear utility function,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and then test using an exponential utility function,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  we  take the  risk  aversion  coefficient  1' =  1.3  for  the  piece-wise  linear  utility  function  and 1' = 3 for the exponential utility function.  We then fit the dense DFN with respect to the piece-wise linear utility function  (3.5)  with the same quadratic loss given in equation (3.4),  and fit  the dense DFN with respect to the exponential utility function (3.6)  by minimizing the quadratic loss of the certainty equivalent,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure  3.2  illustrates  trading-signal  heat  plots  for  the  piece-wise  linear  utility  function  (3.5) and the exponential utility function (3.6).  The most obvious difference is that the piece-wise linear utility  has  states  where  the  trading signals  suggest  to take  position  (0,  0). Table  3.2  and  Table 3.3  display the portfolio metrics for  the k-fold  cross  validation of out-of-sample tests,  and Figure 3.3 shows the time series of portfolio values,  as given by the piece-wise linear utility function  (3.5) and the exponential utility function  (3.6).  By observing these tables and figures,  strong portfolio performance can be concluded based on the values of profits and Sharpe ratios, but it is important also to highlight  the large drawdowns  and the difficulty  they would  pose  in  practice.  In order to perform comprehensive comparisons, we also display some results that are calculated from utilizing benchmarks.  Tables B.l through Table B.5 in Appendix B show similar portfolio metrics for  the SPDR S&amp;P 500 Trust ETF, whose ticker symbol is  SPY, and the four  individual trading actions that are defined in equation  (3.1).  Notice that none of these  benchmarks posts a  positive return over every fold,  whereas the trading signals given by the neural network do.  Moreover,  notice in Appendix B that only for fold #1 of constant trading actions (  -1, 1)  and (  -1, 2)  have comparable performance to the results of the neural network; in all other folds there is not any constant trading action choice that is comparable to the trading strategies that are provided by the neural network.

## 3.3 Transaction Costs

Finally,  it  remains  to  test  if the  trading signals  from  Section 3  can  perform with transaction costs.  Execution of this strategy is  done utilizing market orders, which means that market makers provide liquidity, and therefore, we  cross their bid-ask spread each time when we complete a trade. The price  data that  we  use  in  our  backtests  are  bid-ask  midpoints. Thus,  to  simulate  real-life trading of market orders, we should pay (at least)  1/2 the bid-ask spread each time when we open or close a VIX futures position.

VIX futures have a tick size of five cents 6 , which means that our backtests should always assume

6 Each VIX future that is  traded on  the  Chicago  Board  Options Exchange  (CBOE)  has a  multiplier  of 1000, which means that the tick size is effectively 50 U.S.  Dollars.

~

Figure  3.2: Heat  plots  showing  the  projection  of the  trading  signals  onto  the  two-dimensional space  spanned  by  logarithm  of  VIX  and  the  one-month  roll,  with  the  projected  values  being the most-common trading actions at these points.  The left  plot  is  the  projection of the trading signal  constructed with piece-wise  linear  utility function  (3.5),  the right  plot  is  the projection of the  trading  signal  constructed  with  exponential  utility  function  (3.6). Both trading signals  are constructed utilizing the dense DFN approach of Section 3.1.  The value  "Empty"  represents the values of logarithm of VIX and one-month roll that do not occur.

<!-- image -->

Table  3.2: Portfolio  metrics  for  out-of-sample  tests  in  k-fold  cross  validation  on  trading  signal constructed  with  piece-wise  linear  utility  function  (3.5). These  metrics  are  computed  from  the portfolio returns given by equation (2.10)  with no transaction costs.

| lE  [Rt  (a  (Xt))]  std[Rt  (a  (Xt))]  Profit  (%)  Sharpe  Maximum  Ratio  Drawdown  0  2.361  0.443  304.264  5.297  -0.196  1  1.195  0.368  145.924  3.215  -0.138  2  4.951  0.447  724.848  11.053  -0.117  3  2.835  0.410  384.387  6.878  -0.214  4  0.854  0.242  108.168  3.474  -0.128  5  1.129  0.361  137.044  3.093  -0.123  6  1.027  0.375  121.582  2.709  -0.156  7  1.415  0.754  130.578  1.862  -0.293  8  0.329  0.302  34.784  1.056  -0.180  9  3.284  0.491  429.191  6.661  -0.240   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

a bid-ask spread of at least five  cents in U.S. Dollars.  In the simplest backtest, we hold the bid-ask spread constant at five  cents, which means we  pay $0.025 each time when we  open or close a  VIX futures position.  However,  bid-ask spreads may widen, particularly when the VIX futures curve is in backwardation.  With this widening in mind,  a transaction-cost function for  the i th VIX future is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where c is a fixed basis points (bps) parameter, in other words, c is equal to 20bps, 30bps, or 40bps. Using this  notation for  transaction costs,  the returns on the value  of the trading-signal portfolio are computed similarly to equation (2.10)  except for  an additional term for  transaction costs,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Table  3.3:  Portfolio  metrics  for  out-of-sample  tests in  k-fold  cross  validation  with trading signal constructed with exponential utility function  (3.6).  These metrics are computed from the portfolio returns given by equation (2.10)  with no transaction costs.

| lE [Rt  (a  (Xt))]  std[Rt  (a  (Xt))]  Profit  (%)  Sharpe  Maximum  Ratio  Drawdown  0  1.728  0.456  209.177  3.763  -0.239  1  1.610  0.412  198.810  3.880  -0.165  2  4.534  0.462  645.731  9.775  -0.175  3  3.138  0.463  418.006  6.751  -0.202  4  0.742  0.284  90.055  2.577  -0.190  5  0.683  0.388  74.484  1.731  -0.236  6  0.886  0.400  100.162  2.187  -0.189  7  1.239  0.785  103.799  1.564  -0.281  8  0.639  0.356  71.310  1.765  -0.171  9  2.518  0.564  294.004  4.443  -0.248   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

where ni denotes the number of contracts in the i th VIX future;  computation of ni is  explained in Appendix A.

Figure 3.4 illustrates the time series of portfolio values for  trading signals that are constructed utilizing piece-wise linear utility function  (3.5)  and utilizing the portfolio values with transaction costs  that  are  given  by  equation  (3.9). Figure  3.5  illustrates  the  time  series  of portfolio  value for  trading  signals  that  are  constructed  utilizing  exponential  utility  function  (3.6)  and  utilizing the portfolio values with transaction costs that are given by equation  (3.9).  Table 3.5  and Table 3.4  display  the  metrics  for  portfolios  that  are  computed  with varying  levels  of transaction  costs utilizing piece-wise linear utility function  (3.5)  and exponential utility function  (3.6).  In general, these portfolios  can  still  perform  well  when transaction costs  are  included,  but  we  do  observe  a decline as we  increase the basis points parameter in the transaction cost function  (3.8).  In other words,  as  we  increase  the  values  of c  in  equation  (3.8),  the  profits  and  Sharpe  ratios  decrease. Finally,  as is  the case of no transaction cost, maximum drawdowns remain high when transaction costs are included.

## 4 Conclusion

In this article, we  have proposed and analyzed a  method for  constructing VIX futures trading signals.  The basis for the method is in the identification of certain trading opportunities by observ­ ing the shape of the VIX futures curve.  The trading signal uses a deep feed-forward neural network with dense connective structure to determine the best trading action for  day-ahead expectation of returns.  We  backtested this method and found it to perform well  in out-of-sample tests, showing considerable profits and reasonable Sharpe ratios,  but also showing levels of maximum drawdown that would  be difficult  to manage in practice.  When we  included transaction costs,  we  observed that the portfolio performance reduced to more pedestrian levels.

## Appendix A Mapping Trading Signal to Futures Positions

The dense DFN model that is  proposed in Section 3.1 provides optimal trading actions for  the yields of rolling VIX futures strategy Ji described in equation (2.8).  For example, the trading signal Time occurring at the volatility spike on January 26 th  of 2021,  the piece-wise linear utility function (3.5) and the deep feed-forward neural network (3.3) produces an optimal action (-1,  1).  This represents a  position  with  weight -1 in 1 1  and weight  of 1 in 1 5 . This  appendix provides  a  translation of the outputs for the neural network algorithm into the exact quantities that a real-life trader would utilize when setting up a  position.

<!-- image -->

Figure 3.3: Time  series  of  portfolio  value  for  out-of-sample  tests  of  k-fold  cross  validation  on trading signals constructed with piece-wise linear utility function (3.5)  (top) and exponential utility function  (3.6)  (bottom). The state-action value  function Q (Xt, a) is  obtained  by  training  the dense  DFN  given  by  equation  (3.3). The  returns Rt (a (Xt))  are  computed  with  the  trading actions a (Xt) =  argmaxaEA Q (Xt, a), and  the  portfolio  values  are  computed  from  equation (2.10)  with no transaction costs.

In expression (3.1), we define the five  actions that are considered in our analyses, which are aj for j = 0,  1,  2,  3,  4,  with ao = (0,  0), a1 = (-1,  1), a2 = (-1, 2), a3 = (1,  -1), and a4 = (1,  -2). Each action ai is  a  two-dimensional vector,

where a} is  the portfolio weight  for I1 and a] is  the weight  for I 5 . This action can be converted into  the  actual  number of contracts  in  VIX future pi that is  defined  by  equation  (2.1). Letting ni denote the number of VIX future  contract in pi for  i  =  1,  2,  5,  and  6,  the  followings  are the conversions from a given a; to the ni for  trading signals taking positions in 1 1  and J 5 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P denotes the wealth of trading portfolio, given by either equation (2.10)  or equation (3.9), and where we have taken the rolling weight w to be the same for  all i  as described in the beginning of Section  3. For example,  if the  optimal trading  action  is  (  -1, 1),  then we  have a3 =  -1 and aJ = 1,  and we  apply accordingly the above equation for ni.

Table A. l  shows  the positions in VIX futures Ff for  a  real-time  run starting from  December 28 th of  2020  to  February  19 th  of  2021  of trading  signal  constructed  with  the  piece-wise  linear utility function  (3.5).  The portfolio values that are shown in the table includes a  transaction cost of 1/2 the bid-ask spread for each trade, in other words, the portfolio values are calculated utilizing equation (3.9)  with c = 0,  and each position is  rounded to the nearest whole number of contracts. Of note is  the drop in P from  January 26 th  of 2021  to January 27 th  of 2021,  which was  the day of the  GameStop trading freeze. The trade signal incurred  a  loss  from  the VIX spike  caused  by GameStop, but then recovered the losses in the following  days.

## Appendix B Metrics for  the SPY and VIX ETFs

Results that are reported in Section 3.1  should be compared with some standard benchmarks and non-neural-network trading actions.  Table B.l presents,  for  SPDR S&amp;P  500 Trust ETF, the same metrics that are utilized to evaluate the VIX futures  trading-signal portfolios for  the same ten time  periods  of the  k-fold  cross  validation. Table  B.2  to  Table  B.5  respectively  display  the same metrics that are utilized  to evaluate the VIX futures  trading-signal portfolios for  the same ten time periods of the k-fold cross validation for  the trading portfolio utilizing one of the trading actions that are defined in equation (3.1).

By comparing with the metrics for  DFN-based trading signals that are displayed in Table 3.2 and  Table  3.3  in  Section  3.1,  we  can  observe  that  the  results  that  are  produced  by  the  neural network algorithm that we  propose have reasonably good returns, profits,  and Sharpe ratios,  but also have high volatility and high drawdowns.

<!-- image -->

4ll""M

4ll""M

Figure 3.4:  Time series of portfolio values that are computed with transaction costs utilizing s = 0, 20,  30,  and 40bps as described in equation (3.8),  for  out-of-sample tests of k-fold  cross-validation on  trading the  signal  constructed  with  piece-wise  linear  utility  function  (3.5). The state-action value  function Q (Xt, a)  is  obtained  by  training  the  dense  DFN  given  by  equation  (3.3). The returns Rt (a (Xt))  are computed with the trading actions a (Xt) = argmaxaEA Q (Xt, a),  and the  portfolio  value  with  transaction  cost  deduction  for  the  optimal  action  is Pt computed  with equation (3.9).

w

Figure  3.5: Time  series  of  portfolio  values  that  are  computed  with  transaction  costs  utilizing c  =  0,  20,  30,  and  40bps  as  described  in  equation  (3.8),  for  out-of-sample  tests  of k-fold  cross­ validation  on  trading  the  signal  constructed  with  exponential  utility  function  (3.6). The state­ action value  function Q (Xt, a) is  obtained by training the dense  DFN given  by equation  (3.3). The returns Rt (a (Xt)) are computed with the trading actions a (Xt) = argmaxaEA Q (Xt, a), and the portfolio value with transaction cost deduction for the optimal action is Pt computed with equation (3.9).

<!-- image -->

Table 3.4:  Portfolio metrics with transaction cost deduction for out-of-sample tests ink-fold cross-validation with trading signals constructed with piece-wise linear utility function (3.5), and the state-action function Q (Xt,  a) obtained by training the dense  DFN given by equation (3.3). The transaction costs per contract are given by equation (3.8)  and the portfolio returns are given by equation (3.9).

| ~  St  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  Profit  (%)  202.813  35.406  391.423  152.749  -6.926  8.136  -14.775  -26.051  -52.547  218.103  Sharpe  3.756  0.956  6.643  3.099  -0.159  0.345  -0.175  -0.049  -1.403  3.768  Ratio  c=0  Maximum  -0.213  -0.216  -0.163  -0.258  -0.329  -0.311  -0.306  -0.601  -0.542  -0.240  Drawdown  P&amp;L per  4.345  0.460  2.737  1.051  -0.078  0.104  -0.159  -0.312  -0.741  1.782  Transaction  Profit  (%)  187.321  24.631  370.000  148.617  -6.926  8.126  -14.780  -26.122  -52.550  195.975  Sharpe  3.509  0.719  6.329  3.025  -0.159  0.344  -0.175  -0.050  -1.403  3.439  Ratio  E  =  20bps  Maximum  -0.225  -0.262  -0.163  -0.262  -0.329  -0.311  -0.306  -0.601  -0.542  -0.240  Drawdown  P&amp;L per  3.176  0.287  2.306  1.012  -0.078  0.104  -0.159  -0.313  -0.741  1.403  Transaction  Profit  (%)  138.855  -28.295  247.105  87.970  -11.656  -1.441  -31.083  -28.788  -55.441  123.111  Sharpe  2.709  -0.488  4.460  1.919  -0.324  0.119  -0.561  -0.087  -1.492  2.315  Ratio  E  =  30bps  Maximum  -0.244  -0.473  -0.187  -0.307  -0.346  -0.333  -0.367  -0.601  -0.569  -0.279  Drawdown  P&amp;L per  1.611  -0.226  1.073  0.501  -0.217  -0.017  -0.302  -0.334  -0.755  -0.636  Transaction  Profit  (%)  85.275  -84.254  103.636  -7.369  -43.848  -42.591  -76.575  -57.851  -80.190  11.942  Sharpe  1.787  -1.677  2.096  0.046  -1.458  -0.898  -1.658  -0.509  -2.170  0.456  Ratio  E  =  40bps  Maximum  -0.269  -0.857  -0.377  -0.510  -0.515  -0.507  -0.765  -0.681  -0.802  -0.528  Drawdown  P&amp;L per  0.742  -0.505  0.338  -0.032  -0.380  -0.388  -0.573  -0.555  -0.846  0.046  Transaction   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 3.5:  Portfolio metrics with transaction cost deduction for out-of-sample tests ink-fold cross validation with trading signal constructed with exponential utility  function  (3.6),  and the  state-action  function Q (Xt, a) obtained by  training the dense  DFN given  by  equation  (3.3). The transaction costs  per contract are given by equation (3.8)  and the portfolio returns are given by equation (3.9).

| ~  St  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  Profit  (%)  143.296  64.787  23.421  139.082  -19.477  -44.923  -33.712  -91.306  -49.599  118.240  Sharpe  2.738  1.477  5.505  2.649  -0.470  -0.871  -0.565  -0.967  -1.063  2.098  Ratio  c=0  Maximum  -0.274  -0.184  -0.224  -0.263  -0.381  -0.563  -0.443  -0.920  -0.574  -0.328  Drawdown  P&amp;L  per  4.595  0.819  2.413  0.843  -0.232  -0.545  -0.348  -0.854  -0.523  1.169  Transaction  Profit  (%)  131.973  52.441  305.771  133.121  -19.477  -44.931  -33.716  -91.371  -49.600  103.910  Sharpe  2.553  1.239  5.245  2.551  -0.470  -0.871  -0.565  -0.968  -1.063  1.892  Ratio  s  =  20bps  Maximum  -0.274  -0.185  -0.224  -0.267  -0.381  -0.563  -0.443  -0.921  -0.574  -0.328  Drawdown  P&amp;L per  3.327  0.599  2.060  0.795  -0.232  -0.545  -0.348  -0.854  -0.523  0.921  Transaction  Profit  (%)  99.883  -10.819  194.296  56.765  -24.365  -53.164  -50.059  -94.346  -53.466  55.666  Sharpe  2.015  -0.019  3.545  1.259  -0.618  -1.075  -0.943  -0.989  -1.161  1.173  Ratio  s  =  30bps  Maximum  -0.297  -0.348  -0.254  -0.311  -0.402  -0.596  -0.515  -0.948  -0.605  -0.333  Drawdown  P&amp;L per  1.724  -0.085  0.920  0.280  -0.280  -0.600  -0.466  -0.859  -0.544  0.374  Transaction  Profit  (%)  64.643  -78.125  61.369  -58.328  -55.578  -91.129  -95.012  -131.543  -87.536  -29.006  Sharpe  1.405  -1.354  1.336  -0.902  -1.566  -1.809  -1.624  0.794  -1.887  -0.192  Ratio  c =  40bps  Maximum  -0.330  -0.808  -0.416  -0.772  -0.596  -0.912  -0.950  -1.289  -0.890  -0.534  Drawdown  P&amp;L per  0.837  -0.460  0.218  -0.219  -0.503  -0.792  -0.683  -0.986  -0.690  -0.147  Transaction   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table A.l:  Real-time backtest results from December 28 th of 2020 to February 19 th of 2021  for  the piece-wise linear  utility function  (3.5).  The dense  feed-forward  neural network  (3.3)  is  re-trained weekly,  the  numbers  of contracts ni in Ff are  given  by equation  (A.l),  the  portfolio  value P is given  in  equation  (3.9)  with  c  =  0,  the  CMF  roll  weight w appears  in  equation  (2.2),  and  i  is explained in Section 3.  The net position in VIX futures  is Li ni. The position is  long if the net position is  positive, short if the net position is  negative,  and neutral if the net position is  zero.  Of note is  the  loss  observed  from  Jan.  26th to  27th during the GameStop trading freeze,  and then recovery of losses  in the following days.

| Date  p  w  al  a5  nl  n'2  n5  n6  Lin•  2020-12-28  100.00  0.65714  -1  2  -3  -1  5  3  4  2020-12-29  101.25  0.62857  -1  1  -3  -1  2  1  -1  2020-12-30  103.20  0.60000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  2020-12-31  103.03  0.57143  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  2021-01-04  103.03  0.45714  -1  2  -2  -2  4  4  4  2021-01-05  102.23  0.42857  -1  2  -2  -2  3  4  3  2021-01-06  101.15  0.40000  -1  2  -2  -2  3  5  4  2021-01-07  104.18  0.37143  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  2021-01-08  103.88  0.34286  -1  1  -1  -3  1  3  0  2021-01-11  101.23  0.25714  -1  1  -1  -3  1  3  0  2021-01-12  103.22  0.22857  -1  1  -1  -3  1  3  0  2021-01-13  105.05  0.20000  -1  1  -1  -3  1  3  0  2021-01-14  105.45  0.17143  -1  1  -1  -4  1  3  -1  2021-01-15  103.63  0.14286  -1  1  -1  -3  1  3  0  2021-01-19  105.99  0.02857  -1  2  0  -4  0  8  4  2021-01-20  103.19  0.00000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  2021-01-21  102.89  0.96429  -1  2  -4  0  7  0  3  2021-01-22  103.37  0.92857  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  2021-01-25  103.10  0.82143  -1  1  -3  -1  3  1  0  2021-01-26  105.44  0.78571  -1  1  -3  -1  3  1  0  2021-01-27  92.60  0.75000  -1  2  -2  -1  5  2  4  2021-01-28  90.38  0.71429  -1  2  -2  -1  4  2  3  2021-01-29  89.03  0.67857  -1  2  -2  -1  4  2  3  2021-02-01  92.25  0.57143  -1  2  -2  -1  4  3  4  2021-02-02  93.27  0.53571  -1  2  -2  -2  3  3  2  2021-02-03  96.28  0.50000  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  2021-02-04  96.03  0.46429  -1  1  -2  -2  2  2  0  2021-02-05  96.69  0.42857  -1  1  -2  -2  1  2  -1  2021-02-08  98.28  0.32143  -1  1  -1  -3  1  2  -1  2021-02-09  98.66  0.28571  -1  1  -1  -3  1  2  -1  2021-02-10  98.85  0.25000  -1  1  -1  -3  1  3  0  2021-02-11  100.93  0.21429  -1  1  -1  -3  1  3  0  2021-02-12  104.66  0.17857  -1  1  -1  -3  1  3  0  2021-02-16  105.57  0.03571  1  -1  0  4  0  -3  1  2021-02-17  115.42  0.00000  -1  1  0  -4  0  4  0  2021-02-18  115.25  0.96429  -1  1  -4  0  4  0  0  2021-02-19  118.17  0.92857  0  0  0  0  0  0  0   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

| lE [Rt  (a  (Xt))]  std[Rt  (a  (Xt))]  Profit  (%)  Sharpe  Maximum  Ratio  Drawdown  0  -0.172  0.415  -29.111  -0.439  -0.514  1  0.216  0.180  25.147  1.144  -0.157  2  0.138  0.211  14.347  0.607  -0.186  3  0.192  0.125  23.383  1.452  -0.096  4  0.222  0.105  27.567  2.014  -0.056  5  0.100  0.144  11.191  0.624  -0.119  6  0.097  0.130  11.171  0.676  -0.128  7  0.155  0.114  18.722  1.271  -0.101  8  0.095  0.145  10.514  0.583  -0.193  9  0.218  0.304  20.637  0.685  -0.337   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table  B.l:  Metrics for  SPDR S&amp;P  500  Trust ETF  (ticker  symbol:  SPY)  for  the same ten folds listed in Table 3.1,  which are utilized in the k-fold cross validation of Section 3.

Table B.2:  Portfolio metrics of fixed trading strategy (-1,  1)  for the same ten folds  listed in Table 3.1  without transaction costs, which are utilized in the k-fold cross validation of Section 3.

| lE  [Rt  (a  (Xt))]  std[Rt  (a  (Xt))]  Profit  (%)  Sharpe  Maximum  Ratio  Drawdown  0  -0.199  0.461  -26.908  -0.453  -0.597  1  1.493  0.445  141.464  3.334  -0.298  2  0.059  0.520  -7.700  0.093  -0.558  3  0.285  0.563  9.509  0.488  -0.334  4  0.246  0.347  17.518  0.679  -0.249  5  -0.011  0.458  -10.867  -0.045  -0.363  6  0.729  0.505  54.305  1.421  -0.290  7  -0.156  0.802  -48.498  -0.207  -0.795  8  0.126  0.423  2.731  0.274  -0.364  9  0.320  0.603  9.142  0.513  -0.645   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table B.3:  Portfolio metrics of fixed trading strategy (-1,  2)  for the same ten folds  listed in Table 3.1  without transaction costs, which are utilized in the k-fold cross validation of Section 3.

| lE [Rt  (a  (Xt))]  std[Rt  (a  (Xt))]  Profit  (%)  Sharpe  Maximum  Ratio  Drawdown  0  0.196  0.427  9.200  0.436  -0.287  1  1.467  0.374  146.905  3.902  -0.120  2  -0.113  0.354  -16.253  -0.349  -0.362  3  -0.307  0.415  -34.318  -0.763  -0.574  4  -0.104  0.249  -12.872  -0.459  -0.331  5  0.043  0.264  0.721  0.125  -0.225  6  0.379  0.330  31.456  1.120  -0.166  7  -0.361  0.574  -44.803  -0.647  -0.637  8  0.281  0.267  24.143  1.015  -0.151  9  1.096  0.537  88.277  2.020  -0.313   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table B.4:  Portfolio metrics of fixed trading strategy (1,  -1) for the same ten folds  listed in Table 3.1  without transaction costs, which are utilized in the k-fold cross validation of Section 3.

| lE [Rt  (a  (Xt))]  std[Rt  (a  (Xt))]  Profit  (%)  Sharpe  Maximum  Ratio  Drawdown  0  0.273  0.461  14.908  0.571  -0.361  1  -0.592  0.445  -56.353  -1.354  -0.734  2  -0.036  0.520  -15.183  -0.089  -0.386  3  -0.206  0.563  -30.512  -0.384  -0.474  4  -0.181  0.347  -22.036  -0.551  -0.366  5  0.031  0.457  -6.840  0.046  -0.407  6  -0.410  0.505  -44.223  -0.832  -0.689  7  0.208  0.802  -6.190  0.247  -0.406  8  -0.094  0.423  -16.518  -0.246  -0.426  9  -0.227  0.603  -33.219  -0.939  -0.661   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table B.5:  Portfolio metrics of fixed trading strategy (1,  -2) for the same ten folds  listed in Table 3.1  without transaction costs, which are utilized in the k-fold cross validation of Section 3.

| lE [Rt  (a  (Xt))]  std[Rt  (a  (Xt))]  Profit  (%)  Sharpe  Maximum  Ratio  Drawdown  -0.147  0.427  -21.336  -0.368  -0.437  1  -0.588  0.374  -55.217  -1.601  -0.721  2  0.150  0.354  8.118  0.397  -0.217  3  0.471  0.415  36.258  1.111  -0.246  4  0.139  0.249  10.495  0.517  -0.180  5  -0.022  0.264  -5.455  -0.121  -0.206  6  -0.260  0.330  -28.469  -0.821  -0.473  7  0.596  0.574  40.017  1.022  -0.250  8  -0.204  0.267  -22.303  -0.801  -0.318  9  -0.514  0.537  -52.529  -0.976  -0.691   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## Bibliography

- Irene  Aldridge  and  Marco  Avellaneda. Big  data  science  in finance. Wiley,  New York  City,  New York,  USA,  1st edition,  2020.  ISBN 9781119602989.
- Carol Alexander, Julia Kapraun, and Dimitris Korovilas.  Trading and investing in volatility prod­ ucts. Financial Markets,  Institutions f3 Instruments, 24(4):313-347, 2015.  ISSN 1468-0416.
- Sylvain  Arlot  and  Alain  Celisse. A  survey  of  cross-validation  procedures  for  model  selection. Statistics  Surveys, 4:40-79,  2010.  ISSN 1935-7516.
- Robert D.  Arnott, Campbell R.  Harvey,  and Harry Markowitz.  A backtesting protocol in the era of machine learning. The  Journal of Financial Data Science, 1(1):64-74, 2019.  ISSN 2640-3943.
- Marco Avellaneda and Andrew Papanicolaou.  Statistics of VIX futures and applications to trading exchange-traded  products. International  Journal  of  Theoretical  and  Applied  Finance, 22(1), February 2019.  ISSN 0219-0249.
- Christian Bayer,  Peter Friz,  and  Jim Gatheral.  Pricing under rough  volatility. Quantitative  Fi­ nance, 16(6):887-904, 2016.  ISSN  1469-7688.
- Mikhail  Belkin,  Siyuan  Ma,  and  Soumik  Mandal. To  understand deep  learning we  need to un­ derstand kernel learning.  In ICML  Thirty-Fifth International  Conference  on Machine Learning, 2018.
- Christoph Bergmeir and Jose M.  Benitez.  On the use of cross-validation for  time series predictor evaluation. Information Sciences, 191:192-213, 2012.  ISSN 0020-0255.
- Christoph Bergmeir, Rob J. Hyndman, and Bonsoo Koo.  A note on the validity of cross-validation for  evaluating autoregressive time series  prediction. Computational Statistics f3 Data Analysis, 120:70-83, 2018.  ISSN 0167-9473.
- Prabir Burman and Deborah Nolan.  Data-dependent estimation of prediction functions. Journal of Time  Series  Analysis, 13(3):189-207, 1992.  ISSN 0143-9782.
- Philippe  Casgrain,  Brian  Ning,  and  Sebastian  Jaimungal. Deep  Q-learning  for  Nash  equilibria: Nash-DQN. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10554, 2019.
- Vitor  Cerqueira,  Luis  Torgo,  and  Igor  Mozetic. Evaluating time  series  forecasting  models:  An empirical  study  on  performance  estimation  methods. Machine  Learning, 109(11):1997-2028, October 2020.  ISSN 0885-6125.
- George Cybenko.  Approximation by superpositions of a sigmoidal function. Mathematics  of Con­ trol,  Signals  and Systems, 2(4):303-314,  1989.  ISSN 0932-4194.
- Robert Fry Engle and Clive William John Granger.  Co-integration and error correction represen­ tation estimation and testing. Econometrica, 55(02):251-276,  1987.  ISSN 0012-9682.
- Omar El Euch and Mathieu Rosenbaum.  Perfect hedging in rough Heston models. The  Annals of Applied Probability, 28(6):3813-3856, 2018.  ISSN 1050-5164.

- Jianqing  Fan,  Zhaoran  Wang,  Yuchen  Xie,  and  Zhuoran  Yang. A  theoretical  analysis  of deep q-learning.  In Alexandre M.  Bayen,  Ali Jadbabaie, George Pappas, Pablo A.  Parrilo, Benjamin Recht, Claire Tomlin,  and Melanie Zeilinger, editors, Proceedings  of Machine  Learning Research (PMLR): Learning for Dynamics and Control, volume 120,  pages 465-475.  ML  Research Press, June 2020.  ISSN 2640-3498.
- Jean-Pierre Fouque, George Papanicolaou, and K. Ronnie Sircar. Mean-reverting stochastic volatil­ ity. International  Journal  of Theoretical  and Applied Finance, 3(1):101-142,  2000.  ISSN  02190249.
- Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio,  and Aaron Courville. Deep  learning. Adaptive computation and machine learning series. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, November 2016.  ISBN 9780262035613.
- Trevor Hastie, Andrea Montanari, Saharon Rosset, and Ryan Joseph Tibshirani.  Surprises in high­ dimensional ridgeless least squares interpolation. Annals of Statistics, Forthcoming, 2022.  ISSN 0090-5364.
- Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A.  Rusu, Joel Veness,  Marc G.  Belle­ mare,  Alex  Graves,  Martin Riedmiller,  Andreas K.  Fidjeland,  Georg  Ostrovski,  Stig Petersen, Charles Beattie, Amir Sadik, Ioannis Antonoglou, Helen King, Dharshan Kumaran, Daan Wier­ stra, Shane Legg, and Demis Hassabis. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529-533, 2015.  ISSN 0028-0836.
- Mehryar Mohri,  Afshin  Rostamizadeh,  and  Ameet  Talwalkar. Foundations  of machine  learning. Adaptive computation and machine learning series. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA,  2nd edition, December 2018.  ISBN 9780262039406.
- Allan Pinkus.  Approximation theory of the MLP model in neural networks. ACTA Numerica, 8: 143-195, 1999.  ISSN 0962-4929.
- Johannes Ruf and Weiguan Wang.  Neural networks for  option pricing and hedging:  a  literature review. Journal  of Computational Finance, 24(2):1-46, 2020.  ISSN 1460-1559.
- Johannes Ruf and Weiguan Wang.  Hedging with linear regressions and neural networks. Journal of Business  e3  Economic Statistics, Forthcoming, 2021.  ISSN 0735-0015.
- Justin Sirignano and Konstantinos Spiliopoulos.  Stochastic gradient  descent  in continuous time. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics, 8(1):933-961,  2017.  ISSN  1945-497X.
- Richard  S.  Sutton  and  Andrew  G.  Barto. Reinforcement  learning: an  introduction. Adaptive computation and machine learning series. The MIT press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA, 2nd edition,  2018.  ISBN 9780262039246.
- Robert E. Whaley.  The investor fear  gauge. The  Journal  of Portfolio  Management, 26(3):12-17, 2000.  ISSN 0095-4918.
- Robert E. Whaley.  Understanding the VIX. The  Journal  of Portfolio  Management, 35(3):98-105, 2009.  ISSN 0095-4918.

Chiyuan Zhang, Samy Bengio,  Moritz Hardt, Benjamin Recht,  and Oriol Vinyals.  Understanding deep learning requires rethinking generalization.  In Fifth International  Conference  on Learning Representations, 2017.