## INTERNATIONAL CO-BRANDING AND FIRM'S FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

Hengameh Fakhravar Engineering Management &amp; Systems Engineering Old Dominion University

Hesamoddin Tahami Engineering Management &amp; Systems Engineering Old Dominion University

*Hfakhrav@odu.edu

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

## Abstract

Co-branding has become a widely used marketing strategy, yet little attention has been paid to its impact on a firm's stock value. Prior literature has shown that using a co-branding strategy properly helps firms leverage brand value and equity. We discussed the theoretical foundations and main accomplishments of prior studies. We developed a conceptual framework and hypothesis to close the existing research gap  in  the  topic  of  interest.  We  argued  that  co-branding  event  announcement generates  positive  abnormal  returns  in  the  stock  market.    Furthermore,  we investigated the moderating impact of co-branding structure on the relation between co-branding event announcements and abnormal returns. We claimed that higher cobranding  integration,  greater  co-branding  exclusivity,  and  longer  co-branding duration generate a greater positive abnormal return for the partnering firms.

## 1Introduction

Brands  are  the  most  valuable  assets  of  companies  pursuing  commercial  success ((Keränen et al., 2012);  (Paydas  Turan, 2021)). As  markets become increasingly competitive and consumers ever more demanding, business managers seek out ways of enhancing customer experience and business growth and are therefore turning to co-branding (Besharat &amp; Langan, 2014). Co-branding represents a long-term brand alliance strategy in which one product is branded and identified simultaneously by two brands. From Dell Computers with Intel Processors to Kellogg Star Wars cereal to Philips shavers dispensing Nivea shaving cream, co-branded products take many forms across industries, at times connecting seemingly unlikely alliance partners. Co-branding combines the individual brand characteristics of the constituent brands and transfers the associated values of both brands to the created co-branding (Yu et al., 2021)(Yahoodik et al., 2020). The purpose of forming a co-branding is to create synergies, boost awareness, and enhance the brands' value by leveraging each brand through the transfer of associations from one brand to the other and differentiating them from the competition (Singh et al., 2016). According to this definition, the following  characteristics  constitute  co-branded  products:  First,  the  participating brands should be independent before, during, and after the offering of the co-branded product (Ohlwein &amp; Schiele, 1994). Second, the companies that own the brands should implement a co-branding strategy on purpose (Blackett &amp; Russell, 1999).

Third, the cooperation between the two brands must be visible to potential buyers (Rao, 1997), and fourth, one product must be combined with the two other brands at the same time (Levin et al., 1996)(Fakhravar, 2020b).

However, despite practitioners' apparent enthusiasm towards co-branded products, research has not yet determined if these are profitable investments for their parent firms. Indeed, co-branding may also have downsides. Co-branding carries the risk of  eroding  brand  equity  through  potentially  inconsistent  brand  associations  and potential loss in perceived quality. Negative associations can transfer from partner brands  to  the  co-branded  product,  hindering  its  market  success.  Alternatively, negative associations can also transfer from the co-branded product to one of the partner brands. For instance, in an experiment intended to assess preferences for brownies made from a co-branded mix, (Levin et al., 1996) found that if one partner brand is thought to be inferior (in their case, the brand of chocolate chips used in the brownie mix), it brings down not only the perception of the co-branded product but also that of the other partner brand. In addition to risk, there might also be direct costs that are greater with co-branding, for example, coordination efforts between partner firms.

This  study  examines  the  financial  consequences  of  co-branding  activities  and illuminates some key questions left unexplored by previous research. First, while cobranding can improve customers' attitudes towards the individual brands (Simonin

&amp; Ruth, 1998) and elicit more positive perceptions than single-brand extensions (Park et al., 1996), little is known about how investors react to introductions of cobranded  products.  A  majority  of  published  research  studies  use  an  experimental approach to measure consumers' perceptions and awareness of co-branded products and constituent brands. There is a dearth of research on the stock market impact of co-branding.  Positive  evaluations  obtained  in  lab  settings  may  not  necessarily translate into actual profits in an intensely competitive environment. The financial gains of co-branding in the stock market could help us pinpoint the value of cobranding activities more accurately. Moreover, this study investigates the effects of certain co-branding characteristics on financial returns in the short-term and the long term.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II provides the background and definition  of  co-branding  activities.  A  classification  of  co-branding  is  presented because  there  are  other  brand  alliance  terms  in  the  literature  to  describe  the cooperation between brands. This section also provides a review of the literature and summarizes the findings with respect to the links between co-branding and consumer attitudes  and  the  links  between  branding  activities  that  include  co-branding  and firms'  financial  performance.  Following  this,  section  III  outlines  the  conceptual foundation of the theoretical framework and proposes hypotheses about the stock market's reaction to co-branding announcements. Finally, section IV provides the conclusion.

## 2Definitions and Literature Review

## 2-1- Definitions

Forming  an  alliance  with  other  established  brands  has  become  a  widely  used business strategy since the 1980s, when brand equity became an essential measure of  businesses'  real  value.  Brand  alliances  can  take  many  forms,  from  product bundling to dual branding to co-branding.

First, product bundling is a strategy in which two or more products are sold together for  one  price  ((Gaeth  et  al.,  1991);  (Yadav,  1994)).  The  bundle  can  be  either composed of physical goods like a laptop with its peripherals or intangible services such as a holiday package including an airline ticket and a city tour guide. While in many instances, the components of the bundle carry the same brand, there are cases in which different brands are sold together in one package (e.g., fragrance or skincare multi-brand  packs  sold  by  Sephora).  Product  bundling  is  also  encountered  in promotions,  where  typically  one  branded  product  is  offered  for  free  with  the purchase of another branded product (Varadarajan, 1986)(Tahami et al., 2016).

Second, "Advertising alliance" (or co-advertising, joint advertising) is characterized by the use of two brands on a promotional campaign delivered by an advertisement (Samu et al., 1999). The joint advertising of Axe anti-sweat spray and Coca-Cola zero is a typical case. This anti-sweat spray brand signals its functional performance by  borrowing  the  associations  of  the  "cool  drink"  of  Coca-Cola.  Other  example include the Kellogg cereals with Tropicana fruit juice (Samu et al., 1999) .

Third,  "Joint-sales  promotion"  represents  the  cooperation  of  the  promotional resource shared by two or more brands designed to seek an opportunity for sales growth. In this specific type of alliance, each of the brands (products) can be either adopted independently or promoted together for complimentary use. The examples include the Campbell soup with the Nabisco saltine crackers (Varadarajan, 1986), the Bacardi Rum with Coca-Cola, and a menu including a handmade pizza with a Coca-Cola.(Tahami et al., 2019)

Fourth, "dual branding" concerns an arrangement in which two brands share the same location and consumers, therefore, can purchase their products under the same roof  (e.g.,  Kentucky  Fried  Chicken-A&amp;W restaurants  (Levin  et  al.,  1996).  Fifth, "brand extension" refers to using an existing brand name to launch a new product (Aaker &amp; Keller, 1990). (Kotler &amp; Keller, 2006) claimed that there exist two types of brand extension strategies, namely the "line extension" and "category extension." Line  extension  incorporates  the  established  brand  name  into  the  firm's  existing product  category  (e.g.,  Coca-Cola  introduced  the  vanilla  flavor).  The  extended product  differs  from  the  original  brand  in  several  minor  characteristics  such  as flavors and sizes (Kapferer, 1998)(Tahami &amp; Fakhravar, 2020c). On the contrary, the "category extension" uses the current brand name to access a different product category (e.g., the Apple iPod).

Several researchers ((Park et al., 1996); (Hadjicharalambous, 2006); (Helmig et al., 2008)(Fakhravar, n.d.; Tahami &amp; Fakhravar, 2020a, 2020b, 2020b)) argued that cobranding and brand extension are similar in their purposes: both of them are utilized to reduce the risk of failures of new products by capitalizing on the existing equities of the parent brand(s) and by transferring the existing brand associations to the new product. However, (Leuthesser et al., 2003) claimed that co-branding is sometimes a more effective strategy than brand extension because co-branding has a smaller possibility to dilute the attitudes toward the partnering brands and to damage the allying  brands'  images.  (Hadjicharalambous,  2006)  and  (Helmig  et  al.,  2008) claimed  that  the  only  difference  between  the  two  strategies  is  the  number  of constituent brands involved: brand extension is characterized by the use of a single brand while co-branding involves a combination of two brands.(Fakhravar, 2020a, 2021)

Table 1 summarizes the distinctions between co-branding activities and other types of branding strategies listed above.

Table 1 - distinctions between co-branding activities and other types of branding strategies

| Strategy  Characteristics  Example  Difference from co-  branding  Product bundling  Combined offer of two or more goods  in a package with one total price  Skincare multi-brand  packs sold by Sephora  No simultaneous  branding of a single  physical product by  two brands  Advertising  alliance  Simultaneous mention of different  suppliers of different products in one  advertisement  Nike sport shoes and  Apple iPod player  Joint sales  promotions  Timely, limited appearance of two  independent brands in Promotional  activities  Reebok® &amp;  Pepsi®  Dual  branding  Common usage of a store location  (shop in shop concept)  Burger King®  &amp; Shell™  Brand  extension  Extension of a brand to a new product  in either a  new or an existing product category  Boss brand transfer  from  clothes to  perfumes  Equals co-branding,  if the new product is  branded by two  brands simultaneously   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 2-2 Literature Review

Prior researchers have measured the success of co-branding mostly under two main frameworks, namely the strategic alliance framework and the consumer behavior framework.    Due  to  the  abundant  literature  in  analyzing  the  successful  strategic alliances  (e.g.,(Angle  &amp;  Perry,  1981);  (Devlin  &amp;  Bleackley,  1988);  (Mohr  &amp;

Spekman, 1994)(Ouabira &amp; Fakhravar, 2021)), some marketing researchers have utilized the framework of strategic alliance to examine the success of co-branding. In  their  studies,  the  term  'alliance  success'  is  often  referred  to  a  'successful formation of a co-branding alliance'. Under this framework, most research explores the strategic intents of one brand partner to form a co-branding alliance from two research streams (Fakhravar, 2022). One stream of work emphasizes the signals of a brand (names) (e.g., (Rao &amp; Ruekert, 1994); (Washburn et al., 2000); (Bengtsson &amp; Servais, 2005)) while the other stream of literature focuses on the organizational characteristics and the mutual benefits.(Natarajan et al., 2021)

Signaling theory (Spence, 1973) has been adopted by several scholars (e.g., (Rao &amp; Ruekert, 1994);  (Washburn et al., 2000); (Bengtsson &amp; Servais, 2005)) to explain the function of the brand name in a co-branding alliance. (Rao &amp; Ruekert, 1994) is a seminal piece in applying the signaling theory into co-branding research. They treated  co-branding  as  a  strategic  alliance  and  analyzed  why  the  partnership  is formed by combining their brand names (i.e., as compared to the cooperation in only the R&amp;D level). They argued that the name of each brand could serve as a signal for product quality to the consumers(Series, n.d.). Hence each brand can offer its brand name as a benefit to the other. In another influential paper, (Washburn et al., 2000) stated that consumers could transfer the existing brand associations of the allying brands to the alliance, and the strength of the association can represent the magnitude of brand equity. In summary, the signaling theory is employed to investigate how the brand name can serve as a benefit to be offered or a single piece of information to be displayed in a partnership.

However, using the framework of a strategic alliance to study co-branding has an intrinsic  limitation:  the  behavior  of  consumers  is  not  fully  taken  into  account (Hadjicharalambous, 2006). Since co-branding is a combination of two brands and ultimately, the brands are 'owned' in the minds and hearts of consumers (Leuthesser et al., 2003), consumer evaluation is an indispensable issue in co-branding research. That  is  to  say,  co-branding  should  also  be  studied  from  the  consumer  behavior perspective.(Tahami &amp; Fakhravar, 2020b)

In contrast to a small number of studies from the strategic alliance framework, a rich vein of literature has investigated this topic from the consumer behavior framework (Leuthesser et al., 2003). With a large base of attitude research as their background, the  behavioral  researchers  often  use  'attitudinal  acceptance'  to  measure  the effectiveness of a co-branding strategy. In particular, a great deal of attention has been  paid  to  consumers'  attitudes  toward  the  co-brand  (e.g.,  (Park  et  al.,  1996); (Samu et al.,  1999); (Desai  &amp;  Keller,  2002);  (James  et  al.,  2006))  and  the  postexposure  attitudes  toward  each  of  the  allying  brands  (e.g.,  (Park  et  al.,  1996); (Rodrigue &amp; Biswas, 2004); (Abbo, 2006)).

'Fit' is the most important factor in determining the attitudinal acceptance of the cobrand. (Aaker &amp; Keller, 1990) measured the concept of 'fit' in three dimensions, namely complement, substitute, and transfer. Complement refers to that a particular need  that  can  be  satisfied  by  a  joint  consumption  of  two  products  in  different categories.  Substitute  pertains  to  the  replacement  of  one  product  by  the  other  to fulfill the same desire. The above two dimensions are discussed from a demand-side perspective but, from the supply-side of view, transfer refers to the 'perceived ability of  any  firm  operating  in  the  first  product  class  to  make  a  product  in  the  second product class' (Aaker &amp; Keller, 1990).

(Park et al., 1996) was the first researcher to use 'fit' in co-branding research. They stated that the attribute complementarity (i.e., product-fit) plays an important role, and they defined the term 'complementarity' between the allying brands (e.g., say brand A and B) as:

- 1Both  brands  have  a  set  of  relevant  attributes  (e.g.,  good  taste  and  lowcalories).
- 2Two brands differ in attribute salience such that the attribute, which is not salient to one, is salient to the other (e.g., brand A is salient in good taste and brand B is salient in low-calories).

- 3The brand for which the attribute is salient has a higher perceived performance level on that attribute (e.g., brand A has a higher level on 'good-taste' and brand B has a higher performance level on 'low-calories').

In addition to the product fit between the allying brands, the brand fit (i.e., consistent brand  images)  is  also  proved  to  have  a  considerable  positive  influence  on  the attitudes  toward the co-brand (Simonin &amp; Ruth, 1998). (Simonin &amp; Ruth, 1998) further found  that the  degree of brand  familiarity  moderates  each  brand's contribution to the evaluation of co-brand. Other than the concept of 'fit', several other factors such as country-of-origin effect (Voss &amp; Tansuhaj, 1999), association transfer (James et al., 2006), product involvements and brand orientations (Huber, 2005), and the strength of reciprocal effects (Rodrigue &amp; Biswas, 2004) can also affect consumer attitudes toward the co-brand.

Although  co-branding  has  been  extensively  researched  in  the  marketing  field, positive  evaluations obtained in  experimental  settings do not necessarily  suggest actual profits in an intensely competitive marketplace. One manner in which the true value of co-branding in the marketplace can be established is by examining the stock market's reaction to the introduction of co-branded products.

## 2-2-1 Branding and Stock Market Returns

Brands are viewed as intangible assets that generate future cash flows  (Aaker &amp; Jacobson, 1994) or reduce the volatility of future cash flows (Ambler, 2003). As brand  equity  is  a  complex  concept,  (Keller  &amp;  Lehmann,  2006)  suggested  that branding-shareholder value is reflected in three perspectives: customer-based equity, product-market brand equity, and financial-based brand equity. All three components of brand equity have been found to be able to drive firm value (e.g., (Madden et al., 2006)). Many authors argue that financial-based brand equity as a metric of brand equity goes well beyond short-term sales, profits, and market share, and it is growing in appeal. (Simon &amp; Sullivan, 1993) estimated a firm's brand equity that is based on the financial market value of the firm. They defined brand equity as the  incremental  cash  flows  which  accrue  to  branded  products  over  unbranded products. Their approach provided an objective value of a firm's brands that is related to the determinants of brand equity.

(Barth  et  al.,  1998)  used  simultaneous  equations  estimation  to  investigate  the relationships  between  brand  value  and  returns  and  accounting  variables.  They showed  that  brand  value  estimates  are  positively  associated  with  advertising expense, operating margin, and market share. Their findings suggested brand value estimates  provide  significant  explanatory  power  for  prices  incremental  to  these variables and to recognized brand assets and analysts' earnings forecasts.

(Madden et al., 2006) investigated the link between shareholder value and brand assets and provided evidence pertaining to how marketing affects firm performance. Using the Fama-French method, the authors showed that, when market share and firm  size  are  considered,  strong  brands  not  only  deliver  greater  returns  to stockholders  but  also  help  reduce  the  risk.  Their  findings  provided  a  more comprehensive perspective by supporting the importance of marketing function as the processes that create firm value.

As investors view incremental information on branding activities as contributing to estimating future cash flows, the challenges emerge for marketers and researchers to assess  and  communicate  the  value  created  by  corporate  branding  strategies  on shareholder value. Research supports that firm value is linked to corporate naming strategies  that  influence  brand  awareness  can  change  brand  equity.  Corporate activities related to social responsibility are also suggested to have an impact on firm value through building brand images. Moreover, many studies have documented the manner in which mergers and acquisitions (M&amp;A) and brand portfolio strategies impact firm value. (Srivastava et al., 1998) developed a conceptual framework of the marketing-finance interface and propose that marketing tasks involve developing and  managing  market-based  assets  that  include  customer  relationships,  channel relationships,  and  partner  relationships.  Market-based  assets  such  as  brands  can increase shareholder value through accelerating cash flows, lowering the volatility and vulnerability of cash flows, and enhancing the residual value of cash flows.

It is possible that brands can benefit or suffer from extensions. For instance, brand extensions  may  restrict  the  financial  value  creation  of  the  firm  because  brand extensions  may  preclude  opportunities  that  are  provided  only  through  new  and unconnected brand offerings (Aaker &amp; Keller, 1990). However, there is a dearth of research  on  the  link  between  brand  extensions  and  changes  in  financial  returns. (Lane &amp; Jacobson, 1995) used the event study method to investigate the financial returns  of  brand  extension  announcements and found that stock market response depends  on  brand  equity  components,  including  brand  familiarity  and  attitude towards the extension brands. Their analysis indicated that brand equity characteristics significantly influence the success of brand extensions.

## 2-2-2 Literature Gap

While a large body of research focuses on consumers' assessment of cobranding ((Rao &amp; Ruekert, 1994); (Rao et al., 1999); (Voss &amp; Gammoh, 2004)), 'the lack of firm-side research is a fundamental limitation in the extant brand alliance literature' (Gammoh &amp; Voss, 2011). Consistent with this view, our literature review in Table 2 suggests a gap in knowledge about the value effect of co-branding strategy. (Cao &amp;  Sorescu,  2013)  is  the  only  study  that  examines  the  effect  of  cobranded  new product introductions on firm stock performance. They find that the stock market rewards the manufacturer of cobranded products with a 1% increase in stock returns (Nguyen  et  al.,  2020).  However,  this  research  stops  short  of  uncovering  how cobranding  creates  value  for  both  partners.  Several  important  questions  remain unanswered:  1)  Does  cobranding  create  value  for  all  partnering  firms?  2)  What factors drive the value creation and distribution of co-branding?

Table 2. Summary of literature on the effect of brand alliances on stock market performance

| Article  Research context  Theoretical  lenses  Performance  metric  Key findings  Das et al.  (1988)  70 marketing and 49  technological alliances  in 18 industries  Transaction  cost economics  CAR  Technological alliances  create greater CARs for  partnering firms than  marketing alliances. CARs  are  negatively correlated with  firm profitability and size.  Luo et al.  (2007)  Surveys of 387  executives in 8  industries  Resource  capability  Return on  equity (ROE)  Intensity of a firm's  alliances with its  competitors has a  curvilinear effect on ROE.  Kalaignanam  et al. (2007)  167 new product  development alliances  in information  technology and  telecommunication  industries  Power in  interfirm  relationship  CAR  Partnering firms obtain  positive CARs, but the  gain is asymmetric  between larger and smaller  firms.  While a broad scope  alliance enhances financial  gains for larger firms, a  scale R&amp;D alliance  contributes to the financial  gains for smaller firms.  Swaminamthan  and Morrman  (2009)  230 marketing  alliances in computer  software industry  Signaling  CAR  Marketing alliances create  positive CARs for  partnering firms.  Cao and  Sorescu (2013)  316 announcements of  cobranded new  products in the CPG  industry  Signaling  CAR  Average CARs of the  manufacturing firm to the  announcement of  cobranded new products is  approximately 1.0%.  Borah and  Tellis (2014)  3,522 announcements  of make, buy, or ally  for innovations  Organizational  learning  CAR  Announcements to make  or ally for innovation  generate positive and  higher CARs than  announcements to buy,  which generate negative  CARs.   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 3Hypothesis Development

The conceptual framework is depicted in Figure 1, and the concepts and hypotheses were elaborated on next.

Figure 1. Conceptual Framework

<!-- image -->

## 3-1 Impact of co-branding on stock performance

New co-branded products share two unique features that are likely to be viewed more favorably  by  investors  when  compared  to  single-branded  products.  First,  cobranding  can  signal  quality  to  consumers  (Rao  et  al.,  1999)  and  can  improve consumers' attitudes toward individual partner brands, with positive brand association spillovers documented both from the individual brands to the co-branded product and vice versa (Simonin &amp; Ruth, 1998). With greater credibility of product quality,  co-branded  products  can  also  command  a  premium  price  (Venkatesh  &amp; Mahajan, 1997) and elicit more positive perceptions than single-brand extensions ((Desai &amp; Keller, 2002); (Park et al., 1996)). Collectively, these findings suggest that co-branded products are likely to be viewed more favorably by consumers and generate higher cash flows.

Co-branding  alliances  also  offer  the  partner  firms  an  opportunity  to  improve operational efficiencies. Co-branding partners can gain access to new markets and share each other's resources in terms of manufacturing, managerial knowledge, and advertising. Prior research shows that the market reaction is positive in the case of a new product or technological alliances (e.g., (Kalaignanam et al., 2007)), suggesting that investors anticipate higher future cash flows as a result of technology transfers. Because co-branding alliances involve the creation and commercialization of a new product,  they  draw  upon  characteristics  of  both  marketing  and  technological alliances. Consequently, such alliances should not only generate higher future cash flows  (similar  to  those  generated  by  new  product  alliances)  but  also  reduce  the uncertainty associated with these cash flows by leveraging the equities of the two partner  brands.  Therefore,  it  is  expected  that  the  stock  market  reaction  to  the announcement of co-branded products will be positive.

H1: Co-branding event announcements generate positive abnormal returns in the stock market.

## 3-1 Moderating effect of co-branding attributes

Different attributes of co-branding structure could also impact an involved firm's abnormal returns. According to (Newmeyer et al., 2014), there are three co-branding structures, namely  co-branding  integration,  co-branding exclusivity,  and  cobranding duration. Integration refers to the extent to which the partnering brands are intertwined in form and function. In such a relationship, the brands can be presented together in a multitude of forms, with the degree of integration ranging from very low where the brands are almost entirely self-standing and separate in form and function  to  very  high,  with  the  brands  completely  fused  together  such  that  it  is practically impossible to separate them in form and function. In high integration, multiple brands are paired together to make a complete product, and the highest level of utility is achieved when the brands are used jointly. In contrast, low integration is the joint presentation of brands that largely remain separate in form, and joint use may be desirable but certainly not necessary. Exclusivity is defined as the number of partners with whom the focal brand pursues a co-branding arrangement. Greater exclusivity  is  when  the  focal  brand  has  a  single  (or  few)  partner  brand(s).  For example, the  Apple iPhone  initially  had  an  exclusive  alliance  with  AT&amp;T.  Less exclusive co-branding is one in which the focal brand has many partners (Intel's co- branding with many PC manufacturers). In an exclusive arrangement, all of the focal brand's  performance  information  is  derived  from  the  single  partnership  or  the individual  performance  of  the  parent  brand.  In  a  less  exclusive  co-branding arrangement, consumers  have  broader focal brand performance information obtained  from  multiple  and  possibly  diverse  partnerships  ((Das  &amp;  Teng,  1998); (Mowery et al., 1996)).

Duration is defined as the length of time for which the cobranding arrangement lasts (e.g.,(Das &amp; Teng, 1998); (Provan &amp; Gassenheimer, 1994)). The relationship could be short-term (Disney's Lion King co-promotion with Burger King for that movie only)  or  long-term,  encompassing  multiple  generations  (Pixar's  partnership  with Disney to co-produce multiple movies, finally leading to the merger of Pixar and Disney).

According to the existing research, high co-branding integration, long co-branding duration, and high co-branding exclusivity are found to generate a greater impact on brand evaluation. Thus, the following three hypotheses are proposed.

H2: Co-branding event announcements generate greater positive abnormal returns in the stock market when the partnering brands are highly integrated.

H3: Co-branding event announcements generate greater positive abnormal returns in the stock market when the co-branding structure is more exclusive.

H4: Co-branding event announcements generate greater positive abnormal returns in the stock market when co-branding duration is long term.

## 4Conclusion

In this paper, we investigated the relation between co-branding event announcement and abnormal returns in the stock market for the partnering brands. We argued that co-branding event announcement generates positive abnormal returns in the stock market.    Furthermore,  we  investigated  the  moderating  impact  of  co-branding structure attributes on the relation between co-branding event announcement and abnormal  returns.  We  claimed  that  higher  co-branding  integration,  greater  cobranding exclusivity, and longer co-branding duration generate a greater positive abnormal return for the partnering firms.

## Reference

- Aaker, D. A., &amp; Jacobson, R. (1994). The Financial Information Content of Perceived Quality. Journal of Marketing Research , 31 (2), 191-201. https://doi.org/10.2307/3152193
- Aaker, D. A., &amp; Keller, K. L. (1990). Consumer Evaluations of Brand Extensions. Journal of Marketing , 54 (1), 27-41.

https://doi.org/10.1177/002224299005400102

- Abbo, M.-H. (2006). An Exploratory Study on the Impact of Two Ingredient Branding Strategies on the Host Brand .
- Angle, H. L., &amp; Perry, J. L. (1981). An Empirical Assessment of Organizational Commitment and Organizational Effectiveness. Administrative Science Quarterly , 26 (1), 1-14. https://doi.org/10.2307/2392596
- Barth, M. E., Clement, M. B., Foster, G., &amp; Kasznik, R. (1998). Brand Values and Capital Market Valuation. Review of Accounting Studies , 3 (1), 41-68. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1009620132177
- Bengtsson, A., &amp; Servais, P. (2005). Co-branding on industrial markets. Industrial Marketing Management , 34 , 706-713.
- Besharat, A., &amp; Langan, R. (2014). Towards the formation of consensus in the domain of co-branding: Current findings and future priorities. Journal of Brand Management , 21 (2), 112-132. https://doi.org/10.1057/bm.2013.25
- Cao, Z., &amp; Sorescu, A. (2013). Wedded Bliss or Tainted Love? Stock Market Reactions to the Introduction of Cobranded Products. Marketing Science , 32 (6), 939-959. https://doi.org/10.1287/mksc.2013.0806
- Das, T. K., &amp; Teng, B.-S. (1998). Resource and risk management in the strategic alliance making process. Journal of Management , 24 (1), 21-42. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-2063(99)80052-X
- Desai, K. K., &amp; Keller, K. L. (2002). The Effects of Ingredient Branding Strategies on Host Brand Extendibility. Journal of Marketing , 66 (1), 73-93. https://doi.org/10.1509/jmkg.66.1.73.18450
- Devlin, G., &amp; Bleackley, M. (1988). Strategic alliances-Guidelines for success. Long Range Planning , 21 (5), 18-23.

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/0024-6301(88)90101-X

- Fakhravar, H. (n.d.). Fuzzy inventory model with receiving reparative order and considering imperfect quality items .

- Fakhravar, H. (2020a). Application of Failure Modes and Effects Analysis in the Engineering Design .
- Fakhravar, H. (2020b). Quantifying Uncertainty in Risk Assessment using Fuzzy Theory. ArXiv E-Prints , arXiv:2009.09334.
- Fakhravar, H. (2021). Application of Failure Modes and Effects Analysis in the Engineering Design Process. ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:2101.05444 .
- Fakhravar, H. (2022). Combining heuristics and Exact Algorithms: A Review. ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:2202.02799 .
- Gaeth, G. J., Levin, I. P., Chakraborty, G., &amp; Levin, A. M. (1991). Consumer evaluation of multi-product bundles: An information integration analysis. Marketing Letters , 2 (1), 47-57. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00435195
- Helmig, B., Huber, J.-A., &amp; Leeflang, P. S. H. (2008). Co-branding: The State of the Art. Schmalenbach Business Review , 60 (4), 359-377. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03396775
- James, D. O., Lyman, M., &amp; Foreman, S. K. (2006). Does the tail wag the dog? Brand personality in brand alliance evaluation. Journal of Product &amp; Brand Management , 15 (3), 173-183. https://doi.org/10.1108/10610420610668612
- Kalaignanam, K., Shankar, V., &amp; Varadarajan, R. (2007). Asymmetric New Product Development Alliances: Win-Win or Win-Lose Partnerships? Management Science , 53 (3), 357-374. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1060.0642
- Keller, K. L., &amp; Lehmann, D. (2006). Brands and Branding: Research Findings and Future Priorities. Marketing Science , 25 , 740-759.
- Keränen, J., Piirainen, K. A., &amp; Salminen, R. T. (2012). Systematic review on B2B branding: research issues and avenues for future research. Journal of Product &amp; Brand Management , 21 (6), 404-417. https://doi.org/10.1108/10610421211264892
- Lane, V., &amp; Jacobson, R. (1995). Stock Market Reactions to Brand Extension Announcements: The Effects of Brand Attitude and Familiarity. Journal of Marketing , 59 (1), 63-77. https://doi.org/10.2307/1252015
- Leuthesser, L., Kohli, C., &amp; Suri, R. (2003). 2+2=5? A framework for using cobranding to leverage a brand. Journal of Brand Management , 11 (1), 35-47. https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.bm.2540146
- Levin, A. M., Davis, J. C., &amp; Levin, I. (1996). Theoretical and Empirical Linkages

- Between Consumers' Responses to Different Branding Strategies. ACR North American Advances .
- Madden, T. J., Fehle, F., &amp; Fournier, S. (2006). Brands matter: An empirical demonstration of the creation of shareholder value through branding. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 34 (2), 224. https://doi.org/10.1177/0092070305283356
- Mohr, J., &amp; Spekman, R. (1994). Characteristics of partnership success: Partnership attributes, communication behavior, and conflict resolution techniques. Strategic Management Journal , 15 (2), 135-152. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250150205
- Mowery, D. C., Oxley, J. E., &amp; Silverman, B. S. (1996). Strategic alliances and interfirm knowledge transfer. Strategic Management Journal , 17 (S2), 77-91. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250171108
- Natarajan, G., Ng, E. H., &amp; Katina, P. F. (2021). SYSTEMS STATISTICAL ENGINEERING-HIERARCHICAL FUZZY CONSTRAINT PROPAGATION .
- Newmeyer, C. E., Venkatesh, R., &amp; Chatterjee, R. (2014). Cobranding arrangements and partner selection: a conceptual framework and managerial guidelines. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 42 (2), 103-118. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-013-0343-8
- Nguyen, H. T., Ross, W. T., Pancras, J., &amp; Phan, H. V. (2020). Market-based drivers of cobranding success. Journal of Business Research , 115 , 122-138. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2020.04.046
- Ouabira, M. M., &amp; Fakhravar, H. (2021). Effective Project Management and the Role of Quality Assurance throughout the Project Life Cycle. European Journal of Engineering and Technology Research , 6 (5).
- Park, C. W., Jun, S. Y., &amp; Shocker, A. D. (1996). Composite Branding Alliances: An Investigation of Extension and Feedback Effects. Journal of Marketing Research , 33 (4), 453-466. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224379603300407
- Paydas Turan, C. (2021). Success drivers of co-branding: A meta-analysis. International Journal of Consumer Studies , n/a (n/a). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/ijcs.12682
- Provan, K. G., &amp; Gassenheimer, J. B. (1994). SUPPLIER COMMITMENT IN RELATIONAL CONTRACT EXCHANGES WITH BUYERS: A STUDY OF INTERORGANIZATIONAL DEPENDENCE AND EXERCISED POWER*. Journal of Management Studies , 31 (1), 55-68.

- https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.1994.tb00332.x
- Rao, A. R. (1997). Strategic brand alliances. Journal of Brand Management , 5 (2), 111-119. https://doi.org/10.1057/bm.1997.37
- Rao, A. R., Qu, L., &amp; Ruekert, R. W. (1999). Signaling Unobservable Product Quality through a Brand Ally. Journal of Marketing Research , 36 (2), 258268. https://doi.org/10.2307/3152097
- Rodrigue, C. S., &amp; Biswas, A. (2004). Brand alliance dependency and exclusivity: an empirical investigation. Journal of Product &amp; Brand Management , 13 (7), 477-487. https://doi.org/10.1108/10610420410568417
- Samu, S., Krishnan, H. S., &amp; Smith, R. E. (1999). Using Advertising Alliances for New Product Introduction: Interactions between Product Complementarity and Promotional Strategies. Journal of Marketing , 63 (1), 57-74. https://doi.org/10.1177/002224299906300105
- Series, O. D. L. (n.d.). illuminator .
- Simon, C. J., &amp; Sullivan, M. W. (1993). The Measurement and Determinants of Brand Equity: A Financial Approach. Marketing Science , 12 (1), 28-52.
- Simonin, B. L., &amp; Ruth, J. A. (1998). Is a Company Known by the Company It Keeps? Assessing the Spillover Effects of Brand Alliances on Consumer Brand Attitudes. Journal of Marketing Research , 35 (1), 30-42. https://doi.org/10.2307/3151928
- Spence, M. (1973). Job Market Signaling. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 87 (3), 355-374. https://doi.org/10.2307/1882010
- Srivastava, R. K., Shervani, T. A., &amp; Fahey, L. (1998). Market-Based Assets and Shareholder Value: A Framework for Analysis. Journal of Marketing , 62 (1), 2-18. https://doi.org/10.2307/1251799
- Tahami, H., &amp; Fakhravar, H. (2020a). A Fuzzy Inventory Model Considering Imperfect Quality Items with Receiving Reparative Batch and Order. European Journal of Engineering and Technology Research , 5 (10), 11791185.
- Tahami, H., &amp; Fakhravar, H. (2020b). A fuzzy inventory model considering imperfect quality items with receiving reparative batch and order overlapping. ArXiv Preprint ArXiv:2009.05881 .
- Tahami, H., &amp; Fakhravar, H. (2020c). Multilevel Reorder Strategy-based Supply Chain Model. 5th North American Conference on Industrial Engineering and

Operations Management (IEOM), Michigan, USA .

- Tahami, H., Mirzazadeh, A., Arshadi-khamseh, A., &amp; Gholami-Qadikolaei, A. (2016). A periodic review integrated inventory model for buyer's unidentified protection interval demand distribution. Cogent Engineering , 3 (1), 1206689.
- Tahami, H., Mirzazadeh, A., &amp; Gholami-Qadikolaei, A. (2019). Simultaneous control on lead time elements and ordering cost for an inflationary inventoryproduction model with mixture of normal distributions LTD under finite capacity. RAIRO-Operations Research , 53 (4), 1357-1384.
- Varadarajan, P. 'Rajan.' (1986). Horizontal Cooperative Sales Promotion: A Framework for Classification and Additional Perspectives. Journal of Marketing , 50 (2), 61-73. https://doi.org/10.2307/1251600
- Venkatesh, R., &amp; Mahajan, V. (1997). Products with Branded Components: An Approach for Premium Pricing and Partner Selection. Marketing Science , 16 (2), 146-165.
- Voss, K. E., &amp; Gammoh, B. S. (2004). Building Brands through Brand Alliances: Does a Second Ally Help? Marketing Letters , 15 (2), 147-159. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:MARK.0000047390.01552.a2
- Voss, K. E., &amp; Tansuhaj, P. (1999). A Consumer Perspective on Foreign Market Entry. Journal of International Consumer Marketing , 11 (2), 39-58. https://doi.org/10.1300/J046v11n02\_03
- Washburn, J. H., Till, B. D., &amp; Priluck, R. (2000). Co-branding: brand equity and trial effects. Journal of Consumer Marketing , 17 (7), 591-604. https://doi.org/10.1108/07363760010357796
- Yadav, M. S. (1994). How Buyers Evaluate Product Bundles: A Model of Anchoring and Adjustment. Journal of Consumer Research , 21 (2), 342-353.
- Yahoodik, S., Tahami, H., Unverricht, J., Yamani, Y., Handley, H., &amp; Thompson, D. (2020). Blink Rate as a Measure of Driver Workload during Simulated Driving. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , 64 (1), 1825-1828.
- Yu, Y., Rothenberg, L., &amp; Moore, M. (2021). Exploring young consumer's decision-making for luxury co-branding combinations. International Journal of Retail &amp; Distribution Management , 49 (3), 341-358. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJRDM-12-2019-0399