<!-- image -->

## Stock Performance Evaluation for Portfolio Design from Different Sectors of the Indian Stock Market

Capstone project report submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Post Graduate Program in Data Science at Praxis Business School

By

## ARPIT AWAD AADITYA RAJ GOURAV RAY PUSPARNA CHAKRABORTY SANKET DAS SUBHASMITA MISHRA

Under Supervision of

Prof JAYDIP SEN

PRAXIS BUSINESS SCHOOL

## ABSTRACT

Stock  market  offers  platform  where  people  buy  and  sell  shares  of  publicly  listed  companies. Generally stock prices are quite volatile; hence predicting them is daunting task. There are still many researches going to develop more accuracy in stock price prediction. Portfolio construction refers  to  allocation  of  different  sector  stocks  optimally  to  achieve  maximum  return  by  taking minimum risk. A good portfolio can help investor earn maximum profit by taking minimum risk. Beginning  from  Dow  Jones  Theory  a  lot  of  advancement  has  happened  in  area  of  building efficient  portfolio.  In  this  project  we  have  tried  to  predict  future  value  of  few  stocks  from  six important sectors of Indian economy and also built portfolio. As part of the project, our team has conducted  a  study  of  performance  of  various  Time  series,  machine  learning  (regression  and classification)  and  deep  learning  models  in  stock  price  prediction  on  selected  stocks  from  the chosen six important sectors of the economy. As part of building a n  efficient portfolio we have studied multiple portfolio optimization theories beginning from MPT (Modern Portfolio theory). We have built minimum variance portfolio and optimal risk portfolio for all the six chosen sectors by using past five years' daily stock price as training data and have also conducted back testing to check the performance of the portfolio. We look forward to continue our study in area of stock price prediction and asset allocation and consider this project as first stepping stone.

## CONTENT

- 1 Chapter 1  ..................................................................................................................................
- Introduction .....................................................................................................................
- 2 Chapter 2  ..................................................................................................................................
- Methodology  .....................................................................................................................
- 3 Chapter 3  ..................................................................................................................................

Time Series models .......................................................................................................... Simple Exponential Smoothing .............................................................................. Holt-Winters Trend Method................................................................................... ARIMA (Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average)  ........................................ Sector-wise results and analysis ..................................................................................... Metal Sector ............................................................................................................. IT Sector  ................................................................................................................... Banking Sector  ......................................................................................................... FMCG Sector ........................................................................................................... Auto sector ............................................................................................................... Pharma sector…………………………………………………………………………

- 4 Chapter 4  ..................................................................................................................................

Machine Learning Models ..............................................................................................

Linear Regression  ....................................................................................................

Random Forest.........................................................................................................

Gradient Boost .........................................................................................................

XGBoost ...................................................................................................................

Gaussian NB  .............................................................................................................

Logistic Regression  ..................................................................................................

KNN Model ..............................................................................................................

Classification Reports .............................................................................................

Sector-wise results analysis for ML classification and Regression .............................

Metal Sector .............................................................................................................

Pharma Sector .........................................................................................................

IT Sector ...................................................................................................................

Banking Sector  .........................................................................................................

Auto Sector  ...............................................................................................................

- 5 Chapter 5  ..................................................................................................................................
- Deep Learning Models .......................................................................................................

| Long- and Short-Term Memory Network........................................................................  Convolutional Neural Networks  ........................................................................................  Sector-wise results and analysis ........................................................................................  6  Chapter 6  ..................................................................................................................................  Portfolio Optimization .......................................................................................................  Analysis of Return in different types of portfolio  ............................................................  7  Chapter 7……………………………………………………………………………………...  Conclusion…………………………………………………………………………………  8  References…………………………………………………………………………………….   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## Introduction

Stock market has become one of the money-spinning option for everyone because of its maximum return  in  minimum  time.  It  is  a  secondary  market  where  people  buy  and  sell  securities electronically.  In  India  there  are  two  stock  exchanges- BSE  and  NSE. BSE is considered to be India's oldest stock exchange which came to existence in 1875 which has SENSEX as its flagship index comprising of top 30 stocks which are largest most liquid and financially stable; later NSE came to existence  and  started  trading  in  1994.  NSE  has  a  flagship  index  named  as  NIFTY  50 comprising of top 50 companies based on its trading volume and market capitalization. Securities Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI)  is  the  regulator  of  Indian  Stock  Market.  A  company  first launches its IPO in primary market and then on the day of listing it becomes a part of secondary market and investors as well as traders buys shares of company. All orders in the trading systems needs to be done electronically through brokers from Monday to Friday within 9.00 AM- 3.30PM. Equity  markets  follow  T+2  settlements.  An  investor  earns  by  investing  optimally  in  different sectors  hence  by  building  an  optimal  portfolio.  Before  building  portfolio  investor  should  first decide  his/her  financial  goal  and  have  a  look  on  his/her  current  asset,  liabilities  and  other investments. Then he should allocate asset in diversified manner in order to get maximum return by  taking  minimum  risks.  Once  portfolio  is  constructed  its  crucial  to  monitor  investment  and reevaluate goals annually and make changes semi-annually or annually. Many new methods and concepts  have  emerged  in  financial  portfolio  construction,  risk  management  and  performance evaluation. Markowitz who used variance of returns as a measure of risk was one of the pioneers in proposing a quantitative methodology for portfolio construction, his work along with Sharpe and Lintner generated discussions that formed modern theory of portfolio.  The pandemic saw a large  number  of  surges  in  Trading  and  Demat  Account.  All  stock  trading  data  are  available  in NSE websites. In this project we have taken six important sectors of Indian Economy and top four sectors from six sectors. In this project we have done stock prediction using various techniques like  time  series,  machine  learning  and  deep  learning.  In  Time  Series  we  have  used  Simple Exponential  Smoothing,  Holt  Winter's  Model,  Rolling  Window  Method,  and  Sliding  Window Method  for  stock  price  prediction.  In  machine  learning  we  used  various  Regression  and Classification techniques. In deep learning we used LSTM and CNN method to predict various stock prices.

## CHAPTER-1

Building an efficient portfolio is the process of allocating weights to a collection of stocks i n        such a way  that  the  risk  and  return  are  optimized.  Markowitz's  Minimum  Variance  Portfolio  is considered as the foundation of all the later works in the field of portfolio optimization. A detailed comparative study of various statistical, machine learning and deep learning models has been done for  stock  price  prediction.  Machine  Learning  models  have  also  been  employed  for  building classification models to predict future price of stock. Building an optimal portfolio along with the ROI computation helps an investor to make investment decisions wisely. The investor can equally divide  the  fund  in  different  sectors  to  maximize  return  in  minimum  risk.  Generally  stock  price fluctuate in news flow, we have also tried to show price fluctuation based on news flow. We shall discuss in details in subsequent chapters.

## Methodology

The first step towards achieving the goal of stock price prediction is selection of stocks. We took top  four  stocks  from  six  important  sectors  of  Indian  Economy.  These  four  stocks  were  chosen from top four stock of fact sheet published at the end of every month in NSE website. We chose Metal sector, IT sector, Banking sector, FMCG sector, Auto sector and Pharma sector. For the same, the latest monthly published sectoral Index report was referred to and the top 5 contributors to the index of each sector were chosen. The lists of four stocks chosen from six sectors for stock price prediction are as follows:-

| Sl  No  METAL  IT  BANK  AUTO  FMCG  PHARMA  1  TATA  STEEL  TCS  HDFC  BANK  BAJAJ  AUTO  HINDUSTAN  UNILEVER  SUN  PHARMA  2  HINDALCO  INFY  ICICI  BANK  M&amp;M  ITC  CIPLA  3  JSW STEEL  WIPRO  AXIS  BANK  MARUTI  NESTLE  DR  REDDY  4  VEDANTA  HCL  TECH  KOTAK  BANK  TATA  MOTORS  TATA  CONSUMER  DIVISLAB   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## CHAPTER-2

The daily data from 1 st Jan 2016 to 31 st  Dec 2021 was fetched using Yahoo finance API. The four years data was which is from 1 st Jan 2016 to 31 st Dec 2020 was used as training data and the one year data which is from 1 st Jan 2021 to 31 st December 2021 is used as testing data. Usually, stock markets work 5 days a week and will be off on Saturday and Sunday. But in the dataset, some of the  weekday  trading  data  was  missing  due  to  holidays.  The  missing days  were  identified  and imputed using forward fill. After the imputation, there are 1482 data points. Before going deep into the topic let us discuss few terms associated with stock market:

- i) Open- The price at which stock opens on a trading day.
2. ii) High- The highest price that the stock touches on a trading day.
3. iii) Low- The lowest price that the stock touches on a trading day.
4. iv) Volume- The number of stocks traded on a particular day.
- v) Close- The price of the stock during closing of market.
6. vi) Average Traded Price- This is what buyers have paid for one share on average over the course of a specific time period.
7. vii) RSI- This measures the magnitude of recent price changes to analyze overbought and oversold condition.
8. viii) Moving  Averages-  These  features  capture  average  changes  in  series  of  data  over  a period of time

The models used for prediction are as follows:-

TIME SERIES MODELS:  Simple Exponential Smoothing

Holt's Trend Method

ARIMA

Sliding Window Method

Rolling Window Method

MACHINE LEARNING MODELS: Linear Regression

Random Forest

Gradient Boost

Naïve Bayes

KNN

DEEP LEARNING MODELS: LSTM (Long Short-Term Memory)

CNN (Convolutional Neural  Network)

Python libraries are used for building time series model and machine learning models    and keras for building deep learning models.

The  validation  method  used  for  statistical,  econometric  and  machine  learning  models  is  walkforward validation. There are two variants of walk-forward validation, rolling window and sliding window  walk-forward  validation.  In    rolling  window  validation,  with  every  iteration  both  the training set and test set moves forward by a fixed number of data points, the size of the training set would keep on increasing whereas the size of the test set would remain constant. Similarly, in sliding window validation with every iteration both training set and test set moves forward, but unlike  rolling  window  the  size  of  the  training  set  and  test  set  remains  constant.  That  is,  as  the training  window  moves  forward,  it  would  leave  the  past  values.  The  walk-forward  validation method allows us to train the model with the recent values.

For  stock  price  validation,  the  sliding  window  method  is  considered  to  be  more  appropriate compared to the rolling window method as it leaves the past values as the window moves forward. For stock price prediction more than the amount of the data with which a model has trained the recency of the data is important.

## CHAPTER-3

## TIME SERIES MODEL

## Simple Exponential Smoothing

A simple exponential smoothing is one of the simplest ways to forecast a time series. The idea of this model is future will be almost similar to the past. The intention of exponential smoothing is to smooth original series like moving average does and then to use smoothed series in forecasting future  asset  value.  Exponential  smoothing  is  a  simple  and  realistic  approach  to  forecasting whereby  forecast  is  constructed  from  an  exponentially  weighted  average  of  past  observations. Simple  Exponential  Smoothing  is  widely  used  forecasting  technique  which  requires  little computation. This method is used when data pattern is approximately horizontal (i.e., there is no neither cyclic variation nor pronounced trend in the historical data).

Let  an  observed  time  series  be  y1,  y2,  ….  yn.  Formally,  the  simple  exponential  smoothing equation takes the form of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Si-The smoothed value of time series at time

Yi-Actual value of time series at time

α -Smoothing constant

In case of simple exponential smoothing, the smoothed statistic is the Forecasted value.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

F t+1 -Forecasted value of time series at time t+1

Ft  -Forecasted value of time series at time t

This means:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Generalizing,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The series of weights used in producing the forecast Ft are α , α (1-α ), α(1-α) 2 , α(1-α) 3 ….

These weights decline toward zero in an exponential fashion; thus, as we go back in the series, each value has a smaller weight in terms of its effect on the forecast. The exponential decline of the weights towards zero is evident.

## Choosing α:

After  the  model  is  specified,  its  important  to  validate  its  performance  characteristics  by comparison of its forecast with historical data for the process it was designed to forecast. We can use  the  error  measures  such  as  MAPE  (Mean  absolute  percentage  error),  MSE  (Mean  square error) or RMSE (Root mean square error) and α is chosen such that the error is minimum. Usually the MSE or RMSE can be used as the criterion for selecting an appropriate smoothing constant. For instance, by assigning a value from 0.1 to 0.99, we select the value that produces the smallest MSE or RMSE.

This  method  is  call  exponential  smoothing  because  weight  given  to  each  observation  is exponentially  reduced.  This  is  quite  better  than  moving  average  model.  But  still  it  has  few limitations:

- ❖ It does not project trend
- ❖ It does not recognize its seasonal pattern
- ❖ It cannot use any external information like pricing or marketing expenses

Lastly we can say Simple Exponential Smoothing will help in getting good results and can be foundation block to build complex models later.

## Holt-Winters Trend Method

This method is named after researchers who proposed this model. An early form of exponential smoothing forecast was initially proposed by R.G. Brown in 1956. His equations were refined by Charles C.Holt in 1957. These smoothing models were again improved by Peter Winters. On their name  this  method  named  to  be  Holt-Winters  Method.  Both  proposed  different  exponential smoothing models that also can understand and project a trend or seasonality. This method is very common time  series  forecasting  method  capable  of  including  both  trend  and  seasonality.  It  is combination of Simple Exponential Smoothing, Holt's Exponential Smoothing, Winter's Exponential Smoothing. It's therefore otherwise referred to as triple exponential smoothing.

## Holt-Winters' additive method

The component form for the additive method is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where k is the integer part of (h-1)/m, which ensures that the estimates of the seasonal indices used for forecasting come from the final year of the sample.

The level equation shows a weighted average between the seasonally adjusted observation (yt-st-m)(yt-st-m) and non-seasonal forecast (ℓt-1+bt-1)(ℓt-1+bt-1) for time t. The trend equation is identical to Holt's linear method. The seasonal equation shows a weighted average between  the  current  seasonal  index, (yt-ℓt-1-bt-1)(yt-ℓt-1-bt-1),  and  the  seasonal  index  of  the same season last year (i.e., m time periods ago).

The equation for the seasonal component is often expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If we substitute ℓt from the smoothing equation for the level of the component form above, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which  is  identical  to  the  smoothing  equation  for  the  seasonal  component  we  specify  here, with γ=γ ∗ (1-α). The usual parameter restriction is 0≤γ ∗ ≤1, which translates to 0≤γ≤1-α

## Holt-Winters' multiplicative method

The component form for the multiplicative method is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This  method  is  capable  of  capturing  level,  trend  and  seasonality  component  and  promptly utilizes them in a forecast. It is incredibly intuitive and relatively simple forecasting procedure capable of modeling plethora of time series.

## ARIMA

It  stands for Auto Regressive Integrated Moving Average. It is a linear regression model that uses its own lags as predictors. It helps to get better insight into data and predict future trend. A dataset is stationary if it has constant mean, variance and covariance over time.

AR terms are the lags of stationary series MA terms are the lags of forecast errors.

It is mainly of two types- Non-Seasonal Arima and Seasonal Arima. These models are applied to stationary data. If data is not stationary then process of differencing is followed. The ACF and PACF patterns are studied to study the presence of lags in data. Then model is fitted and checked for residuals. A series is made stationary by differencing the time series with its lag value. After each differencing, the Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test is conducted to check the stationarity of the series, and the process is repeated until the series passes the ADF test. The Auto Regression parameter (p), the Difference parameter (d), and the Moving Average parameter (q) are required to fit the ARIMA model to a time series and to perform the univariate forecasting. Python has  the auto\_arima() function which finds the appropriate p, d, and q value of a series.

p otherwise known as lag order

d otherwise known as degree of differencing

q otherwise known as moving average

ARIMA is a method for forecasting future outcomes based on a historical time series. It is mainly based  on  statistical  concept  of  serial  correlation  where  past  data  influence  future  trends.  These models  take  into  account  trends,  cycles,  seasonality,  and  other  non-static  types  of  data  while making forecast.

## SECTOR WISE RESULTS AND ANALYSIS

## METAL SECTOR

The performance metric used is RMSE/mean percentage. It checks what percentage of the mean of the test value is RMSE (Root Mean Square Error). RMSE/mean help to compare across stocks as the value range of the variable in consideration won't affect the metric.

## 1. TATASTEEL

<!-- image -->

This is the seasonal decomposition of TATASTEEL

## Simple Exponential Smoothing

<!-- image -->

Here is graphical representation test, train and forecast graph. Training data is from 1 st January 2016 to 31 st December 2020, Test data is from 1st January 2021 to 31 st  December 2021. Green line shows the forecast value

## Holt Winter Trend Method

Arima

<!-- image -->

## Below is log return and Auto correlation plot

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Sliding Window Method

<!-- image -->

## Rolling Window Method

<!-- image -->

## 2. Hindalco

<!-- image -->

## Simple Exponential Smoothing

<!-- image -->

## Holt Winter Trend Method

<!-- image -->

## Sliding Window Method

<!-- image -->

## Rolling Window Method

<!-- image -->

## IT SECTOR

1.

TCS

<!-- image -->

## SIMPLE EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING

<!-- image -->

## HOLT WINTER TREND METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ARIMA

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## SLIDING WINDOW

<!-- image -->

## ROLLING WINDOW

<!-- image -->

## 2. WIPRO

<!-- image -->

## SIMPLE EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING

<!-- image -->

## HOLT WINTER METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ARIMA

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## SLIDING WINDOW

<!-- image -->

## ROLLING WINDOW

<!-- image -->

## BANKING SECTOR

## 1. HDFC BANK

<!-- image -->

## SIMPLE EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING

<!-- image -->

## HOLT WINTER TREND METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ARIMA

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## SLIDING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ROLLING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## 2. ICICI BANK

<!-- image -->

## SIMPLE EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING

<!-- image -->

## HOLT WINTER TREND METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ARIMA

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## SLIDING WINDOW

<!-- image -->

## ROLLING WINDOW

<!-- image -->

## FMCG SECTOR

## 1. HINDUSTAN UNILEVER

<!-- image -->

## SIMPLE EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING

<!-- image -->

## HOLT WINTER TREND METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ARIMA

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## SLIDING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ROLLING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## 2. ITC

<!-- image -->

## SIMPLE EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING

<!-- image -->

## HOLT WINTER TREND METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ARIMA

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## SLIDING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ROLLING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## AUTO SECTOR

## 1. TATA MOTORS

<!-- image -->

## SIMPLE EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING

<!-- image -->

## HOLT WINTER TREND METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ARIMA

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## SLIDING WINDOW

<!-- image -->

## ROLLING WINDOW

<!-- image -->

## 2. MARUTI

<!-- image -->

SIMPLE EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING

<!-- image -->

## HOLT WINTER TREND METHOD

<!-- image -->

ARIMA

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## SLIDING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ROLLING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## PHARMA SECTOR

## 1. SUN PHARMA

<!-- image -->

## SIMPLE EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING

<!-- image -->

## HOLT WINTER TREND METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ARIMA

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## SLIDING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ROLLING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## 2. CIPLA

<!-- image -->

## SIMPLE EXPONENTIAL SMOOTHING

<!-- image -->

## HOLT WINTER TREND METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ARIMA

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## SLIDING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## ROLLING WINDOW METHOD

<!-- image -->

## CHAPTER-4

## MACHINE LEARNING MODELS

## Linear Regression

It  is  mathematical  representation  of  patterns  hidden  in  data.  When  ML  model  is  trained  to  the training data it discovers some structures within it. If a model is trained on a training data and then apply that model to new data, the model would be able to infer some relationship within it.

Below are few steps for process of training a ML model:

- ❖ Get input data
- ❖ Split data into training and test data
- ❖ Fit algorithm to train data
- ❖ Evaluate model
- ❖ Use model in real life

Linear Regression is one of the best supervised machine learning algorithms. It is used to predict a numeric value based on a set of inputs. It tries to achieve a straight line of best fit between input variable  and  output  variable.  Linear  regression  attempts  to  model  the  relationship  between  two variables  by  fitting  a  linear  equation  to  observed  data.  One  variable  is  considered  to  be  an explanatory  variable,  and  the  other  is  considered  to  be  a  dependent  variable.  Linear-regression models  are  relatively  simple  and  provide  an  easy-to-interpret  mathematical  formula  that  can generate  predictions.  For  each  value  of  the  independent  variable,  the  distribution  of  the dependent variable must be normal. The variance of the distribution of the dependent variable should  be  constant  for  all  values  of  the  independent  variable.  The  relationship  between  the dependent variable and each independent variable should be linear and all observations should be independent.

## Random Forest

Random forest is a Supervised Machine Learning Algorithm that is used widely in Classification and Regression problems. It builds decision trees on different samples and takes their majority vote  for  classification  and  average  in  case  of  regression.  It  can  handle  the  dataset  containing continuous variables and categorical variable It performs better results for classification problems. It  consists  of  multiple  random decision  trees.  First  each  tree  is  built  on  a  random  sample  from original data, and then at each node a subset of features are randomly selected to generate best split. It is not only used for classification/regression but also for outlier detection, clustering and interpreting  a  dataset.  It  is  based  on  the  concept  of ensemble  learning, which  is  a  process of combining multiple classifiers to solve a complex problem and to improve the performance of the model.

One  of  the  main  advantage  of  using  random  forest  is  it  takes  less  time  as  compared  to  other algorithms.  It  predicts  output  with  high  accuracy  and  also  maintains  accuracy  when  large proportion  of  data  is  missing.  Apart  from  these  there  are  few  assumptions  of  Random  Forest. There should be some actual values in the feature variable of the dataset so that the classifier can predict accurate results rather than a guessed result. The predictions from each tree must have very low correlations. Random Forest is mainly applied in banking, pharma and marketing sectors. It is capable of performing both classification and regression tasks and can also handle large dataset with high dimensionality.

## Gradient Boost

Gradient  Boosting  is  a  supervised  machine  learning  algorithm  used  for  classification  and regression problems. It is an ensemble technique which uses multiple weak learners to produce a strong model for regression and classification. It requires few inputs such as a loss function to optimize,  a  weal  learner  to  make  prediction  and  an  additive  model  to  add  weak  learners  to minimize the loss function.  Gradient descent is a first-order iterative optimization algorithm for finding  a  local  minimum  of  a  differentiable  function.  As  gradient  boosting  is  based  on minimizing a loss function, different types of loss functions can be used resulting in a flexible technique that can be applied to regression, multi-class classification

Some advantages of Gradient Boosting are as follows:

1. Most of the time predictive accuracy of gradient boosting algorithm on higher side.
2. It provides lots of flexibility and can optimize on different loss functions and provides several hyper parameter tuning options that make the function fit very flexible.
3. Most of the time no data pre-processing required.
4. Gradient Boosting algorithm works great with categorical and numerical data.
5. Handles missing data - missing value imputation not required.

## XGBoost

XGBoost stands for 'Extreme Gradient Boosting'. XGBoost is one of the most popular variants of  gradient  boosting.  It  is  a  decision-tree-based  ensemble Machine  Learning  algorithm that uses a gradient boosting framework. XGBoost  is basically designed to enhance the performance  and  speed  of  a  Machine  Learning  model.  In  prediction  problems  involving unstructured  data  (images,  text,  etc.),  artificial  neural  networks  tend  to  outperform  all  other algorithms  or  frameworks.  However,  when  it  comes  to  small-to-medium  structured/tabular data,  decision  tree-based  algorithms  are  considered  best-in-class  right  now. XGBoost is used for  supervised  learning  problems,  where  we  use  the  training  data to  predict  a  target  variable. XGBoost  is  an  optimized  distributed  gradient  boosting  library  designed  to  be  highly  efficient, flexible,  and  portable.  It  implements  Machine  Learning  algorithms  under  the  Gradient  Boosting framework. It provides a parallel tree boosting to solve many data science problems in a fast and accurate way.

XGBoost uses pre-sorted algorithm &amp; histogram-based algorithm for computing the best split. The histogram-based  algorithm  splits  all  the  data  points  for  a  feature  into  discrete  bins  and uses these bins to find the split value of the histogram. Also, in XGBoost, the trees can have a varying number of terminal nodes and left weights of the trees that are calculated with less evidence  is  shrunk  more  heavily.  XGBoost  is  a  faster  algorithm  when  compared  to  other algorithms because of its parallel and distributed computing. XGBoost is developed with both deep considerations in terms of systems optimization and principles in machine learning.

## Gaussian NB

Naïve Bayes method is a type of supervised machine learning model. This namedto be 'naïve' because the classifier assumes that the input features that go into the model are  independent of each other. Hence, changing one input feature won't affect any of the others. Naive Bayes are a group of supervised machine learning classification algorithms based on the Bayes theorem. It is a simple classification technique, but has high functionality. They find use when the dimensionality of the inputs is high. Complex classification problems can also be implemented by using Naive Bayes Classifier. Gaussian Naive Bayes is a variant of Naive Bayes that follows Gaussian normal distribution  and  supports  continuous  data. Naive  Bayes  Classifiers  are  based  on  the  Bayes Theorem. One assumption taken is the  strong  independence  assumptions  between  the  features. These classifiers assume that the value of a particular feature is independent of the value of any other  feature.  In  a  supervised  learning  situation,  Naive  Bayes  Classifiers  are  trained  very efficiently. Naive Bayed classifiers need a small training data to estimate the parameters needed for classification. Naive Bayes Classifiers have simple design and implementation and they can applied to many real life situations.

Some Application of Naïve Bayes are as follows:-

- ❖ Real-time prediction
- ❖ Multi-class prediction
- ❖ Text Classification
- ❖ Recommendation System

Some Advantages of Naïve Bayes are:

-  Naive Bayes is easy to grasp and works quickly to predict class labels. It also performs well on multi-class prediction.
-  When the assumption of independence holds, a Naive Bayes classifier performs better compared to other models like logistic regression, and you would also need less training data.
-  It performs well when the input values are categorical rather than numeric.

## Logistic Regression

Logistic Regression comes under the umbrella of supervised machine learning. It is used when data is binary in nature and linearly separable. It is mainly used for binary classification problem. Logistic  model  is  a statistical  model that  models  the probability of  one  event  taking  place  by having the log-odds for the event be a linear combination of one or more independent variables. In regression  analysis, logistic  regression  is estimating the  parameters  of  a  logistic  model  (the coefficients  in  the  linear  combination).  Formally,  in  binary  logistic  regression  there  is  a single binary dependent variable, coded by a indicator variable, where the two values are labeled "0"  and  "1",  while  the independent  variables can  each  be  a  binary  variable  or  a continuous variable.

## Key Assumptions of Effective Logistic Regression:

Multinomial can be used to classify subjects into groups based on a categorical range of variables to  predict  behavior.  For  example,  you  can  conduct  a  survey  in  which  participants  are  asked  to select one of several competing products as their favorite. You can create profiles of people who are most likely to be interested in your product, and plan your advertising strategy accordingly.

Binary is most useful when you want to model the event probability for a categorical response variable with two outcomes. A loan officer wants to know whether the next customer is likely to default or not default on a loan. Binary analysis can help assess the risk of extending credit to a particular customer.

The goal of Logistic Regression is to discover a link between characteristics and the likelihood of a specific outcome. A Logistic Regression model is similar to a Linear Regression model, except that  the  Logistic  Regression  utilizes  a  more  sophisticated  cost  function,  which  is  known  as  the 'Sigmoid function' or 'logistic function' instead of a linear function.

## KNN Model

The k-nearest neighbors (KNN) algorithm is a simple, supervised machine learning algorithm that can  be  used  to  solve  both  classification  and  regression  problems.  It's  easy  to  implement  and understand, but has a major drawback of becoming significantly slows as the size of that data in use grows.

KNN works by finding the distances between a query and all the examples in the data, selecting the specified number examples (K) closest to the query, then votes for the most frequent label or averages the labels. Knn model is often called lazy learner because  model is not learned using training data prior and the learning process is postponed to a time when prediction is requested on the  new  instance.  Some  of  its  application  are  in  data  preprocessing,  recommendation  engines, financial sector, health care sector and pattern recognition problems.

## SECTOR WISE RESULTS AND ANALYSIS METAL SECTOR

## 1. TATA STEEL

## LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

## 2. HINDALCO

## LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

| STOCK NAME  LINEAR  REGRESSION  RANDOM  FOREST  GRADIENT  BOOST  Tata Steel  29.28  30.05  30.76  Hindalco  10.71  10.61  10.78  JSW Steel  14.60  15.90  15.96  VEDL  8.20  8.80  8.90   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## IT SECTOR

1. TCS

## LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

## 2. WIPRO

## LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

| STOCK NAME  LINEAR  REGRESSION  RANDOM  FOREST  GRADIENT  BOOST  TCS  45.73  46.94  46.87  Infy  20.69  23.58  22.77  Wipro  9.26  9.78  9.85  Hcl tech  18.55  20.01  18.97   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## BANKING SECTOR

## 1. HDFC BANK

## LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

## 2. ICICI BANK

## LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

| STOCK NAME  LINEAR  REGRESSION  RANDOM  FOREST  GRADIENT  BOOST  HDFC Bank  23.09  22.85  23.17  ICICI Bank  12.72  13.53  13.31  Kotak Bank  33.74  35.18  34.54  Axis Bank  13.62  14.25  13.65   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## FMCG SECTOR

1. HINDUSTAN UNILEVER

## LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

## 2. ITC LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

| STOCK NAME  LINEAR  REGRESSION  RANDOM  FOREST  GRADIENT  BOOST  HUL  10.51  11.31  10.86  ITC  3.76  3.80  3.60  Nestle  211.62  215.30  211.01  Tata Consumer  10.50  11.31  10.86   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## AUTO SECTOR

## 1. TATA MOTORS

## LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

## 2. MARUTI

## LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

| STOCK NAME  LINEAR  REGRESSION  RANDOM  FOREST  GRADIENT  BOOST  Tata Motors  11.11  12.36  11.94  Maruti  123.58  123.08  123.95  Bajaj Auto  59.37  59.84  61.28  M&amp;M  15.80  17.36  16.56   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## PHARMA SECTOR

## 1. SUN PHARMA

## LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

## 2. CIPLA

## LINEAR REGRESSION

<!-- image -->

## RANDOM FOREST

<!-- image -->

## GRADIENT BOOST

<!-- image -->

| STOCK NAME  LINEAR  REGRESSION  RANDOM  FOREST  GRADIENT  BOOST  Sun Pharma  11.44  12.31  12.54  Cipla  13.96  14.67  14.58  Divislab  68.49  73.12  71.71  Drreddy  75.78  78.15  77.26   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## CLASSIFICATION REPORTS

## AUC VALUES OF DIFFERENT STOCKS METAL SECTOR:

| STOCK  NAME  RANDOM  FOREST  XG BOOST  GAUSSIAN  NB  LOGISTIC  REGRESSION  KNN  Tata Steel  0.7822  0.7837  0.7097  0.6468  0.5068  Hindalco  0.7555  0.7714  0.6915  0.6177  0.5044  JSW Steel  0.7889  0.8033  0.7540  0.5987  0.5109  Vedanta  0.8126  0.8245  0.7700  0.7145  0.5644   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| STOCK  NAME  RANDOM  FOREST  XG BOOST  GAUSSIAN  NB  LOGISTIC  REGRESSION  KNN  TCS  0.8015  0.7822  0.7329  0.6040  0.5000  Infy  0.7811  0.7350  0.7525  0.6225  0.5000  Wipro  0.8128  0.7923  0.7603  0.5931  0.5000  Hcltech  0.7851  0.7758  0.7328  0.6356  0.5000   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| STOCK  NAME  RANDOM  FOREST  XG BOOST  GAUSSIAN  NB  LOGISTIC  REGRESSION  KNN  HDFC Bank  0.8333  0.8136  0.7912  0.6822  0.5687  ICICI Bank  0.8036  0.7951  0.7692  0.6944  0.4326  Kotak Bank  0.8217  0.8076  0.7674  0.6828  0.5325  Axis Bank  0.8167  0.8231  0.7892  0.6950  0.5141   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

| STOCK  NAME  RANDOM  FOREST  XG BOOST  GAUSSIAN  NB  LOGISTIC  REGRESSION  KNN  HUL  0.8090  0.7835  0.7389  0.6900  0.5168  ITC  0.8188  0.8019  0.7850  0.6791  0.5745  Nestle  0.8196  0.8022  0.6240  0.6039  0.4671  Tata  Consumer  0.8157  0.8258  0.7365  0.6739  0.5000   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

| STOCK  NAME  RANDOM  FOREST  XG BOOST  GAUSSIAN  NB  LOGISTIC  REGRESSION  KNN  Tata Motors  0.7860  0.7761  0.7474  0.6973  0.5423  Maruti  0.7821  0.7787  0.6548  0.5843  0.4930  Bajaj Auto  0.7899  0.8104  0.7364  0.6017  0.4985  M&amp;M  0.8225  0.8136  0.7863  0.6977  0.5437   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

| STOCK  NAME  RANDOM  FOREST  XG BOOST  GAUSSIAN  NB  LOGISTIC  REGRESSION  KNN  Sun Pharma  0.8184  0.8303  0.7785  0.7510  0.5039  Cipla  0.8212  0.8222  0.7828  0.6908  0.5029  Divislab  0.7944  0.8029  0.6825  0.5767  0.5074  Drreddy  0.7888  0.7909  0.7166  0.5893  0.5097   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## CHAPTER-5

## DEEP LEARNING MODEL

Deep  learning  is  a  part  of  machine  learning  based  on  artificial  neural  networks.  It  teaches computer to work like that of humans. Deep learning is a key technology behind driverless cars, enabling them to recognize a stop sign, or to distinguish a pedestrian from a lamppost. It is the key to  voice  control  in  consumer  devices  like  phones,  tablets,  TVs,  and  hands-free  speakers.  Deep learning is getting lots of attention lately and for good reason. Deep learning achieves recognition accuracy at higher levels than ever before. This helps consumer  electronics meet user expectations, and it is crucial for safety-critical applications like driverless cars. Recent advances in  deep  learning  have  improved to the point where deep learning outperforms humans in some tasks  like  classifying  objects  in  images.  Deep  learning  requires  large  amounts  of labeled  data. Deep  learning  requires  substantial computing  power.  High-performance  GPUs  have  a  parallel architecture that is efficient for deep learning. When combined with clusters or cloud computing, this enables development teams to reduce training time for a deep learning network from weeks to hours or less. The term 'deep' refers to number of hidden layers in neural network. Deep learning network can have 100-150 hidden layers within it.  Few  applications of deep  learning  are    self driving cars, fraud detection, virtual assistants, visual recognition, pixel restoration, adding sounds to  silent movies, automatic game playing etc.

In this project we have worked on two deep learning techniques:-

-  Long- and Short-Term Memory Network

- [ ]  Convolutional Neural Networks

## Long and Short-Term Memory Network

Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks are a type of recurrent neural network capable of learning  order  dependence  in  sequence  prediction  problems.  This  is  a  behavior  required  in complex problem domains like machine translation, speech recognition, and more. LSTMs are a complex  area  of  deep  learning. LSTM  is  an  advanced  RNN,  which  is  sequential  network  that allows information to persist. It is capable of handling the vanishing gradient problem faced by RNN. A recurrent neural network is also known as RNN is used for persistent memory. LSTM was designed by Hochreiter &amp; Schmidhuber. It tackled the problem of long-term dependencies of RNN in which the RNN cannot predict the word stored in the long-term memory but can give more accurate predictions from the recent information. As the gap length increases RNN does not give an efficient performance. LSTM can by default retain the information for a long period of time. It is used for processing, predicting, and classifying on the basis of time-series data. The recurrent neural network uses long short-term memory blocks to provide context for the way the program receives inputs and creates outputs. The long short-term memory block is a complex unit with  various  components  such  as  weighted  inputs,  activation  functions,  inputs  from  previous blocks  and  eventual  outputs.  The  unit  is  called  a  long  short-term  memory  block  because  the program  is  using  a  structure  founded  on  short-term  memory  processes  to  create  longer-term memory.

Some applications of LSTM are:-

- ❖ Language Modelling
- ❖ Machine Translation
- ❖ Image Captioning
- ❖ Handwriting generation
- ❖ Chatbots

## Convolutional Neural Network

Convolutional Neural Network is a Deep Learning algorithm which can take in an input image, assign importance (learnable weights and biases) to various aspects/objects in the image and be able to differentiate one from the other. The pre-processing required in a CNN is much lower as compared to other classification algorithms. While in primitive methods filters are handengineered, with enough training, CNN have the ability to learn these filters/characteristics. The architecture of a CNN is analogous to that of the connectivity pattern of Neurons in the Human Brain and was inspired by the organization of the Visual Cortex. Individual neurons respond to stimuli only in a restricted region of the visual field known as the Receptive Field. A collection of such fields overlap to cover the entire visual area. CNN's were first developed and used around the 1980s. The most that a CNN could do at that time was recognizing handwritten digits. It was mostly used in the postal sectors to read zip codes, pin codes, etc. The important thing to remember about any deep learning model is that it requires a large amount of data to train and also requires a lot of computing resources. In the present work, we have used CNN to forecast the univariate time series data. CNN has two important processing layers, convolutional layers, and pooling layers. The convolutional layers read input using a filter by scanning across the input data field. The output of the convolutional layer is an interpretation of the input that is projected onto the  filter map. The pooling layer takes the projections and reduces them to the most essential elements, using average pool or max pool. The convolution and pooling layers are repeated  and the output of the final pooling layer is provided to one or more fully-connected layers  that interpret what has been read.

The performance of the models is also studied by varying the number of filters. The objective of the same is to analyze how the increase or decrease in parameters would affect the accuracy of prediction and reduce/increase the time taken for computation. The loss function used is 'mean absolute error '(MAE), the optimizer used is Adam optimizer, and the activation function used is ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit).

## SECTOR WISE RESULT AND ANALYSIS

| STOCK NAME  PARAMETERS  MAE  Tata Steel  793857  245.12  Infy  793857  425.63  HDFC Bank  793857  492.98  ITC  793857  136.41  Maruti  793857  3241.91  Sun Pharma  793857  336.29   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## CHAPTER-6

## PORTFOLIO OPTIMIZATION

Earlier we have discussed the various statistical, econometric, machine learning, and deep  learning models  to  predict  stock  prices  of  selected  stocks  from  six  sectors.  This  chapter  discusses  a systematic  approach  for  building  portfolios  of  stocks  -minimum  risk  portfolio,  optimal  risk portfolio-  from  five  sectors.  Five  stocks  from  each  sector  would  be  considered  for  portfolio building. Historical stock prices of five years that are from Jan 1, 2016, to Dec 31, 2020, would be used for building the portfolios. The performances of the portfolios are evaluated based on their returns  after  a  period  of  one  year.  Several  other  attributes  of  the  portfolios  such  as  the  risk, weights  assigned  to  different  stocks,  and  the  correlation  among  the  constituent  stocks  are  also studied.

## Steps followed in portfolio design

## Data acquisition of 5 stocks from each of the chosen five sectors

As discussed in Chapter 2, using Yahoo Finance API, stock prices of five years i.e. from Jan 1, 2016, to Dec 31, 2020, are fetched for building the portfolio and from Jan 1, 2021, to Dec 31, 2021,  for  backtesting.  Since  the  focus  is  on  univariate  analysis,  'close  price'  is  the  variable  of interest.

## Computation of return and volatility

The daily return and log return values of each stock of the sector are calculated. The daily return values are the percentage changes in the daily close values over successive  days,  while  the  log return  values  are  the  logarithms  of  the  percentage changes in the daily close values. Using the daily  volatility  and  the  annual  volatility  of  five  stocks  of  each  sector  are  computed.  The  daily volatility is defined as the standard deviation of daily return values. The annual volatility is yield by a multiplication factor of square root of 250. Annual volatility of a stock quantifies the risk associated with stock from point of view of an investor, as it indicates the amount of variability in price.

## Computation of covariance

Once the volatilities and return of the stocks are computed, the covariances for the five stocks in each sector are calculated. Any pair exhibiting a high value of correlation coefficient indicates a strong association between them. A good portfolio aims to minimize the  risk while maximizing the return.  Risk  minimization  of  a  portfolio  requires  identifying  stocks  that  have  low  correlation among themselves so that a higher diversity can be achieved. Hence, computation and analysis of the covariance of the stocks are of importance.

Based on various parameters we have built three types of portfolios:

## OPTIMISED PORTFOLIO

## EQUAL ALLOCATION PORTFOLIO

## MINIMUM VOLATILITY PORTFOLIO

## OPTIMISED PORTFOLIO

The investors in the stock markets are usually not interested in the minimum risk portfolios as the return are usually less. In most cases, the investors are ready  to incur risk if the associated return value is more. To compute the optimum risk portfolio, we use the metric Sharpe Ratio of a portfolio. The Sharpe Ratio of a portfolio is given below.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Rc, Rf, and σc denote the return of the current portfolio, the risk-free portfolio, and  the standard deviation of the current portfolio, respectively. Here, the risk-free portfolio is a portfolio with a volatility value of 1%. The optimum-risk portfolio is  the one that maximizes the Sharpe Ratio for a set of stocks. This portfolio makes an optimization between the return and the risk of a portfolio. It yields a substantially higher return than the minimum risk portfolio, with a very nominal increase in the risk, and hence, maximizing the value of the Sharpe ratio.

## EQUAL ALLOCATION PORTFOLIO

Here, we proceed towards a deeper analysis of the historical prices of the five stocks in each of the five sectors. Here we construct a portfolio  using the twenty five stocks, with each stock carrying equal weight. Since there are five stocks in a sector each stock is assigned a weight of 0.04. Based on the training dataset and using an equal-weight portfolio, we compute the yearly  return and risk of each portfolio.

The yearly return and the yearly volatility of the equal-weight portfolio of each sector are computed using the training dataset. For this purpose, the mean of the yearly return values is derived using the resample function in Python with a parameter 'Y'. Yearly volatility values of the stocks in the equal-weight portfolio are derived by multiplying the daily volatility values by the square root of 250, assuming that there are 250 working days in a year for a stock exchange. The equal-weight portfolio of a sector gives us an idea about the overall  profitability and risk associated with each sector over the training period. However for future investments, their usefulness is very limited. Every stock in a portfolio does not contribute equally to its return and the risk.

## MINIMUM VOLATILITY PORTFOLIO

We build the minimum volatility portfolio for each sector using the records in its training  dataset. The minimum volatility portfolio is characterized by its minimum variance. The  variance of a portfolio is a metric computed using the variances of each stock in the  portfolio as well as the covariance between each pair of stocks in the portfolio.

## ANALYSIS OF RETURN IN DIFFERENT TYPES OF PORTFOLIO

| STOCK NAME  OPTIMAL PORTFOLIO(%)  EQUAL ALLOCATION  PORTFOLIO(%)  MINIMUM VOLATILITY  PORTFOLIO(%)  AMOUNT SPENT FOR 1YR  RETURN IN 1YR  TATASTEEL  99950  73287  7  99992  70997  6  99982  56751  8  HINDALCO  13  17  0  JSW STEEL  25  10  17  VEDL  42  25  16  ADANI ENTERPRISE  MARUTI  TATAMOTORS  M&amp;M  BAJAJ AUTO  EICHER MOTOR  HDFC BANK  ICICI BANK  AXIS BANK  KOTAK BANK  SBIN  INFY  TCS  HCL TECH  WIPRO  TECHM  ZEEL  PVR  TV18BRDCST  SUNTV  SAREGAMA  20  1  11  2  0  1  7  4  4  3  8  7  0  4  16  5  3  0  12  8  15  8  1  22  6  1  1  3  7  6  2  15  3  1  4  11  4  18  3  130  8  48  2  0  1  3  2  2  8  3  1  1  5  4  3  8  27  11  19  2  24  2  29   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## CONCLUSION

In  this  project,  we  have  studied  the  performance  of statistical,  econometrical,  machine  learning and deep learning models in stock price prediction. Simple exponential smoothing, Holt Winter method,  ARIMA  is  the  statistical  model  studied  whereas  K  Nearest  Neighbor,  Decision  Tree, SVM,  XGBoost  and  Random  Forest  are  the  machine  learning  models  used  for  stock  price prediction. Among the classification ML models, along with the above mentioned ones, logistic regression  has  also  been  studied.  LSTM and CNN are the deep learning models used for stock price  prediction.  Performance of  the  deep  learning  models  with  increase  or  decrease  of  the parameters/ input values has also been analyzed. Sliding Window and Rolling Window are the validation  method  used  for  statistical, econometric  and  machine  learning  models.  Since  deep learning models give better results only if the training data is huge, traditional train slit method is used for training and testing. Some interesting patterns in day wise RMSE/ mean plots have been noticed while building machine learning and deep learning models. It is noticed that among  the econometric models performed the best across the sectors, whereas Random Forest and XGBoost are at par with each other as far as ML classification or regression models are concerned. LSTM gave better results compared to CNN, though time taken for execution is much less for CNN.

We built three types of portfolio and analyzed return of different types of portfolio and then we studied NLP to do sentiment analysis and analyze impact of news on different stocks prices.

## CHAPTER-7

## REFERENCES

- Sen, J. (2022) 'A Forecasting Framework for the Indian Healthcare Sector Index', International Journal  of  Business  Forecasting  and  Marketing  Intelligence  (IJBFMI),  Art  ID:  IJBFMI108504. (Accepted for Publication) DOI: 10.1504/IJBFMI.2022.10047095.
- Sen,  J.  and  Mehtab,  S.  (2021)  'A  Comparative  Study  of  Optimum  Risk  Portfolio  and  Eigen Portfolio on the Indian Stock Market', International Journal of Business Forecasting and Marketing Intelligence (IJBFMI), Vol 7, No 2, pp. 143-193. Inderscience Publishers. DOI: 10.1504/IJBFMI.2021.10043037
- Mehtab,  S.  and  Sen,  J.  (2020)  'A  Time  Series  Analysis-Based  Stock  Price  Prediction  Using Machine  Learning  and  Deep  Learning  Models',  International Journal of Business Forecasting  and  Marketing  Intelligence  (IJBFMI),  Inderscience  Publishers,  Vol  6,  No  4, pp. 272-335. DOI: 10.1504/IJBFMI.2020.115691.
- Sen, J., Mehtab, S. and Nath, G. (2020) 'Stock Price Prediction Using Deep Learning Models', Lattice:    The  Machine Learning Journal, Vol 1, No 3, pp. 34-40, December 2020. DOI: 10.36227/techrxiv.16640197.v1
- Sen, J. (2018)  "Stock  Composition  of  Mutual  Funds  and  Fund  Style: A  Time  Series Decomposition  Approach  towards  Testing  for  Consistency",  International  Journal  of Business Forecasting and Marketing Intelligence, Vol 4, No 3, pp. 235-292, 2018. DOI: 10.1504/IJBFMI.2018.092781.
- Sen,  J.and  Datta  Chaudhuri,  T.  (2018)  "Understanding  the  Sectors  of  Indian  Economy  for Portfolio choice", International Journal of Business Forecasting and Marketing Intelligence, Vol 4, No 2, pp. 178 - 222, April 2018. DOI: 10.1504/IJBFMI.2018.090914.
- Sen, J. (2017) "A Robust Analysis and Forecasting Framework for the Indian Mid Cap Sector Using  Time  Series  Decomposition  Approach",  Journal  of Insurance and Financial Management, Vol 3, No 4, pp. 1 -32, September 2017. PDF DOI: 10.36227/techrxiv.15128901.v1
- Sen, J. (2017) "A Time Series Analysis-Based Forecasting Approach for the Indian Realty Sector ", International Journal of Applied Economic Studies, Vol 5, No 4, pp 8 - 27, August 2017. PDF. DOI: 10.36227/techrxiv.16640212.v1.
- Sen J. and Datta Chaudhuri, T. (2017) "A Predictive Analysis of the Indian FMCG Sector Using Time Series Decomposition-Based Approach", Journal of Economics Library, Vol 4, No 2, pp 206 - 226, June 2017.   http://dx.doi.org/10.1453/jel.v4i2.1282 PDF
- Sen J. and Datta Chaudhuri, T. (2017), "A Time Series Analysis-Based Forecasting Framework for the Indian Healthcare Sector", Journal of Insurance and Financial Management, Vol 3, No 1 (2017), pp 66 - 94. PDF. DOI: 10.36227/techrxiv.16640221.v1.
- Sen  J.  and  Datta  Chaudhuri  (2016),  'An  Investigation  of  the  Structural  Characteristics  of  the Indian IT Sector and the Capital Goods Sector - An Application of the R Programming Language  in  Time  Series  Decomposition  and  Forecasting',  Journal  of  Insurance  and Financial Management, Vol 1, Issue 4, pp 68-132, June 2016. PDF. DOI:

- Sen J. and Datta Chaudhuri (2016), 'An Alternative Framework for Time Series Decomposition and  Forecasting  and  its  Relevance  for  Portfolio  Choice  -  A  Comparative  Study  of  the Indian Consumer Durable and Small Cap Sectors', Journal of Economics Library, Istanbul, Turkey, Vol 3, Issue 2, pp 303 - 326, June 2016.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1453/jel.v3i2.787 PDF
- Sen  J.  and  Datta  Chaudhuri  (2015),  'A  Framework  for  Predictive  Analysis  of  Stock  Market Indices - A Study of the Indian Auto Sector, Calcutta Business School (CBS) Journal of Management Practices, Vol 2, Issue 2, pp 120, December 2015. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.2178.3448   PDF
- Sen, J. (2022) 'Designing Efficient Pair-Trading Strategies Using Cointegration for the Indian Stock Market' Proceedings of the IEEE ASIANCON'22, Pune, India, August, 2022.
- Sen, J. and Dutta, A. (2022) 'Design and Analysis of Optimized Portfolios for Selected Sectors of  the  Indian  Stock  Market',  in  Proceedings  of  the  2022  International  Conference  on Decision  Aid  Sciences  and  Applications  (DASA),  pp.  567-573,  March  23-25,  2022, Chiangrai, Thailand. DOI: 10.1109/DASA54658.2022.9765289.
- Sen, J. and Dutta, A. (2021), 'A Comparative Study of Hierarchical Risk Parity Portfolio and Eigen  Portfolio  on  the  NIFTY  50  Stocks',  In  Proceedings  of  the  2nd  International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Data Analytics (ICCIDA'21), January 8-9, 2021, Hyderabad, India. (In Press)
- Sen,  J.,  Dutta,  A.,  Mondal,  S.,  and  Mehtab,  S.  (2021),  'A  Comparative  Study  of  Portfolio Optimization Using Optimum  Risk  and  Hierarchical Risk Parity Approaches', In Proceedings  of  the  8th  International  Conference  on  Business  Analytics  and  Intelligence (ICBAI'21), December 20-22, 2021, IISc, Bangalore, India.
- Bhowmick,  H.,  Chatterjee,  A.,  and  Sen,  J.  (2021)  'Comprehensive  Movie  Recommendation System',  In  Proceedings  of  the  8th  International  Conference  on  Business  Analytics  and Intelligence (ICBAI'21), December 20-22, 2021, IISc, Bangalore, India.
- Sen, J. and Dutta, A. (2021), 'Risk-Based Portfolio Optimization on Some Selected Sectors of the Indian Stock Market', In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Big Data, Machine Learning and Applications (BigDML'21), December 19-20, 2021, NIT Silchar, Assam, India. (In Press)
- Sen, J., Mehtab, S., and Dutta, A. (2021) 'Precise Stock Price Prediction for Optimized Portfolio Design  Using  an  LSTM  Model',  In  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  19th  OITS  International Conference on Information Technology (OCIT'21), pp. 210-215, December 16-18, 2021, Bhubaneswar, India. DOI: 10.1109/OCIT53463.2021.00050.
- Sen, J., Mondal, S., and Nath, G. (2021) 'Robust Portfolio Design and Stock Price Prediction Using  an  Optimized  LSTM  Model',  In  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  18th  India  Council International  Conference  (INDICON'21),  pp.  1-6,  December  19-21,  2021,  Guwahati, India. DOI: 10.1109/INDICON52576.2021.9691583.
- Sen, J., Mehtab, S., Dutta, A., and Mondal, S. (2021) 'Hierarchical Risk Parity and Minimum
- Variance Portfolio Design on NIFTY 50 Stocks', In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference  on  Decision  Aid  Sciences and  Applications  (DASA'21),  pp.  668-675, December 7-8, 2021, Bahrain. DOI: 10.1109/DASA53625.2021.9681925.
- Sen, J., Mondal, S. and Mehtab, S. (2021) 'Portfolio Optimization on NIFTY Thematic Sector Stocks Using an LSTM Model', In Proceedings of the IEEE  International Conference on Data Analytics for Business and Industry (ICDABI'21), pp. 364-369, Bahrain, October 2526, 2021. DOI: 10.1109/ICDABI53623.2021.9655886.
- Chatterjee,  A.,  Bhowmick,  H.,  and  Sen,  J.(2021)  'Stock  Price  Prediction  Using  Time  Series, Econometric,  Machine  Learning,  and  Deep  Learning  Models',  In  Proceedings  of  IEEE Mysore Sub Section International Conference (MysuruCon'21), October 24-25, 2021, pp. 289-296, Hassan, Karnataka, India. DOI: 10.1109/MysuruCon52639.2021.9641610.
- Sen, J., Dutta, A., and Mehtab, S. (2021) 'Stock Portfolio Optimization Using a Deep Learning LSTM  Model',  In  Proceedings  of  IEEE  Mysore  Sub  Section  International  Conference (MysuruCon),  October  24-25, 2021, pp. 263-271, Hassan, Karnataka, India.  DOI: 10.1109/MysuruCon52639.2021.9641662.
- Sen, J., Mondal, S., and Mehtab, S. (2021) 'Analysis of Sectoral Profitability of the Indian Stock Market  Using  an  LSTM  Regression  Model',  in  Proceedings  of  the  Deep  Learning Developers' Conference (DLDC'21),  September  24, 2021, Bangalore, India.  DOI: 10.36227/techrxiv.17048579.v1.
- Sen, J., Mehtab, S., and Dutta, A. (2021) 'Volatility Modeling of Stocks from Selected Sectors of the Indian Economy Using GARCH', in Proceedings of the IEEE Asian Conference on Innovation  in  Technology  (ASIANCON'21),  pp  1-9,  August  28-29,  2021,  Pune,  India. DOI: 10.1109/ASIANCON51346.2021.9544977. IEEE Xplore Link
- Sen, J., Mehtab, S. (2021) 'Accurate Stock Price Forecasting Using Robust and Optimized Deep Learning  Models',  in  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Intelligent Technologies (CONIT), pp. 1-9, June 25-27, 2021, Hubballi, India. DOI: 10.1109/CONIT51480.2021.9498565.
- Sen, J., Dutta, A., and Mehtab, S. (2021) 'Profitability Analysis in Stock Investment Using an LSTM-Based  Deep  Learning  Model',  in  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  2nd  International Conference for Emerging Technology (INCET), pp. 1-9, May 21-23, Belagavi, India. DOI: 10.1109/INCET51464.2021.9456385.
- Mehtab, S. and Sen, J. (2022) 'Analysis and Forecasting of Financial Time Series Using CNN and LSTM-Based Deep Learning Models', In: Sahoo J.P, Tripathy A.K., Mohanty M., Li KC.,  Nayak  A.K.  (eds)  Advances  in  Distributed  Computing  and  Machine  Learning. Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, vol 202, pp 405-423. Springer, Singapore. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-16-4807-6\_39.
- Mehtab, S. and Sen, J., and Dasgupta, S. (2020) 'Robust Analysis of Stock Price Time Series Using CNN and LSTM-Based Deep Learning Models', in Proceedings of the IEEE 4th International  Conference  on  Electronics,  Communication  and  Aerospace  Technology (ICECA), pp 1481-1486, November 5-7, 2020, Coimbatore, India. DOI: 10.1109/ICECA49313.2020.9297652.
- Mehtab,  S.  and  Sen,  J.  (2020),  'Stock  Price  Prediction  Using  CNN  and  LSTM-Based  Deep Learning Models', in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Decision Aid Sciences and Applications (DASA), pp. 447-453, November 8-9, 2020, Sakheer, Bahrain. DOI: 10.1109/DASA51403.2020.9317207.
- Mehtab, S. and Sen, J., and Dutta, A. (2021), and Abhishek Dutta, 'Stock Price Prediction Using Machine  Learning  and  LSTM-Based  Deep  Learning  Models',  Machine  Learning  and Metaheuristics Algorithms, and Applications (SoMMA), pp. 88-106, Communications in Computer and Information Science, Springer, Singapore. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-16-0419-5\_8.
- Mehtab, S. and Sen, J. (2020), 'Stock Price Prediction Using Convolutional Neural Networks on a  Multivariate Time Series', in Proceedings of the 3rd National Conference on Machine Learning  and  Artificial  Intelligence  (NCMLAI  2020),  Lal  Bahadur  Shastri  Institute  of Management, New Delhi, INDIA, February 1, 2020. PDF DOI: 10.36227/techrxiv.15088734.v1.
- Mehtab, S. and Sen, J.  (2019),  'A  Robust  Predictive  Model  for  Stock  Price  Prediction  Using Deep Learning and Natural Language Processing', in Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Business Analytics and Intelligence (BAICONF, 2019), Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, INDIA, December 5 -7, 2019. DOI: 10.36227/techrxiv.15023361.v1.
- Sen, J. (2018) 'Stock Price Prediction Using Machine Learning and Deep Learning Frameworks', in Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Business Analytics and Intelligence (ICBAI'2018), Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, INDIA, December 20 - 21, 2018.
- Sen J. and Datta Chaudhuri, T. (2017), "A Robust Predictive Model for Stock Price Forecasting", in Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Business Analytics and Intelligence, Indian  Institute  of  Management,  Bangalore,  December  11-  13,  2017,  INDIA.    DOI: 10.36227/techrxiv.16778611.v1
- Mondal, S. and Sen, J. (2017) "A Framework of Predictive Analysis of Tourist Inflow  in the Beaches of West Bengal: A Study of Digha-Mandarmoni Beach", in Proceedings of the First International Conference on Computational Intelligence, Communication and Business Analytics (CICBA-2017), Springer-Verlag, CCIS Series, pp. 161 - 176, March 24 - 25, 2017, Kolkata, INDIA. DOI: 10.1007/978-981-10-6427-2\_14.
- Sen  J.  and  Datta  Chaudhuri,  T.  (2016)  "Decomposition  of  Time  Series  Data  to  Check Consistency  between  Fund  Style  and  Actual  Fund  Composition  of  Mutual  Funds",  in Proceedings  of  the  4th  International  Conference  on  Business  Analytics  and  Intelligence (ICBAI  2016),    Indian  Institute  of  Science,  Bangalore,  India,  December  19  -  21,  2016. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.2.33048.19206.
- Sen J. and Datta Chaudhuri, T.(2016), 'Decomposition of  Time Series Data of Stock Markets and  its  Implications  for  Prediction  -  An  Application  for  the  Indian  Auto  Sector',  in Proceedings  of  the  2nd  National  Conference  on  Advances  in  Business  Research  and Management Practices  (ABRMP'2016), Kolkata, India,  January  8-9,  pp.  15  -  28,  2016. doi:10.13140/RG.2.1.3232.0241
- Mehtab,  S.  and  Sen,  J.  (2022)  'Stock  Price  Prediction  Using  Deep  Learning  and  Natural Language Processing', book chapter in: J. Sen and S. Mehtab (eds), Machine Learning in the  Analysis  and  Forecasting  of  Financial  Time  Series,  pp.  1-28,  Cambridge  Scholars Publishing, UK, May 2022. ISBN: 978-1-5275-8324-5.
- Sen J. (2022) 'Machine Learning and Deep Learning in Stock Price Prediction', book chapter in: J. Sen and S. Mehtab (eds), Machine Learning in the Analysis and Forecasting of Financial Time  Series,  pp.  29-67,  Cambridge  Scholars  Publishing,  UK,  May  2022.  ISBN:  978-15275-8324-5.
- Sen, J. and Mehtab, S. (2022) 'Stock Price Prediction Using Convolutional Neural Networks', book  chapter  in:  J.  Sen  and  S.  Mehtab  (eds),  Machine  Learning  in  the  Analysis  and Forecasting  of  Financial  Time  Series,  pp.  68-101,  Cambridge  Scholars  Publishing,  UK, May 2022. ISBN: 978-1-5275-8324-5.
- Dutta A. and Sen, J. (2022) 'Robust Predictive Models for the Indian IT Sector using Machine Learning  and  Deep  Learning',  book  chapter  in:  J.  Sen  and  S.  Mehtab  (eds),  Machine Learning  in the  Analysis  and  Forecasting  of Financial  Time  Series,  pp.  102-196, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, UK, May 2022. ISBN: 978-1-5275-8324-5.
- Ashmita  Paul and Jaydip Sen, 'A  Causality Analysis between the Indian Information Technology  Sector  Index  and  the  DJIA  Index',  book  chapter  in:  J.  Sen  and  S.  Mehtab (eds),  Machine  Learning  in  the  Analysis  and  Forecasting  of  Financial  Time  Series,  pp. 197-234, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, UK, May 2022. ISBN: 978-1-5275-8324-5.
- Mehtab,  S.  and  Sen,  J.  (2022)  'Stock  Price  Prediction  using  Machine  Learning  and  Deep Learning Algorithms and Models', book chapter in: J. Sen and S. Mehtab (eds), Machine Learning  in the  Analysis  and  Forecasting  of Financial Time  Series,  pp.  235-303, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, UK, May 2022. ISBN: 978-1-5275-8324-5.
- Sen  J.  (2022)  'Analysis  of  Different  Sectors  of  the  Indian  Economy  for  Robust  Portfolio Construction',  book  chapter  in:  J.  Sen  and  S.  Mehtab  (eds),  Machine  Learning  in  the Analysis  and  Forecasting  of  Financial  Time  Series,  pp.  304-360,  Cambridge  Scholars Publishing, UK, May 2022. ISBN: 978-1-5275-8324-5.
- Sen,  J.,  Dutta,  A.  (2022),  'Portfolio  Optimization  for  the  Indian  Stock  Market',  in:  Wang,  J. (ed.)  Encyclopedia  of  Data  Science  and  Machine  Learning,  IGI  Global,  USA,  August 2022. (In Press). DOI: 10.4018/978-1-7998-9220-5.
- Sen,  J.  and  Mehtab,  S.  (2022)  'Long-and-Short-Term  Memory  (LSTM)  Price  Prediction  Architectures  and  Applications  in  Stock  Price  Prediction',  Chapter  8,  in:  Singh,  U., Murugesan, S., and Seth, A. (eds) Emerging Computing Paradigms - Principles, Advances, and Applications, Wiley, USA, August, 2022. (In Press)
- Sen,  J.,  Sen,  R.,  and  Dutta,  A.  (2021)  'Machine  Learning  in  Finance:  Emerging  Trends  and Challenges',  Introductory  Chapter',  in  Machine  Learning:  Algorithms,  Models,  and Applications  Editor:  Jaydip  Sen,  IntechOpen,  London,  UK,  December,  2021.  DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.101120.
- Sen, J. and Mehtab, S. (2021) 'Design and Analysis of Robust Deep Learning Models for Stock Price Prediction',  Book  Chapter  in  Machine  Learning  -  Algorithms,  Models  and Applications,  Editor:  Jaydip  Sen.  Chapter  published  in  the  book  Machine  Learning:
- Algorithm,  Models,  and  Application  edited  by  Jaydip  Sen  and  published  online  by IntechOpen, London, UK, in August 2021. DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.99982.
- Sen  J.  (2018)  "A  Study  of  the  Indian  Metal  Sector  Using  Time  Series  Decomposition-Based Approach", Book Chapter in Selected Studies on Economics and Finance, Editors: Selim Basar,  A.  Alkan  Celik,  and  Turgut  Bayramoglu,  pp.  105  -  152,  Cambridge  Scholars Publishing, UK, March 2018.
- Sen, J. and Mehtab, S. (2022) Machine Learning in the Analysis and Forecasting of Financial Time  Series,  Cambridge  Scholars  Publishing,  Newcastle  upon  Tyne,  UK,  May  2022. ISBN: 978-1-5275-8324-5.
- Sen,  J.  (2021)  Machine  Learning  -  Algorithms,  Models,  and  Applications,  InTechOpen Publishers, London, UK. ISBN: 978-1-83969-485-1. ISSN: 2633-1403.
- Sen, J. and Datta Chaudhuri, T. (2017) Analysis and Forecasting of Financial Time Series Using R: Models and Applications, Scholar's Press, Germany. ISBN: 978-3-330-65386-3.