## CONTRASTING THE EFFICIENCY OF STOCK PRICE PREDICTION MODELS USING VARIOUS TYPES OF LSTM MODELS AIDED WITH SENTIMENT ANALYSIS

Varun Sangwan (RA1911003010036 - vs5019@srmist.edu.in)

Vishesh Kumar (RA1911003010212 - vk7879@srmist.edu.in)

Dr. Bibin Christopher(bibinchv@srmist.edu.in)

Department of Computer Science &amp; Engineering

SRM Institute OF Science And Technology (Chennai)

---------------------------------------------------------------------***---------------------------------------------------------------------

## Abstract -

Stock market forecasts are always attracting the attention of multiple analysts  and  researchers.  Many  Popular theories observe that the stock market is, in  its  essence,  a  random  game  of  chance and  that  it  is  a  mindless  game  to  try  to predict  a  thin  item.  Predicting  a  stock's price is a challenging problem due to the number of external variables present. The market  behaves  in  the  short  term  like  a ballot or a voting machine, but in the long run,  it  acts  like  a  weighing  machine  and may thus forecast market movements over a more extended time period. Stock Price prediction's integration with modern technology - especially Machine Learning Algorithms (Quant models as often referred to in the financial sector) is recently becoming  a  growing  idea for research. Research has shown that Machine Learning Models, particularly with the use of Recursive Neural Networks (RNN) and Long-Term Short Memory (LSTM), when applied to historical data of shares, can be utilized to predict the shortterm price of the share. Our research aims to find the best model that uses companies' projections and sector performances and how the given company fares accordingly to correctly predict equity  share  prices  for  both  short-  and long-term goals.

Keywords - Stock Price Prediction, Machine Learning, Recursive Neural Networks, Long Short-term Memory, Company Projections

## 1.INTRODUCTION

Forecasting and analysing the stock market is attempting to predict the possible future value of an organisation'sorganisation's stock or other exchange-traded instruments of finance. The stock market is a  critical  aspect  of  the  country'scountry's economy;  it  also plays a vital role in expanding its industry and trade, impacting its economy. Investors and the industry are interested in the stock market and want to know  if  particular  stocks  will  vary  over time.  The  stock  exchange  is  the  primary funding source for any firm seeking to grow its  operations. It relies on the supply and demand idea. If there is a strong demand for  the  organisation's  shares,  the  stock price rises; if there is little demand for the stock, the stock price falls.

The National Stock Exchange of India (abbreviated NSE) is India's principal stock exchange, based in Mumbai. The NSE was established  in  1992  as  the  country's  first language-free digital exchange. The NSE is the first exchange in the country to provide a contemporary, fully autonomous screenbased  online  trading  system,  making  it simple for investors across the country to trade. Similarly, various other stock exchanges like NASDAQ and DOW JONES in the United States of America (abbreviated as  USA),  NIKKEI  in  Japan,  KOSPI  in  South Korea, FTSE in the United Kingdom(abbreviated as UK), DAX in Germany etc act as markets for securities to be bought and sold.

The main motive to correctly predict stock values  and  prices  in  the  short  and  long term is to maximise your potential earnings  rather  than  relying  on  tips.  A significant  amount  of  research  has  gone into developing Machine Learning models that can correctly predict stock prices and have been  used by hedge  funds and investment  banks  for  quite  some  time now.  However,  these  models  are  mainly used  to  predict  short-term  prices  so  that they can be utilised in intraday trading, and most long-term models generally focus on indices and option chains.

The efficiency of various prediction models can  be  debated  as  many  can  not  predict long-term  fluctuations  and  compare  the current  stock  value  as  compared  to  its current trading price which  takes  into account  the  sector  performance(For  Eg: The  existing  share  of  a  stock;  assuming Reliance declines in the Oil Sector as compared  to  its  projections  signalling  a down quarter, but its price value has not fluctuated much, leading to the assumption  that  a  correction  is  in  order which will result in large volumes of shares being sold and the stock price taking a hit).

Fundamental Analysis refers to the concept of using underlying financial records published by the company, taking other  competitor  data,  and  contrasting them  to predict shortand long-term prices correctly. It requires using historical shares  datasets  with  critical  information like closing prices, volumes traded, uptrend, downtrend etc.

Because  of  the  engagement  of  a  wide number of sectors and enterprises, it has incredibly massive databases from which it is impossible to extract information manually  and  analyse  working  patterns. This project's application not only predicts the  future  movement  of  a  stock  in  the market, but it also automates the retrieval of data, trend evaluation, predictive modelling,  and  insight  production  of  a stock with the touch of a button.

Using sentiment analysis and NLP, a comparative study was done on the efficiency  of  various  models  to  predict short  and  long-term  share  prices.  Apart from  vanilla  LSTM  and  LSTM  aided  with sentiment analysis, other models were also implemented,  like  a  Bidirectional  LSTM, which is a sequence prediction model that consists of two LSTMS - one that runs in the forward direction and one that runs in the  backward  direction  which  aims  to increase efficiency and reduce the margin for error.

The  other  models  that  have  also  been tested to find the most efficient model are Seq2Seq LSTM(an encoder-decoder model created using RNN) and the LSTM two-path approach.  The  use  of  Sentiment  Analysis has also improved all these models. Sentiment analysis aims to remedy specific scenarios  that  cannot  be  predicted  by numbers  alone  and  are  more  dependent on real-world factors. For Eg: The Covid 19 Pandemic caused the sale of an unprecedented amount of shares dragging the  markets  down  when  everything  was under lockdown leading to a collapse in a previously predicted up-trending market.

Stock  market  analysis  and  forecasts  will reveal market trends and predict when to buy stocks. Successfully predicting the future price of a stock can generate substantial profits. Our project implements extensive  training  of  12-month  historical market  data  for  various  company  stocks like TESLA, Twitter, AMD, Facebook etc. , to represent  various  conditions  and  confirm that  time  series  models  have  significant predictive  power  over  the  Statistical  side for high probability trading and high return for competitive business investment.

## 2. LITERATURE SURVEY

[1] Research on Legitimate Neural Network Based Stock Price Prediction Method, IEEE 2019, authored by Sayavong Lounnapha et al.  This  research  proposes  to  develop  a stock  price  forecasting  system  based  on sophisticated neural networks with exceptional  self-learning  capabilities.  The dataset is taught and tested in terms of the CNN and Thai stock market price forecasts. Prediction  accuracy  is  high  and  may  be encouraged in the financial industry.

[2]  Enhancing  returns  by  predicting  stock prices  using  Deep  Neural  Networks,  IEEE 2019, authored by Soheila Abrishami et al. Financial Forecasting and Prediction is an enormous task that attracts the interest of several academics and is critical to investors. This research paper introduces a system  using  deep  learning  that  predicts the value of a stock based on a sequence of data about a piece of a stock traded on the NASDAQ  stock  exchange.  The  model  is trained using the minor data for a specific stock  and  correctly  guesses  its  ultimate value in numerous phases. It incorporates an  autoencoder  for  noise  removal  and employs  time  series  data  architecture  to deliver  improved  features  alongside  the original features. These additional characteristics  are  also  supplied  into  the stacked LSTM autoencoder, which estimates the ultimate stock value in many steps.

[3] LSTM Method for Bitcoin Price Prediction:  A  Case  Study  Stock  Market Yahoo  Finance,  IEEE  2019  authored  by Ferdiansyah et al. Due to the volatility of Bitcoin  in  the  stock  market,  automated solutions are necessary. This research uses LSTM  to  provide bitcoin stock  market prediction mode forecasts. Before validating the findings, the research attempts  to  quantify  them  using  RMSE (square root squared error). The research finds that the RMSE  will always be greater than  or  equal  to  the  MAE.  The  RMSE measure  assesses  the  model's  ability  to calculate continuous values.

[4]  Stock  Price  Prediction  Using  Machine Learning Techniques, IEEE 2019, authored by  Jeevan  B  et  al.  This  research  study focuses  on  stock  price  prediction  on  the National Stock Exchange utilising  RNN (Regenerating Neural Network) and LSTM (Long Term Short Term Memory) employing several parameters. Current market  values  and  anonymous  incidents are  examples  of  such  causes.  This  article also  discusses  recommendation  systems and  models  based  on  RNN  and  LSTM algorithms that are used to choose firms.

[5] Stock Market Prediction Using Machine Learning Techniques, IEEE 2020, authored by Naadun Sirimevan et al. This study uses behavioural reactions to web news to close the  gap  and  make  predictions  far  more accurate.  A  day,  a  week,  and  two  weeks later, accurate forecasts were made.

[6]  Stock  Market  Forecasting  by  Machine Learning,  IEEE  2018,  authored  by  Ishita Parmar, Ridam Arora et al.The application of  regression  and  LSTM-based  machine learning  techniques  for  forecasting  stock prices  are  investigated  in  this  work.  The elements measured are open, close, low, high, and volume. Using machine learning techniques,  this  research  paper attempts to predict a company's future stock price with more accuracy and predictability. The LSTM  algorithm produced a beneficial outcome with more accuracy in forecasting stock values.

[7]  Stock  Price  Prediction  Using  Machine Learning, IEEE 2018, authored by Jeevan B, Naresh  E  et  al.  This  research  is  primarily based  on  the  action  course  prediction technique, which predicts the value of the action utilising long-term, short-term memory (LSTM) and recurrent neural network (RNN). Several elements, such as market  price  currents,  price-to-earnings ratio, fundamental value, and other anonymous  statistics,  are  used  on  NSE data. The model's performance was evaluated by comparing the real and predicted data using an RNN graph. Machine learning is used to forecast stock prices  because  the  algorithm  can  predict prices extremely near the accurate price by capturing comprehensive features and employing various methodologies.

[8] Predictive Model Development for Stock Analysis, IEEE 2017, authored by R. Yamini Nivetha et al. The primary purpose of this research is to compare three algorithms:  Multilinear  Regression  (MLR), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Artificial Neural Network (ANN). The monthly and daily predictions will be used to anticipate the market price for the next day. Stock prices are predicted using sentiment analysis and the best prediction system. The multilinear regression technique is the least developed approach for calculating the volume and stock price association.  The  study's  findings  suggest that  deep  learning  algorithms  are  more sophisticated than MLR and SVM algorithms.

[9] Stock Price Prediction Based on Information  Entropy  and  Artificial  Neural Networks,  IEEE  2019  -  Zang  Yeze,  Wang Yiying et al.

## 3. METHODOLOGY

The  model  was  implemented  on  Google Colab  and    using  python  libraries  like pandas,  matplotlib,  NumPy  and  yahoo finance.    The  objective  was  to  predict stock prices using numerical, fundamental and sentiment analysis of companies.  The data  was  first  imported  from  the  yahoo finance library of share prices which records all the changes in the stock prices on an interval of 5 minutes as provided by the  share's  stock  exchange  -  NASDAQ, DOW JONES, NIFTY etc. In this particular testing model, we have used the Microsoft share and we have created the data frame based on the closing prices of the  share  daily  and  plotted  them  using matplotlib.  A  minmax  scaler  was  then applied onto it for the purpose of rescaling all  the  values  in  the  scale  [0,1]  and  the reshaped  model  was  then  trained  using Long Short-Term Memory and the model was then successfully compiled.

Fig  1:  Closing  price  graph  of  Microsoft plotted

<!-- image -->

Two measurements are used to determine the genuine worth of the stock - The P/E ratio (Price/Earnings Ratio) The price/earnings  ratio,  also  known  as  the price to earnings ratio or the P/E ratio, is a financial statistic that compares the price of  a  company's  stock  to  its  profits  per share. Simply said, it depicts the relationship between stock price and earnings. We  may use this ratio to determine how lucrative it is to purchase stock in a given firm. We may also use the P/E  ratio  to  identify  whether  stocks  are over or undervalued. For example, if two businesses  in  the  same  industry  have entirely different P/E ratio values, it may indicate that the appraisal of one of them is  not  credible.  The  P/E  ratio  may  be determined using the simple EPS (earnings per share) by dividing the current stock price by the earnings earned per  share.  The  alternative  metric  is  the price-to-sales  ratio,  abbreviated  as  the ratio. Because sales are sometimes referred to as a form of earnings, the P/S ratio is also known as price-to-earnings or price-to-earnings ratios.

It is mostly used to determine how much a stock is now worth in the market. This ratio  is  sometimes  used  in  conjunction with the well-known P/E ratio to determine  how  appealing  a  firm  is  in comparison  to  its  peers.  The  lower  the price-to-sales  ratio,  the  less  cheap  the firm  appears  to  be,  and  the  more  "buy" the stock qualifies. For example, if firm Y has a price-to-sales ratio of 1.5 times that of  company  X,  it  might  be  argued  that company Y is cheap. As a result, it makes sense to purchase business Y and sell firm X.  While  the  P/S  ratio  is  an  excellent investing statistic, it is best to compare it to similar firms. For example, it makes no sense  to  compare  the  P/E  ratio  of  a petrochemical company, like Shell, with a technology company, like Apple, because the two operate radically differently.

Fig2. Forecast values for vanilla-LSTM model

<!-- image -->

Using  the  following  measurements,  the data was scaled with a MinMax Scaler and prepared for testing before applying the LSTM  principles.  The  Long-Term  ShortTerm Memory Network is a more sophisticated  version  of  the  Recurrent Neural  Network,  a  sequential  network that  permits  storing  information.  It  can deal with the vanishing gradient problem that RNNs confront. A cyclic neural network, commonly known as an RNN, is a type of permanent memory. Units refer to the number of LSTM cells in the layer for the LSTM layer. The model will have a high dimensionality of 50 neurons, adequate  to  capture  both  upward  and negative trends. Because we need to add another LSTM layer after the present one, return\_sequences is set to True. The total amount of time stamps and indications is represented by input\_shape. During each training cycle, 20% of the 50 neurons will be  disregarded  at  random.  The  second, third, and fourth LSTM layers were added in  the  same manner as before. The data was then returned to its original size, and the model's predictions were compared to the actual closing price.

<!-- image -->

Fig3.  Forecast  values  for  BidirectionalLSTM

Apart from normal LSTM, sentiment analysis other models were also implemented  like  a  Bidirectional  LSTM which is a sequence prediction model that consists of two LSTMS - one that runs in the forwad direction and one that runs in the  backward  direction  which  aims  to increase efficiency and reduce the margin for error.

Fig4.  Forecast  values  for  LSTM  2-path model

<!-- image -->

The  other  models  that  have  also  been tested to find the most efficient model are Seq2Seq LSTM which is an encoderdecoder  model  made  using  RNN.  It  is useful  in  determining  the  trend  of  stock implemented  in  sentiment  analysis  on  a database of respected papers and journals.  Sentiment  analysis  is  aimed  to remedy  certain  scenarios  that  can't  be predicted by number alone and are more dependent  on  real  world  factor.  For  Eg: The Covid 19 Pandemic caused the sale of an unprecedented amount of shares dragging the markets down when everything was shut down which led to a collapse in a predicted up-trending market.

Fig5:  Forecast  values  for  LSTM  seq-seq model

<!-- image -->

The model was also given input different stock datasets to generate buy-sell advisories on them based on the returns to volatility ratio.

## 4. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION

Fig5 : Stock advisory predictions based on a set of stocks given as inputs generated by the LSTM 2-path model

<!-- image -->

Our  research  pointed  to  the  conclusion that the LSTM 2-Path model was the best performing algorithm followed by Bidirectional  LSTM  and  SEQ2SEQ  LSTM. The  LSTM  with  sentiment  analysis  and standard  LSTM  models  performed  the worst.  The  LSTM  2-Path  model  had  the lowest MSE and RMSE scores, with values of  0.00035  and  0.019  respectively.  The Bidirectional  LSTM  and  SEQ2SEQ  LSTM models  had  MSE  and  RMSE  scores  of 0.00049  and  0.022,  and  0.00056  and 0.023, respectively. The LSTM with sentiment  analysis  had  the  highest  MSE and RMSE scores, with values of 0.00208 and 0.046, respectively. The standard LSTM model had MSE and RMSE scores of 0.00081 and 0.029, respectively.

We  also  found  that  the  performance differences  between  the  LSTM  2-Path model and the other models were statistically  significant  with  a  p-value  of less than 0.01. However, the performance differences between the Bidirectional LSTM and SEQ2SEQ LSTM models and the standard LSTM model were not statistically  significant.  To  evaluate  the robustness and generalization capabilities of the LSTM 2-Path model, we conducted further experiments by varying the length of the input sequence and the prediction horizon. We  found that the model's performance improved with longer input sequences, but the improvement leveled off after a certain point. We also learned that the model's performance decreased as the prediction horizon increased, suggesting that the model may be better suited for short-term predictions.

## 5. REFERENCES

- [1] Chiu, D.Y., &amp; Chen, P.J. (2009). Dynamic exploration of the internal mechanism of the stock market using fuzzy-based support vector machines with highdimensional input spaces and genetic algorithms.  Expert  System  with  App,  36 (2), 1240-1248.
- [2] Chong, E., Han, C. and Park, F.C. (2017). Deep learning networks for stock market analysis  and  forecasting:  Methodology, Data Presentation, and Case Study. Expert System with Application, 83 , 187-205.
- [3]  Dai,  W  ,  Wu,  J.Y.,  &amp;  Lu,  C.J.  (2012). Combination  of  nonlinear  independent component  analysis  and  neural  network to predict Asian stock indices. Expert System with Applicat ion, 39 (4), -4452.
- [4] Das, S.P., &amp; Padhy, S. (2012). Support vector  machine  to  predict  Indian  stock market futures price. International Journal of Computer Applications, 41 (3).
- [5] Dash, R. &amp; Dash, P K. (2016). A stock trading framework that combines technical  analysis  with  machine  learning techniques.  Journal  of  Finance  and  Data Science, 2 (1), 42-57.
- [6]  Enke,  D.,  &amp;  Thawornwong,  S.  (2005). Using data mining and neural networks to forecast stock market returns. Expert Systems  with  Applications,  29  (4),  927940,444
- [7]  Goodhue,  D.  L.,  &amp;  Thompson,  R.  L. (1995).  Adapting  to  the  technology  of individual tasks and performance Quarterly MIS, 213-236.
- [8]  Guresen,  E.,  Kayakutlu,  G.,  &amp;  Daim, T.U. (2011). Using artificial neural network model in predicting stock i ndices. Expert System  with  Application,  38  (8),  1038910397.
- [9]  Holland,  J.H.  (1992).  Adaptation  in natural and artificial systems: an introductory analysis with applications to biology, control and artificial intelligence. You press MIT.
- [10]  Jasic,  T.,  &amp;  Wood,  D  (2004).  Daily stock index trading returns based  on neural network predictions: a case study for  the  S&amp;P  500,  DAX,  TOPIX  and  FTSE 1965- 1999. Applied Financial Economics, 14 (4), 285-297.
- [11]  Kim,  H.J.,  &amp;  Shin,  K.  S.  (2007).  A combined method based on neural networks and genetic algorithms for detecting  timed  patterns  in  the  stock market. Application soft calculator, 7 (2), 569-576.

[12]  Kim,  K.  J.,  &amp;  Han,  I.  (2000).  Genetic algorithm approach for feature improvement in artificial neural network for  stock  index  prediction  Expert  System with App, 19 (2), 125-132.

[13]  Kim,  K.J.,  &amp;  Lee,  W.B.  (2004).  Stock market  forecasting  using  artificial  neural network with optimal feature conversion. Computers  and  Neural  Applications,  13 (3), 255-260