## A return-diversification approach to portfolio selection

Francesco Cesarone 1 ∗† , Rosella Giacometti 2 † , Manuel L Martino 1 † , Fabio Tardella 3 †

1 Department of Business Studies, Roma Tre University.

2 Department of Management, Bergamo University.

3 Department of Information Engineering, University of Florence.

∗ Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): francesco.cesarone@uniroma3.it;

Contributing authors: rosella.giacometti@unibg.it; manuelluis.martino@uniroma3.it; fabio.tardella@unifi.it;

These authors contributed equally to this work.

† December 18, 2023

## Abstract

In this paper, we propose a general bi-objective model for portfolio selection, aiming to maximize both a diversification measure and the portfolio expected return. Within this general framework, we focus on maximizing a diversification measure recently proposed by Choueifaty and Coignard for the case of volatility as a risk measure. We first show that the maximum diversification approach is actually equivalent to the Risk Parity approach using volatility under the assumption of equicorrelated assets. Then, we extend the maximum diversification approach formulated for general risk measures. Finally, we provide explicit formulations of our bi-objective model for different risk measures, such as volatility, Mean Absolute Deviation, Conditional Value-at-Risk, and Expectiles, and we present extensive out-of-sample performance results for the portfolios obtained with our model. The empirical analysis, based on five real-world data sets, shows that the return-diversification approach provides portfolios that tend to outperform the strategies based only on a diversification method or on the classical risk-return approach.

Keywords : Risk Diversification, Most Diversified Portfolio, Bi-objective Optimization, Risk Parity, Portfolio Selection, Expectiles.

## 1 Introduction

The importance of diversification in portfolio selection has been recently pointed out by several authors (see, e.g., Meucci, 2009; Fabozzi and S., 2010; Roncalli, 2014b; Lhabitant, 2017; Cesarone et al., 2020). A qualitative definition of diversification is very clear to portfolio managers: a portfolio is well-diversified if it is not heavily exposed to individual shocks (Meucci, 2009). In order to formalize a quantitative approach, suitable portfolio diversification measures should be introduced. One of the first attempts dates back to the Babilonian Talmud (see, e.g., Duchin and Levy, 2009), where the uniform (or naive) capital diversification is recommended. Some early studies on the use of diversification in finance can be found in the works of Leavens (1945) and Bernoulli (1954). However, only recently more refined notions of portfolio diversification have been proposed and analyzed. Among them, the most popular approaches, both from a theoretical and from a practical viewpoint, seem to be the Risk Parity model, introduced by Maillard et al. (2010) (see also Roncalli, 2014b), and the Most Diversified Portfolio, proposed in Choueifaty and Coignard (2008) and Choueifaty et al. (2013) for the case of the volatility risk measure. These two approaches provide different diversified portfolio in general. However, we show here that, in the case of volatility and under the assumption of equicorrelated assets, the Most Diversified Portfolios and the Risk Parity portfolios actually coincide. This result establishes a first bridge between these hitherto uncorrelated notions of portfolio diversification.

We recall that other diversification approaches have been proposed. Among them we find entropy (see, e.g., Usta and Kantar, 2011; Carmichael et al., 2018; Pola, 2016; Bera and Park, 2008; Deng and Lin, 2022), extensions of Risk Parity with general risk measures (see, e.g., Ararat et al., 2021; Bai et al., 2016; Cesarone and Tardella, 2017; Cesarone and Colucci, 2017; Chaves et al., 2012; Qian, 2005, 2011; Roncalli, 2014a; Bellini et al., 2021), the Herfindahl index (see, e.g., Coqueret, 2015; Dhingra et al., 2023), and the Minimum-Torsion Bets (Meucci et al., 2015). For a review of the main contributions on diversification strategies and classes of diversification measures, we refer to Koumou (2020).

Typically, in the diversification approach the classical risk-return optimization model is replaced by the quest for a portfolio that maximizes some measure of diversification. However, the maximization of portfolio diversification could be included as an additional criterion in a RiskGain framework as already done by some authors in specific cases (see, e.g., Roncalli, 2014a;

Usta and Kantar, 2011; Bera and Park, 2008; Deng and Lin, 2022).

Other studies have been devoted to bi-objective portfolio selection models where risk is minimized and a diversification measure is maximized (see, e.g., Bera and Park, 2008; Coqueret, 2015). However, we observe that the goals of risk and diversification are strictly related and hence diversification should be used as a substitute of risk rather than a complement. Indeed, very few attempts have been made to include gain maximization into the proposed diversification models. Here we propose a general bi-objective model for portfolio selection where we aim at maximizing both a diversification measure and the expected return. We first analyze some general properties of this bi-objective model and then we specialize the analysis to the case of a general diversification measure that extends the one proposed in Choueifaty et al. (2013) for the case of volatility. We provide explicit formulations of our model for the cases of volatility, Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD), Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR), and Expectiles risk measures and we present extensive out-of-sample performance results for the portfolios obtained with our models. The empirical analysis, based on five real-world data sets, shows that the return-diversification approach provides portfolios that tend to outperform the strategies based only on a diversification method or on the classical risk-return approach.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we recall some definitions and properties of risk measures and we propose a general return-diversification model. In Section 2.1, we discuss and extend the maximum diversification ratio approach to the case of a general risk measure. In Section 2.2, we recall the Risk Parity approach and we prove its equivalence with the maximum diversification ratio approach in the case of volatility under the assumption of constant correlation. Section 3 provides explicit linear or quadratic formulations for the problem of maximizing both return and diversification in the case of some specific risk measures typically used for asset allocation. In Section 4, we provide an extensive empirical analysis based on five real-world data sets, which highlights promising out-of-sample performance results of returndiversification portfolio strategies. Some concluding remarks are given in Section 5 together with possible ideas for future research.

## 2 A Return-Diversification Model

We consider a general probability space { Ω , F , P } where all random variables are defined. We denote by L p := L p (Ω , F , P ) the set of all random variables X with E [ | X | p ] &lt; + ∞ , where p ∈ [1 , + ∞ ) . For our purposes, we are concerned with an investment universe with n tradable assets, and we denote by R i the random variable representing the return of the asset i . For a nonnegative vector x , the random portfolio return is defined as R P ( x ) = n ∑ i =1 x i R i where n ∑ i =1 x i = 1 and x i is the percentage of capital invested in the asset i . Note that R P ( x ) belongs to the convex cone P = { ∑ n i =1 x i R i : x ∈ R n + } . To each random variable R in P we associate real values φ ( R ) , ψ ( R ) , and g ( R ) , which may be interpreted as diversification, risk, and gain measures respectively. The diversification measure φ ( R ) is often expressed as a function of the risk measure ψ ( R ) . We recall some general properties of risk measures in terms of the mapping ρ : R n + → R given by ρ ( x ) = ψ ( R P ( x )) , which can also be viewed as a risk measure for the portfolio represented by x . The risk measure ρ is called:

- (i) positive iff ρ ( x ) &gt; 0 , ∀ x ∈ R n + \{ 0 } ;
- (ii) convex iff ρ ( λx +(1 -λ ) y ) ≤ λρ ( x ) + (1 -λ ) ρ ( y ) ∀ x, y ∈ R n + , λ ∈ [0 , 1] ;
- (iii) positively homogeneous (of degree 1) iff ρ ( λx ) = λρ ( x ) , ∀ x ∈ R n + , ∀ λ ∈ R + .

We recall the following classical definitions.

Definition 1 (Artzner et al. (1999)) . A coherent risk measure is a risk measure ρ that satisfies Conditions (ii) and (iii), which imply subadditivity, namely ∀ X,Y ∈ L p ρ ( X + Y ) ≤ ρ ( X ) + ρ ( Y ) . Furthermore, it satisfies monotonicity, namely, ∀ X,Y ∈ L p , X ≤ Y implies ρ ( X ) ≥ ρ ( Y ) , and translativity, namely ∀ X ∈ L p and α ∈ R ρ ( X + α ) = ρ ( X ) -α .

Definition 2 (Rockafellar et al. (2006)) . A deviation risk measure is a risk measure ρ that satisfies Conditions (ii) and (iii), which imply subadditivity, (i), translational invariance, i.e., ∀ X ∈ L p and α ∈ R ρ ( X + α ) = ρ ( X ) , and normalization, namely ρ (0) = 0 .

On this basis, we propose to address the problem of maximizing some diversification measure φ ( R P ( x )) and, simultaneously, maximizing the portfolio expected return g ( x ) = µ P ( x ) =

n ∑ i =1 µ i x i , where µ i is the expected return of the asset i :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.1 Maximum Diversification for General Risk Measures

We now recall, extend, and compare two popular diversification approaches (namely the Maximum Diversification ratio and Risk Parity) associated with a risk measure that satisfies Conditions (i), (ii), and (iii).

Definition 3 (Diversification Ratio) . For a risk measure ρ that satisfies conditions (i), (ii), (iii), we define the Diversification Ratio (DR) as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that, since ρ is convex, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ρ i = ρ ( R i ) . Hence, by construction, DR ( x ) ≥ 1 . Maximizing DR amounts to maximizing the relative distance between the portfolio risk in the worst-case scenario, i.e., when ρ is additive (right-hand side in (2)), and the generic portfolio risk (left-hand side in (2)).

Furthermore, we observe that for a risk measure ρ satisfying (i), (ii) and (iii), the greatest Diversification Ratio based on at most m assets is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, DR m ( P ) represents the maximum relative diversification risk benefit we can obtain at a random variable X ∈ P with respect to a decomposition of X as a convex combination of at most m random variables X i ∈ P . By construction, DR m ( P ) ≥ 1 and DR m ( P ) ≤ DR m +1 ( P ) . We now show that the maximum value of DR m ( P ) for all m is actually attained when m = n by using the extreme rays R i of the cone P .

Theorem 1. If ρ satisfies (i)+(ii)+(iii), then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Given X 1 , . . . , X m ∈ P , there exist β ij ∈ R + , with i = 1 , . . . , m and j = 1 , . . . , n , such that ∑ n j =1 β ij = 1 and X i = ∑ n j =1 β ij R j for i = 1 , . . . , m . Furthermore, given α i , . . . , α m with ∑ m i =1 α i = 1 and setting ¯ λ j = m ∑ i =1 α i β ij , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the first inequality follows from assumptions (ii) and (iii) which imply ρ ( α i X i ) ≤ ∑ n j =1 α i β ij ρ ( R j ) for all i .

In financial terms, Theorem (1) implies that the greatest diversification benefit that can be obtained by decomposing a portfolio X as a convex combination of any number of portfolios X 1 , . . . , X m , is actually attained by decomposing X as a convex combination of the n assets R 1 , . . . , R n , and hence by maximizing the diversification ratio DR ( x ) for x ∈ ∆ , where ∆ = { x ∈ R n : n ∑ i =1 x i = 1 , x ≥ 0 } . Thus, one can consider the maximum diversification portfolio x MD as the one maximizing DR ( x ) over ∆ .

## 2.2 Maximum Diversification and Risk Parity

We now recall the diversification approach based on the general notion of equal risk contribution from each asset which has been originally proposed by Qian (2005, 2011); Maillard et al. (2010) for the case of the volatility risk measure.

For a differentiable risk measure ρ ( x ) = ψ ( R P ( x )) satisfying Conditions (i), (ii), (iii), Euler's theorem guarantees that the total risk can be decomposed into the sum of the total risk contributions of each asset

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the total risk contribution of asset i is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The Risk Parity portfolio is the (unique) portfolio x RP ∈ ∆ that satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Equivalently, the Risk Parity portfolio can be obtained as a solution of the system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Euler's theorem, λ RP = ρ ( x ) n is the equal contribution to the risk from each asset. In the general case, the Risk Parity portfolio and the maximum diversification portfolio are different. However, we will now show that they coincide for the case of volatility under the assumption of constant correlation. This hypothesis is supported by some scholars (see, e.g., Elton and Gruber, 1973; Elton et al., 1976, 2006; Engle and Kelly, 2012) who suggest to estimate the covariance matrix with the constant correlation model, i.e., σ ij = cσ i σ j and σ ii = σ 2 i . In the case of the variance risk measure with constant correlation, Maillard et al. (2010) show that the Risk Parity portfolio is given by x RP i = σ -1 i n ∑ j =1 σ -1 j . The following result shows that this coincides with the maximum diversification portfolio under the same assumptions.

̸

Proof. Assume that σ ij = kσ i σ j and σ ii = σ 2 i . Following Choueifaty et al. (2013) (see p. 18 - Appendix B, and also Section 3 below for the general case), the maximum diversification

Theorem 2. If ρ ( x ) = n ∑ i =1 n ∑ j =1 x i x j c ij σ i σ j , with c ii = 1 and c ij = k for all i = j , then a maximum diversification portfolio is given by x i MD = σ -1 i n ∑ j =1 σ -1 j .

portfolio in the case of volatility can be obtained by finding a solution y ∗ of the following problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and taking x i MD = y ∗ i n ∑ j =1 y j with i = 1 , . . . , n . Note that, under the assumption of the constant

correlation model, the covariance matrix Σ is positive definite. Hence, Problem (5) has a unique solution y ∗ . If y ∗ &gt; 0 , then it must satisfy the following KKT conditions:

for some λ ∈ R .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider the points y k = k ( 1 σ 1 , . . . , 1 σ n ) with k ∈ R and substitute them into the first equation of (6). We obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, solving for λ we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence y k satisfies the second constraint of Problem (6) for k = 1 n . Thus, y ∗ = 1 n ( 1 σ 1 , . . . , 1 σ n ) is a solution of Problem (6), with λ = -1 + ( n -1) c n . Thus, by strict convexity, y ∗ is also the unique solution of Problem (5). The maximum diversification portfolio is then obtained by normalizing y ∗ , namely x i MD = σ -1 i n ∑ j =1 σ -1 j .

## 3 Linear and Quadratic Formulations for the Return-Diversification Model with Specific Risk Measures

In the case where diversification is measured with the diversification ratio (3), Problem (1) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The Pareto-optimal solutions of Problem (7) can be obtained with the ε -constraint method as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where η is the required level of the portfolio expected return. Problem (8) is a Fractional Programming (FP) problem, and is a nonconvex problem. However, by condition (ii), Problem (8) belongs to the class of concave-convex FP problems, that can be tackled by means of the Schaible transform (Schaible, 1974) described below.

For a long-only portfolio x ≥ 0 , we set y = tx , where t = 1 n ∑ i =1 x i ρ i . Clearly, if ρ ( · ) is a positive function, then t &gt; 0 . Thus, Problem (8) can be reformulated as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By eliminating x and t from Problem (9), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that Problem (10) is a simple convex programming problem with linear constraints which can be efficiently solved even for large instances. Since ρ is a homogenous function of degree 1, we find the portfolio weights that maximize the diversification ratio in Problem (8) by simply normalizing the solution y ∗ of Problem (10). Thus, x i MD = y ∗ i n ∑ k =1 y ∗ k , for i = 1 , . . . , n .

We are interested in computing the optimal values h ( η ) of Problem (8) as a function of η in the interval [ η min , η max ] , where η min denotes the value of n ∑ i =1 µ i x i at an optimal solution of the problem obtained by deleting the return constraint in (8), and η max = max { µ 1 , . . . , µ n } . Indeed, the graph of h ( η ) on the interval [ η min , η max ] contains the set of all non-dominated portfolios (efficient frontier), which is usually approximated by solving (8) for several (equally spaced) values of η in [ η min , η max ] .

We now describe the explicit formulation of Problem (10) in the case of some specific risk measures typically used for asset allocation.

## 3.1 Volatility

Let σ i be the volatility of asset i and c ij be the (linear) correlation between assets i and j . The portfolio volatility is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that volatility is a deviation risk measure satisfying Definition 2. Hence, by condition (ii)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

When the asset returns are perfectly positively correlated, i.e., c ij = 1 , σ ( x ) is additive. In the case of volatility, Problem (10) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3.2 MAD

The Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD) is defined as the expected value of the absolute deviation of the portfolio return R P ( x ) from its mean µ P ( x ) , namely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R i is the random return of asset i and µ i is its expected value. Note that MAD is a deviation risk measure satisfying Definition 2. Hence, by condition (ii)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Expression (15) holds with equality, i.e., MAD is additive, under the conditions specified in the following proposition.

Proposition 1 (Ararat et al. (2021)) . Let R 1 , R 2 , · · · , R n ∈ L 1 (Ω , F , P ) . Then, MAD is additive if and only if for each i = j the asset returns satisfy the following conditions:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume that the asset returns are discrete random variables defined on a discrete state space with T states of nature having probability π t , with t = 1 , ..., T . The outcomes of the discrete random returns correspond to the historical scenarios. More precisely, the portfolio choice is performed using an in-sample window of T historical realizations having equal probability π t = 1 /T , as is typically done in portfolio optimization (see, e.g., Carleo et al., 2017; Cesarone, 2020; Bellini et al., 2021, and references therein).

In the case of MAD, Problem (10) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r i,t is the historical realization of the return of asset i at time t , and MAD i = MAD ( R i ) = 1 T ∑ T t =1 | r i,t -µ i | .

As in Konno and Yamazaki (1991), we can linearize Problem (17) by introducing T auxiliary variables d t defined as the absolute deviation of the portfolio return from its mean for each t = 1 , . . . , T , i.e., d t = | ∑ n i =1 r i,t y i -∑ n i =1 µ i y i | , and by replacing the absolute value with the following constraints: d t ≥ ∑ n i =1 ( r i,t -µ i ) y i and d t ≥ -∑ n i =1 ( r i,t -µ i ) y i . Hence, Problem (17)

can be rewritten as the following LP problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3.3 CVaR

The formal definition of the Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR), at a specified confidence level ε , is

where Q R P ( x ) ( α ) is the quantile function of the portfolio return R P ( x ) . Note that CVaR is a coherent risk measure satisfying Definition 1 and, in particular, the convexity condition (ii)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where CVaR ε ( R i ) represents CVaR of asset i . Expression (19) holds with equality, i.e., CVaR is additive in the case where the random variables R i are comonotonic (Tasche, 2002). Similar to the case of MAD, in a discrete world, Problem (10) with CVaR as a risk measure becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the Conditional Value-at-Risk of asset i is given by CVaR ε ( R i ) = -1 j ∑ j t =1 r i, ( t ) , with j = round ( εT ) , while r i, (1) ≤ . . . ≤ r i, ( T ) represent the ordered realizations of the returns of asset i . We recall the LP reformulation of CVaR by Rockafellar and Uryasev (2000) for a given portfolio y

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, Problem (20) can be rewritten as the following LP problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3.4 Expectiles

Expectiles have been defined by Newey and Powell (1987) as the minimizers of the expected value of an asymmetric piecewise quadratic loss function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X ∈ L 2 , α ∈ (0 , 1) , and ( b ) + = max( b, 0) , ( b ) -= -min( b, 0) . The minimizer in (22) is unique and determined by the first-order condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is indeed an equivalent definition of e α ( X ) valid for each X ∈ L 1 (see, e.g., Bellini et al., 2014). We denote by ζ α ( x ) = ζ α ( R p ( x )) = e α ( -R p ( x )) the α -expectile of the portfolio loss which, as usual, is defined as the opposite of the portfolio return. For α ∈ [1 / 2 , 1) , Expectiles satisfy Definition 1, and hence condition (ii)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Expression (24) holds with equality, i.e., Expectile is additive, under the conditions specified in the following theorem.

Theorem 3 (Bellini et al. (2021)) . Let R 1 , R 2 , · · · , R n ∈ L 1 (Ω , F , P ) , and α ∈ (1 / 2 , 1) . Then, Expectile is additive if and only if for each i = j the asset returns satisfy the following conditions:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Again, in a discrete world and in the case of Expectile, Problem (10) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ζ α ( R i ) represents the α -Expectile of asset i .

As described in Bellini et al. (2021), for a fixed portfolio y , its α -Expectile ζ α ( y ) = ζ α can be obtained by solving the following equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, Problem (26) can be rewritten as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We can linearize Problem (28) by replacing the positive and negative parts of -n ∑ i =1 y i r i,t -ζ α with 2 T auxiliary variables d + t , d -t ≥ 0 satisfying d + t -d -t = -n ∑ i =1 y i r i,t -ζ α and d + t · d -t = 0 . We note that, by using an argument similar to the one of Theorem 5 in Bellini et al. (2021), one can show that the complicating complementarity constraints d + t · d -t = 0 are always satisfied and can thus be dropped from the formulation. Hence, Problem (10) for Expectiles can be reformulated as the following LP problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4 Empirical Analysis

In this section, we present an extensive empirical analysis based on five real-world data sets. More precisely, Section 4.1 describes the datasets, the setup of the experiments and of the portfolio strategies, and the performance measures used to evaluate the results. In Section 4.2, we discuss the out-of-sample computational results obtained.

All experiments have been implemented on a workstation with Intel(R) Xeon(R) E5-2623 v4 CPU @ 2.60GHz processor and 64 GB of RAM, under MS Windows 10 Pro, using MATLAB R2022b and the GUROBI 9.5.1 optimization solver.

## 4.1 Experimental Setup

The empirical analysis is based on a rolling time window scheme of evaluation. We consider in-sample windows of 2 years (i.e., 500 observations), and we choose one financial month both as a rebalancing interval and as a holding period. In Table 1, we list the real-world data sets obtained from Refinitiv, which consist of daily prices adjusted for dividends and stock splits for some of the major market indexes, and which are publicly available at the website https://www.francescocesarone.com/data-sets .

Table 1: List of data sets analyzed

| Index  #  Assets  Country  Time Interval  DowJones  28  USA  Oct 2006-Feb 2023  EuroStoxx50  46  EU  Oct 2006-Feb 2023  FTSE100  82  UK  Oct 2006-Feb 2023  NASDAQ100  70  USA  Oct 2006-Feb 2023  SP500  420  USA  Oct 2006-Feb 2023   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

In our experiments, we test two classes of portfolio selection models: ( i ) the return-diversification strategy (8), and ( ii ) the return-risk approach reported below (see, e.g., Cesarone, 2020; Bellini et al., 2021).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These two classes of models are applied to the four risk measures described in Section 3. For each model, we choose two target levels η of portfolio expected return in the interval [ η min , η max ] , where η min denotes the value of n ∑ i =1 µ i x i at an optimal solution of the problem obtained by deleting the return constraint in (8) and (30), and η max = max { µ 1 , . . . , µ n } . More precisely, denoting the generic portfolio target return by η α = η min + α ( η max -η min ) , we consider α = 0 , 1 / 3 . Furthermore, for comparison purposes, we also examine the performance of the Risk Parity (Maillard et al., 2010) and of the Equally-Weighted (DeMiguel et al., 2009) portfolios, and that of the market index. In Table 2, we list the nineteen portfolio

Table 2: List of portfolio strategies

| #  Approach  Abbreviation  Minimum Risk  1  Min Variance  MV0  2  Min MAD  MAD0  3  Min CVaR  ε  CVaR0  4  Min Expectiles  Expe0  Minimum Risk with target return  5  Min Variance with target return  MV1  6  Min MAD with target return  MAD1  7  Min CVaR  ε  with target return  CVaR1  8  Min Expectiles with target return  Expe1  Maximum Diversification Ratio  9  Max Volatility Ratio  DRvol0  10  Max MAD Ratio  DRMAD0  11  Max CVaR  ε  Ratio  DRCVaR0  12  Max Expectiles Ratio  DRExpe0  Maximum Diversification Ratio with target return  13  Max Volatility Ratio with target return  DRvol1  14  Max MAD Ratio with target return  DRMAD1  15  Max CVaR  ε  Ratio with target return  DRCVaR1  16  Max Expectiles Ratio with target return  DRExpe1  17  Risk Parity  RP  18  Equally Weighted  EW  19  Market Index  Index   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

strategies analyzed together with the respective abbreviations. Note that abbreviations ending with 0 (e.g., MV0 and DRvol0 ) indicate strategies obtained without the return constraint (or, equivalently, with target level η 0 ). Abbreviations ending with 1 (e.g., MV1 and DRvol1 ) denote strategies obtained by solving Models (8) and (30) with a common target return ¯ η 1 = max { η MinV 1 / 3 , η MinMAD 1 / 3 , η MinCV aR 1 / 3 , η MinExp 1 / 3 , η DRV ol 1 / 3 , η DRMAD 1 / 3 , η DRCVaR 1 / 3 , η DRExp 1 / 3 } . Furthermore, in Models (8) and (30), we fix ε = 5% for CVaR and α = 0 . 9 for Expectiles (see, e.g., Cesarone and Colucci, 2017; Bellini et al., 2021).

The out-of-sample performance results of each portfolio strategy are evaluated by considering several performance measures widely used in the literature (see, e.g., Cesarone et al., 2015,

2016, 2020; Bruni et al., 2017; Cesarone and Colucci, 2017), and detailed below.

- -The average µ out and the standard deviation σ out of the out-of-sample portfolio returns R out .
- The Sharpe ratio defined as µ out /σ out (Sharpe, 1966, 1994). Clearly, higher Sharpe ratios are associated with better results.
- The Maximum DrawDown ( MDD , Chekhlov et al., 2005) is a measure of the maximum potential out-of-sample loss from the observed peak and is expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where T in and T are the length of a single in-sample window and the entire time series, respectively. The DrawDown is computed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where W t = W t -1 (1 + R out t ) denotes the portfolio wealth at time t , with W 0 = 1 . Note that the MDD is always non-positive, hence higher values are preferable.

- The Ulcer index (Martin and McCann, 1989) measures the depth and duration of drawdowns in prices over the out-of-sample period, and is expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lower Ulcer values indicate better portfolio performance.

- -The Rachev ratio ( Rachev10 , Biglova et al., 2004) is a measure of the relative gap between the mean of the best α % values of R out -r f and that of the worst β % ones, and it is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with r f = 0 and where α = β = 10% . A higher Rachev ratio is clearly preferred.

- -The Turnover ( Turn , DeMiguel et al., 2009) evaluates the amount of trading required to perform in practice the portfolio strategy, and is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S indicates the number of rebalances, x s,k is the portfolio weight of asset k after rebalancing, and x s -1 ,k is the portfolio weight before rebalancing at time s . A lower turnover typically indicates better portfolio performance. We emphasize that this definition of portfolio turnover is a proxy of the effective one, since it evaluates only the amount of trading generated by the models at each rebalance, without considering the trades due to changes in asset prices between one rebalance and the next. Hence, by definition, the turnover of the EW portfolio is zero.

- -The Jensen's Alpha ( AlphaJ , Jensen, 1968) is defined as the intercept of the line given by the linear regression of R out on R out I , namely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where β = Cov ( R out , R out I ) /σ 2 ( R out I ) and R out I is the out-of-sample portfolio return of the Market Index.

- -The Information ratio ( InfoR , Treynor and Black, 1973) is defined as the expected value of the difference between the out-of-sample portfolio return and that of the benchmark index divided by the standard deviation of such difference, namely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Clearly, the larger its value, the better the portfolio performance.

- -The Value-at-Risk of the out-of-sample portfolio returns R out with a confidence level equal to 5% ( VaR5 ).
- The Omega ratio ( Omega , Harlow and Rao, 1989) is the ratio between the average of

positive and negative out-of-sample portfolio returns, and is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where η is fixed to 0.

- -The average number of selected assets ( ave # ).
- -The Return on Investment ( ROI , see, e.g., Cesarone et al., 2022a,b), namely the time-bytime return generated by each portfolio strategy over a specified time horizon ∆ ν . ROI is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where W τ = W τ -∆ ν ∏ τ t = τ -∆ ν +1 (1 + R out t ) is the portfolio wealth generated by investing at the beginning of the time horizon the amount of capital W τ -∆ ν . In our experiment, we compute the annual ROI, namely we fix ∆ ν equal to 250 days.

## 4.2 Out-of-Sample Performance Evaluation

We provide here the out-of-sample computational results of the portfolio selection strategies listed in Table 2, for each data set in Table 1. For reasons of space, the experimental results of the out-of-sample ROI are moved to Appendix A. The rank of performance results is shown in different colors, ranging from deep-red to deep-green, which represent the worst and the best results, respectively.

In Table 3 we report the computational results obtained with the DowJones data set. First, we note that the return-diversification models generally tend to outperform the return-risk strategies in terms of µ out , Ulcer index, and Turnover. Also when analyzing the Jensen's Alpha, and the Sharpe, Rachev, Information, and Omega ratios, which are generally considered highly desirable indicators by practitioners, the return-diversification approaches seem to obtain superior results. Among these, the CVaR maximum diversification ratio with and without the return constraint (DRCVaR1 and DRCVaR0, respectively) achieves the highest Jensen's Alpha, Sharpe, Rachev, and Omega ratios. Interestingly, the MAD maximum diversification ratio without the return constraint (i.e, DRMAD0) provides the lowest Ulcer index and relatively low Turnover. These results indicate less severe and shorter-lasting drawdowns and lower trading costs. As expected, the minimum-risk strategies exhibit the best results in terms of risk, as shown by the out-of-sample σ out , MDD, and VaR5. We also observe that when requiring a target constraint on the portfolio expected return, the performance results of the optimal portfolios typically improve.

Table 3: Out-of-sample performance results on the DowJones dataset

| Approach  µ  out  σ  out  Sharpe  MDD  Ulcer  Rachev10  Turn  AlphaJ  InfoR  VaR5  Omega  ave #  MV0  0,023%  0,950%  2,43%  -0,329  0,087  0,948  0,119  -0,002%  -0,022  1,33%  1,081  10  MAD0  0,028%  0,968%  2,91%  -0,334  0,077  0,952  0,224  0,003%  -0,015  1,38%  1,098  14  CVaR0  0,027%  0,934%  2,85%  -0,310  0,080  0,966  0,235  0,004%  -0,014  1,40%  1,092  8  Expe0  0,025%  0,943%  2,68%  -0,313  0,080  0,955  0,214  0,001%  -0,018  1,35%  1,088  9  MV1  0,033%  1,077%  3,07%  -0,351  0,097  0,960  0,406  0,005%  -0,006  1,65%  1,097  9  MAD1  0,036%  1,093%  3,27%  -0,351  0,094  0,964  0,426  0,007%  -0,002  1,70%  1,104  10  CVaR1  0,037%  1,081%  3,42%  -0,304  0,087  0,982  0,480  0,011%  0,000  1,66%  1,108  7  Expe1  0,034%  1,052%  3,19%  -0,334  0,096  0,963  0,422  0,007%  -0,005  1,59%  1,101  13  EW  0,051%  1,239%  4,09%  -0,392  0,076  0,969  -  0,014%  0,066  1,79%  1,143  28  RP  0,046%  1,158%  3,99%  -0,373  0,072  0,964  0,017  0,012%  0,043  1,68%  1,140  28  Index  0,037%  1,223%  3,02%  -0,431  0,095  0,941  -  -  -  1,79%  1,103  -  DRvol0  0,047%  1,182%  3,96%  -0,367  0,080  0,979  0,136  0,014%  0,022  1,68%  1,138  15  DRMAD0  0,048%  1,147%  4,18%  -0,337  0,070  0,974  0,177  0,015%  0,027  1,60%  1,147  17  DRCVaR0  0,050%  1,133%  4,41%  -0,370  0,075  0,995  0,332  0,019%  0,024  1,61%  1,147  11  DRExpe0  0,046%  1,115%  4,17%  -0,326  0,076  0,982  0,256  0,016%  0,019  1,58%  1,143  8  DRvol1  0,053%  1,232%  4,26%  -0,362  0,083  0,985  0,268  0,019%  0,028  1,79%  1,141  11  DRMAD1  0,054%  1,221%  4,40%  -0,323  0,074  0,983  0,307  0,021%  0,030  1,82%  1,145  13  DRCVaR1  0,054%  1,215%  4,41%  -0,382  0,086  0,998  0,397  0,022%  0,026  1,82%  1,142  9  DRExpe1  0,049%  1,157%  4,26%  -0,331  0,078  0,983  0,335  0,018%  0,022  1,74%  1,140  11   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

In Table 4 we report the computational results obtained with the EuroStoxx 50 data set. We observe again that the return-diversification models typically outperform the other considered strategies in almost all performance measures. In particular, DRVol0, DRMAD0, DRCVaR0, and DRExpe0 achieve significant performances in terms of µ out , σ out , Sharpe, MDD, Ulcer, and Omega, thus representing valid solutions to both risk-averse and risk-lover investors. Furthermore, these strategies provide attractive performance relative to the benchmark index, as indicated by the Jensen's Alpha and the Information ratio.

Table 5 provides the out-of-sample performance results on FTSE100. As expected, the minimum risk strategies (i.e., MV0, MAD0, CVaR0, and Expe0) seem to be attractive to risk-averse investors, as they show lowest values of σ out and VaR5. When focusing on gainrisk performances, the maximum diversification ratio portfolios with and without the return constraint attain the best results in terms of µ out , Jensen's Alpha, Sharpe, Information, and Omega ratios. For the Turnover, RP, MV0, and DRvol0 show low values, which means lower transaction costs. Furthermore, we also observe that imposing the return constraint generally improves the performance of the optimal portfolios. Indeed, DRvol1 and DRMAD1 show the highest µ out , Sharpe ratio, and Jensen's Alpha.

Table 4: Out-of-sample performance results on the EuroStoxx50 dataset

| Approach  µ  out  σ  out  Sharpe  MDD  Ulcer  Rachev10  Turn  AlphaJ  InfoR  VaR5  Omega  ave #  MV0  0,046%  0,982%  4,69%  -0,311  0,073  0,966  0,118  0,036%  0,033  1,47%  1,147  11  MAD0  0,042%  1,024%  4,10%  -0,369  0,088  0,963  0,294  0,031%  0,030  1,51%  1,128  16  CVaR0  0,047%  1,007%  4,69%  -0,394  0,087  0,950  0,257  0,037%  0,033  1,54%  1,145  9  Expe0  0,042%  0,980%  4,30%  -0,298  0,076  0,967  0,206  0,032%  0,027  1,46%  1,133  10  MV1  0,039%  1,134%  3,43%  -0,397  0,127  0,930  0,367  0,028%  0,023  1,84%  1,101  8  MAD1  0,033%  1,152%  2,91%  -0,436  0,148  0,927  0,400  0,022%  0,018  1,84%  1,086  9  CVaR1  0,048%  1,152%  4,13%  -0,385  0,122  0,943  0,440  0,037%  0,031  1,82%  1,123  7  Expe1  0,034%  1,126%  3,06%  -0,425  0,148  0,938  0,402  0,024%  0,018  1,78%  1,091  13  EW  0,047%  1,405%  3,34%  -0,431  0,105  0,981  -  0,030%  0,104  2,13%  1,106  46  RP  0,046%  1,289%  3,55%  -0,396  0,094  0,971  0,017  0,030%  0,086  1,93%  1,113  46  Index  0,018%  1,425%  1,25%  -0,449  0,167  0,956  -  -  -  2,19%  1,038  -  DRvol0  0,060%  1,095%  5,44%  -0,331  0,070  0,989  0,119  0,048%  0,053  1,72%  1,168  15  DRMAD0  0,056%  1,099%  5,10%  -0,355  0,077  0,976  0,193  0,044%  0,053  1,68%  1,160  18  DRCVaR0  0,062%  1,164%  5,34%  -0,334  0,070  1,004  0,268  0,050%  0,052  1,79%  1,164  10  DRExpe0  0,058%  1,077%  5,35%  -0,308  0,068  0,999  0,205  0,046%  0,049  1,65%  1,165  8  DRvol1  0,052%  1,228%  4,20%  -0,360  0,102  0,952  0,273  0,039%  0,040  1,92%  1,125  11  DRMAD1  0,046%  1,240%  3,70%  -0,389  0,115  0,945  0,342  0,033%  0,034  1,96%  1,110  13  DRCVaR1  0,060%  1,262%  4,72%  -0,329  0,099  0,972  0,351  0,047%  0,046  1,95%  1,141  8  DRExpe1  0,048%  1,199%  4,00%  -0,370  0,106  0,951  0,342  0,036%  0,034  1,86%  1,119  10   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

In Table 6 we report the computational results on NASDAQ100. Again, we note that the return-diversification models generally outperform the other strategies. Indeed, DRVol1, DRMAD1, DRCVaR1, and DRExpe1 typically obtain superior results in terms of µ out , Jensen's Alpha, Sharpe, Rachev, Information, and Omega. However, for mildly risk-averse investors, DRVol0, DRMAD0, DRCVaR0, and DRExpe0 might be advisable, while for very risk-averse investors, strategies based on risk minimization are recommended.

Finally, Table 7 shows the out-of-sample performance results on S &amp; P500. In this case, the return-diversification portfolios provide interesting results both in terms of gain and risk. Indeed, DRvol0, DRMAD0, DRCVaR0, and DRExpe0 achieve good values of Sharpe, Rachev, and Omega while preserving control over risk, as highlighted by σ out , Ulcer, and VaR5. Furthermore, we observe that including the return constraint typically allows for achieving good performance in terms of µ out , Jensen's Alpha, and Information ratio, although with a worsening of risk.

Table 5: Out-of-sample performance results on the FTSE100 dataset

| Approach  µ  out  σ  out  Sharpe  MDD  Ulcer  Rachev10  Turn  AlphaJ  InfoR  VaR5  Omega  ave #  MV0  0,044%  0,871%  5,09%  -0,305  0,067  0,998  0,197  0,034%  0,039  1,27%  1,162  22  MAD0  0,037%  0,886%  4,12%  -0,327  0,076  0,966  0,259  0,025%  0,029  1,28%  1,131  25  CVaR0  0,042%  0,892%  4,70%  -0,309  0,101  1,006  0,364  0,031%  0,033  1,28%  1,146  16  Expe0  0,046%  0,896%  5,17%  -0,338  0,089  1,001  0,336  0,036%  0,038  1,28%  1,165  19  MV1  0,052%  0,992%  5,26%  -0,314  0,093  0,984  0,407  0,041%  0,043  1,47%  1,161  14  MAD1  0,048%  0,992%  4,79%  -0,318  0,096  0,976  0,444  0,036%  0,038  1,46%  1,148  15  CVaR1  0,043%  0,995%  4,36%  -0,364  0,110  0,996  0,551  0,033%  0,030  1,47%  1,131  12  Expe1  0,047%  1,025%  4,55%  -0,325  0,108  0,995  0,463  0,036%  0,034  1,47%  1,141  22  EW  0,048%  1,181%  4,04%  -0,369  0,084  0,989  -  0,031%  0,078  1,76%  1,129  82  RP  0,045%  1,056%  4,23%  -0,351  0,076  0,979  0,023  0,029%  0,072  1,57%  1,135  82  Index  0,018%  1,160%  1,52%  -0,366  0,106  0,943  -  -  -  1,73%  1,048  -  DRvol0  0,054%  0,960%  5,61%  -0,342  0,080  0,997  0,167  0,042%  0,051  1,40%  1,178  24  DRMAD0  0,044%  0,954%  4,63%  -0,371  0,084  0,966  0,281  0,032%  0,041  1,38%  1,145  27  DRCVaR0  0,055%  0,995%  5,52%  -0,339  0,085  1,010  0,352  0,043%  0,048  1,47%  1,173  17  DRExpe0  0,053%  0,949%  5,55%  -0,326  0,077  1,016  0,306  0,042%  0,047  1,35%  1,175  13  DRvol1  0,060%  1,037%  5,78%  -0,321  0,093  1,004  0,309  0,048%  0,053  1,50%  1,177  16  DRMAD1  0,058%  1,036%  5,63%  -0,345  0,091  0,987  0,371  0,046%  0,055  1,54%  1,175  19  DRCVaR1  0,055%  1,071%  5,09%  -0,353  0,103  1,017  0,461  0,043%  0,043  1,56%  1,155  13  DRExpe1  0,055%  1,065%  5,15%  -0,337  0,101  1,006  0,404  0,043%  0,044  1,59%  1,160  15   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 6: Out-of-sample performance results on the NASDAQ100 dataset

| Approach  µ  out  σ  out  Sharpe  MDD  Ulcer  Rachev10  Turn  AlphaJ  InfoR  VaR5  Omega  ave #  MV0  0,043%  0,989%  4,33%  -0,361  0,085  0,956  0,141  0,009%  -0,022  1,34%  1,146  15  MAD0  0,042%  0,990%  4,24%  -0,358  0,079  0,958  0,181  0,008%  -0,023  1,33%  1,143  19  CVaR0  0,051%  1,008%  5,02%  -0,350  0,085  0,975  0,278  0,018%  -0,013  1,38%  1,167  11  Expe0  0,047%  1,005%  4,70%  -0,377  0,093  0,953  0,285  0,014%  -0,017  1,39%  1,155  14  MV1  0,082%  1,456%  5,66%  -0,423  0,143  0,963  0,490  0,034%  0,020  2,29%  1,175  10  MAD1  0,083%  1,408%  5,86%  -0,442  0,146  0,974  0,502  0,034%  0,021  2,19%  1,182  12  CVaR1  0,079%  1,389%  5,67%  -0,415  0,131  0,978  0,576  0,034%  0,016  2,07%  1,178  9  Expe1  0,076%  1,308%  5,81%  -0,428  0,132  0,972  0,504  0,032%  0,015  1,95%  1,183  20  EW  0,079%  1,368%  5,77%  -0,425  0,086  0,969  -  0,022%  0,041  2,14%  1,193  70  RP  0,072%  1,266%  5,72%  -0,412  0,079  0,969  0,020  0,020%  0,021  1,95%  1,194  70  Index  0,063%  1,444%  4,34%  -0,416  0,108  0,945  -  -  -  2,33%  1,141  -  DRvol0  0,082%  1,284%  6,41%  -0,501  0,083  1,013  0,158  0,037%  0,024  1,77%  1,220  21  DRMAD0  0,071%  1,217%  5,84%  -0,490  0,080  0,981  0,260  0,026%  0,011  1,72%  1,200  25  DRCVaR0  0,079%  1,258%  6,31%  -0,546  0,087  0,996  0,380  0,036%  0,019  1,75%  1,213  15  DRExpe0  0,073%  1,210%  6,05%  -0,497  0,082  0,982  0,318  0,030%  0,013  1,69%  1,202  11  DRvol1  0,114%  1,617%  7,07%  -0,466  0,121  0,986  0,328  0,058%  0,053  2,56%  1,223  13  DRMAD1  0,098%  1,570%  6,23%  -0,496  0,128  0,972  0,376  0,042%  0,039  2,45%  1,195  15  DRCVaR1  0,097%  1,530%  6,32%  -0,455  0,118  0,973  0,479  0,045%  0,034  2,42%  1,198  11  DRExpe1  0,094%  1,448%  6,49%  -0,500  0,113  0,977  0,428  0,043%  0,035  2,19%  1,207  15   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 7: Out-of-sample performance results on the SP500 dataset

| Approach  µ  out  σ  out  Sharpe  MDD  Ulcer  Rachev10  Turn  AlphaJ  InfoR  VaR5  Omega  ave #  MV0  0,030%  0,903%  3,30%  -0,362  0,082  0,941  0,252  0,007%  -0,014  1,20%  1,113  28  MAD0  0,028%  1,014%  2,73%  -0,367  0,087  0,924  0,501  0,000%  -0,020  1,26%  1,098  61  CVaR0  0,030%  0,875%  3,43%  -0,341  0,074  0,940  0,463  0,009%  -0,013  1,29%  1,110  19  Expe0  0,033%  0,910%  3,68%  -0,366  0,085  0,930  0,477  0,011%  -0,009  1,28%  1,122  24  MV1  0,065%  1,345%  4,87%  -0,466  0,145  0,945  0,593  0,034%  0,027  1,99%  1,156  16  MAD1  0,062%  1,293%  4,79%  -0,467  0,139  0,938  0,628  0,031%  0,025  1,98%  1,153  18  CVaR1  0,065%  1,280%  5,09%  -0,401  0,117  0,947  0,691  0,036%  0,027  1,95%  1,165  13  Expe1  0,067%  1,224%  5,44%  -0,407  0,116  0,945  0,637  0,037%  0,031  1,83%  1,174  30  EW  0,060%  1,379%  4,32%  -0,468  0,091  0,962  -  0,018%  0,062  2,04%  1,150  420  RP  0,054%  1,245%  4,30%  -0,437  0,085  0,956  0,022  0,016%  0,047  1,80%  1,150  418  Index  0,040%  1,291%  3,13%  -0,466  0,106  0,927  -  -  -  1,93%  1,106  -  DRvol0  0,067%  1,124%  5,97%  -0,430  0,074  0,963  0,242  0,037%  0,041  1,62%  1,201  34  DRMAD0  0,057%  1,073%  5,29%  -0,422  0,072  0,957  0,398  0,027%  0,027  1,50%  1,178  40  DRCVaR0  0,057%  1,097%  5,20%  -0,475  0,087  0,977  0,476  0,029%  0,023  1,57%  1,170  23  DRExpe0  0,059%  1,078%  5,50%  -0,450  0,081  0,964  0,443  0,030%  0,028  1,53%  1,183  16  DRvol1  0,084%  1,479%  5,69%  -0,538  0,133  0,929  0,414  0,046%  0,051  2,31%  1,181  21  DRMAD1  0,074%  1,436%  5,16%  -0,565  0,162  0,915  0,488  0,037%  0,041  2,19%  1,164  24  DRCVaR1  0,072%  1,424%  5,08%  -0,512  0,132  0,956  0,618  0,037%  0,036  2,18%  1,161  16  DRExpe1  0,071%  1,351%  5,24%  -0,534  0,134  0,924  0,532  0,036%  0,038  2,00%  1,168  20   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 5 Conclusions

We have proposed a new return-diversification approach to portfolio selection and we have focused on the case of the diversification ratio for general and specific risk measures. An extensive empirical analysis based on several real-world data sets has shown promising out-ofsample performance results of our approach.

The theoretical and empirical analysis of the models based on our bi-objective approach using different diversification measures is left for future research. It is also worth investigating further the connections between the Risk Parity and the Maximum Diversification ratio approaches both in the case of volatility and in the case of general risk measures, possibly trying to establish their equivalence under appropriate assumptions.

## References

- Ararat, C., Cesarone, F., Pinar, M., and Ricci, J. (2021). MAD Risk Parity portfolios. Working Paper . Available at: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2110.12282 .
- Artzner, P., Delbaen, F., Eber, J., and Heath, D. (1999). Coherent measures of risk. Mathematical Finance , 9(3):203-228.

- Bai, X., Scheinberg, K., and Tutuncu, R. (2016). Least-squares approach to risk parity in portfolio selection. Quantitative Finance , 16(3):357-376.
- Bellini, F., Cesarone, F., Colombo, C., and Tardella, F. (2021). Risk parity with expectiles. European Journal of Operational Research , 291(3):1149-1163.
- Bellini, F., Klar, B., Müller, A., and Gianin, E. R. (2014). Generalized quantiles as risk measures. Insurance: Mathematics and Economics , 54:41-48.
- Bera, A. K. and Park, S. Y. (2008). Optimal portfolio diversification using the maximum entropy principle. Econometric Reviews , 27(4-6):484-512.
- Bernoulli, D. (1954). Exposition of a new theory on the measurement of risk. Econometrica , 22(1):23-36.
- Biglova, A., Ortobelli, S., Rachev, S., and Stoyanov, S. (2004). Different Approaches to Risk Estimation in Portfolio Theory. The Journal of Portfolio Management , 31(1):103-112.
- Bruni, R., Cesarone, F., Scozzari, A., and Tardella, F. (2017). On exact and approximate stochastic dominance strategies for portfolio selection. European Journal of Operational Research , 259(1):322-329.
- Carleo, A., Cesarone, F., Gheno, A., and Ricci, J. M. (2017). Approximating exact expected utility via portfolio efficient frontiers. Decisions in Economics and Finance , 40:115-143.
- Carmichael, B., Koumou, G. B., and Moran, K. (2018). Rao's quadratic entropy and maximum diversification indexation. Quantitative Finance , 18(6):1017-1031.
- Cesarone, F. (2020). Computational Finance: MATLAB® Oriented Modeling . Routledge.
- Cesarone, F., Cesetti, R., Orlando, G., Martino, M. L., and Ricci, J. M. (2022a). Comparing SSD-efficient portfolios with a skewed reference distribution. Mathematics , 11(1):50.
- Cesarone, F. and Colucci, S. (2017). Minimum risk versus capital and risk diversification strategies for portfolio construction. Journal of the operational research society , pages 1-18.
- Cesarone, F., Martino, M. L., and Carleo, A. (2022b). Does ESG impact really enhance portfolio profitability? Sustainability , 14(4):2050.
- Cesarone, F., Moretti, J., Tardella, F., et al. (2016). Optimally chosen small portfolios are better than large ones. Economics Bulletin , 36(4):1876-1891.
- Cesarone, F., Scozzari, A., and Tardella, F. (2015). Linear vs. quadratic portfolio selection models with hard real-world constraints. Computational Management Science , 12(3):345-370.
- Cesarone, F., Scozzari, A., and Tardella, F. (2020). An optimization-diversification approach to portfolio selection. Journal of Global Optimization , 76(2):245-265.

- Cesarone, F. and Tardella, F. (2017). Equal risk bounding is better than risk parity for portfolio selection. Journal of Global Optimization , 68(2):439-461.
- Chaves, D., Hsu, J., Li, F., and Shakernia, O. (2012). Efficient algorithms for computing risk parity portfolio weights. The Journal of Investing , 21:150-163.
- Chekhlov, A., Uryasev, S., and Zabarankin, M. (2005). Drawdown measure in portfolio optimization. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance , 8(1):13-58.
- Choueifaty, Y. and Coignard, Y. (2008). Toward maximum diversification. The Journal of Portfolio Management , 35(1):40-51.
- Choueifaty, Y., Froidure, T., and Reynier, J. (2013). Properties of the most diversified portfolio. Journal of Investment Strategies , 2(2):49-70.
- Coqueret, G. (2015). Diversified minimum-variance portfolios. Annals of Finance , 11(2):221-241.
- DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., and Uppal, R. (2009). Optimal versus naive diversification: How inefficient is the 1/N portfolio strategy? Review of Financial Studies , 22(5):1915-1953.
- Deng, X. and Lin, Y. (2022). Improved particle swarm optimization for mean-variance-yager entropy-social responsibility portfolio with complex reality constraints. Engineering Computations , 39(4):1288-1316.
- Dhingra, V., Gupta, S. K., and Sharma, A. (2023). Norm constrained minimum variance portfolios with short selling. Computational Management Science , 20(1):6.
- Duchin, R. and Levy, H. (2009). Markowitz versus the talmudic portfolio diversification strategies. The Journal of Portfolio Management , 35(2):71-74.
- Elton, E. J. and Gruber, M. J. (1973). Estimating the dependence structure of share prices-implications for portfolio selection. The Journal of Finance , 28(5):1203-1232.
- Elton, E. J., Gruber, M. J., and Padberg, M. W. (1976). Simple criteria for optimal portfolio selection. The Journal of finance , 31(5):1341-1357.
- Elton, E. J., Gruber, M. J., and Spitzer, J. (2006). Improved estimates of correlation coefficients and their impact on optimum portfolios. European Financial Management , 12(3):303-318.
- Engle, R. and Kelly, B. (2012). Dynamic equicorrelation. Journal of Business &amp; Economic Statistics , 30(2):212228.
- Fabozzi, F. and S., F. (2010). Diversification: Should we be Diversifying Trends? The Journal of Portfolio Management , 36:1-4.
- Harlow, W. V. and Rao, R. K. (1989). Asset pricing in a generalized mean-lower partial moment framework: Theory and evidence. Journal of financial and quantitative analysis , 24(3):285-311.

- Jensen, M. C. (1968). The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945-1964. The Journal of Finance , 23(2):389-416.
- Konno, H. and Yamazaki, H. (1991). Mean-absolute deviation portfolio optimization model and its application to Tokyo stock exchange. Management Science , 37:519-531.
- Koumou, G. B. (2020). Diversification and portfolio theory: a review. Financial Markets and Portfolio Management , 34(3):267-312.
- Leavens, D. H. (1945). Diversification of investments. Trusts and Estates , 80(5):469-473.
- Lhabitant, F.-S. (2017). Portfolio diversification . Elsevier.
- Maillard, S., Roncalli, T., and Teiletche, J. (2010). The Properties of Equally Weighted Risk Contribution Portfolios. The Journal of Portfolio Management , 36(4):60-70.
- Martin, P. and McCann, B. (1989). The investor's guide to fidelity funds. Wiley .
- Meucci, A. (2009). Managing diversification. Risk , 22:74-79.
- Meucci, A., Santangelo, A., and Deguest, R. (2015). Risk budgeting and diversification based on optimized uncorrelated factors. Available at SSRN 2276632 .
- Newey, W. K. and Powell, J. L. (1987). Asymmetric least squares estimation and testing. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pages 819-847.
- Pola, G. (2016). On entropy and portfolio diversification. Journal of Asset Management , 17(4):218-228.
- Qian, E. (2005). Risk parity portfolios: Efficient portfolios through true diversification. Panagora Asset Management, September .
- Qian, E. (2011). Risk Parity and Diversification. Journal of Investing , 20(1):119-127.
- Rockafellar, R. and Uryasev, S. (2000). Optimization of Conditional Value-at-Risk. Journal of risk , 2(3):21-42.
- Rockafellar, R., Uryasev, S., and Zabarankin, M. (2006). Generalized deviations in risk analysis. Finance and Stochastics , 10(1):51-74.
- Roncalli, T. (2014a). Introducing expected returns into risk parity portfolios: A new framework for asset allocation. Available at SSRN 2321309 .
- Roncalli, T. (2014b). Introduction to risk parity and budgeting . Chapman &amp; Hall/CRC Financial Mathematics Series. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
- Schaible, S. (1974). Parameter-free convex equivalent and dual programs of fractional programming problems. Zeitschrift für Operations Research , 18(5):187-196.
- Sharpe, W. F. (1966). Mutual fund performance. The Journal of business , 39(1):119-138.

- Sharpe, W. F. (1994). The sharpe ratio. The Journal of Portfolio Management , 21(1):49-58.
- Tasche, D. (2002). Expected shortfall and beyond. Journal of Banking &amp; Finance , 26(7):1519-1533.
- Treynor, J. L. and Black, F. (1973). How to use security analysis to improve portfolio selection. The journal of business , 46(1):66-86.
- Usta, I. and Kantar, Y. M. (2011). Mean-variance-skewness-entropy measures: A multi-objective approach for portfolio selection. Entropy , 13(1):117-133.

## Appendix A: Additional Out-of-Sample Performance Results

For the sake of completeness, we report here additional tables containing some statistics of the out-of-sample annual ROI obtained by all the portfolio selection strategies listed in Table 2 on DowJones (Table 8), EuroStoxx 50 (Table 9), NASDAQ100 (Table 11), FTSE100 (Table 10), and S &amp; P500 (Table 12).

Table 8: Annual ROI on the DowJones dataset

| Approach  Mean  Vol  5%-perc  25%-perc  50%-perc  75%-perc  95%-perc  MV0  7,09%  8,58%  -7,04%  1,77%  7,05%  12,55%  21,09%  MAD0  8,47%  8,75%  -6,69%  2,98%  9,15%  14,30%  22,50%  CVaR0  7,88%  7,92%  -6,16%  3,23%  7,84%  13,23%  21,01%  Expe0  7,64%  8,17%  -6,68%  2,90%  8,33%  12,65%  20,68%  MV1  10,11%  10,75%  -6,89%  2,96%  9,77%  16,99%  28,22%  MAD1  10,68%  10,35%  -6,33%  4,14%  10,88%  16,91%  28,23%  CVaR1  10,90%  10,00%  -4,60%  5,02%  10,38%  16,40%  27,86%  Expe1  10,45%  10,39%  -6,42%  4,11%  9,69%  16,85%  29,71%  EW  14,12%  12,67%  -5,86%  6,39%  14,19%  19,96%  38,41%  RP  12,97%  11,11%  -5,07%  6,54%  13,17%  18,35%  32,49%  Index  10,62%  11,69%  -8,48%  3,44%  9,77%  17,84%  30,38%  DRvol0  13,07%  12,11%  -7,69%  4,82%  14,64%  19,78%  30,87%  DRMAD0  13,19%  11,02%  -5,70%  6,31%  14,11%  19,12%  30,20%  DRCVaR0  14,29%  12,95%  -6,55%  5,58%  14,82%  21,08%  36,07%  DRExpe0  13,10%  10,75%  -6,75%  7,31%  13,68%  19,99%  30,00%  DRvol1  15,17%  12,47%  -5,57%  7,52%  15,52%  23,40%  36,20%  DRMAD1  15,28%  12,43%  -5,75%  7,26%  15,26%  23,60%  36,06%  DRCVaR1  16,00%  13,84%  -4,38%  6,02%  15,24%  25,71%  40,96%  DRExpe1  14,41%  11,64%  -6,10%  7,17%  14,76%  21,92%  33,85%   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 9: Annual ROI on the EuroStoxx50 dataset

| Approach  Mean  Vol  5%-perc  25%-perc  50%-perc  75%-perc  95%-perc  MV0  13,40%  12,57%  -4,39%  3,37%  11,79%  22,00%  36,05%  MAD0  12,20%  12,94%  -8,63%  2,96%  11,83%  21,49%  33,23%  CVaR0  14,75%  13,07%  -3,34%  4,35%  13,00%  25,18%  37,81%  Expe0  12,45%  11,20%  -4,21%  3,85%  11,42%  20,02%  32,60%  MV1  12,01%  12,43%  -10,44%  3,70%  12,92%  21,18%  29,86%  MAD1  10,93%  12,52%  -12,86%  3,02%  11,94%  20,05%  29,09%  CVaR1  14,17%  12,54%  -8,34%  6,63%  14,67%  22,92%  33,51%  Expe1  11,09%  11,43%  -9,69%  3,74%  11,97%  19,52%  28,01%  EW  12,28%  16,95%  -12,17%  -1,09%  13,50%  22,83%  41,07%  RP  12,21%  15,09%  -9,84%  -0,10%  13,49%  22,05%  37,83%  Index  4,21%  15,05%  -19,97%  -6,82%  3,44%  15,47%  28,35%  DRvol0  16,84%  15,37%  -2,88%  6,31%  13,91%  23,86%  45,14%  DRMAD0  16,05%  14,67%  -4,19%  4,57%  14,71%  24,90%  42,88%  DRCVaR0  16,83%  18,66%  -7,10%  4,87%  13,07%  25,01%  47,33%  DRExpe0  16,16%  13,65%  -4,32%  6,43%  14,33%  24,79%  42,20%  DRvol1  14,97%  14,51%  -9,89%  4,68%  16,46%  25,02%  37,52%  DRMAD1  13,67%  15,06%  -13,59%  3,00%  15,84%  25,05%  35,42%  DRCVaR1  16,78%  14,83%  -10,20%  7,39%  17,39%  26,11%  41,93%  DRExpe1  13,81%  13,49%  -10,92%  4,67%  15,11%  24,01%  33,60%   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 10: Annual ROI on the FTSE100 dataset

| Approach  Mean  Vol  5%-perc  25%-perc  50%-perc  75%-perc  95%-perc  MV0  12,03%  13,95%  -10,95%  4,86%  11,16%  19,57%  37,53%  MAD0  9,88%  12,84%  -12,07%  3,39%  9,18%  17,21%  33,86%  CVaR0  11,98%  15,18%  -15,11%  2,81%  12,66%  21,77%  37,87%  Expe0  13,08%  14,57%  -14,16%  5,35%  12,63%  21,85%  38,17%  MV1  15,42%  15,13%  -11,34%  5,92%  17,72%  25,94%  37,68%  MAD1  14,25%  14,73%  -11,58%  3,56%  16,48%  25,98%  35,11%  CVaR1  13,08%  15,85%  -15,20%  1,82%  16,09%  24,56%  36,23%  Expe1  14,17%  16,55%  -13,46%  2,27%  15,16%  25,08%  41,25%  EW  12,86%  16,04%  -8,86%  0,83%  11,79%  22,32%  42,05%  RP  12,17%  14,38%  -8,50%  1,61%  11,15%  21,24%  38,22%  Index  4,59%  11,72%  -14,94%  -2,82%  4,33%  11,62%  23,15%  DRvol0  15,20%  19,08%  -11,33%  3,71%  12,43%  24,59%  44,53%  DRMAD0  12,39%  15,51%  -11,76%  3,30%  10,48%  21,26%  40,82%  DRCVaR0  15,39%  19,02%  -10,23%  1,45%  14,30%  25,38%  46,02%  DRExpe0  15,05%  16,58%  -8,56%  3,37%  12,34%  26,64%  44,35%  DRvol1  17,96%  18,77%  -14,24%  4,55%  16,74%  32,27%  48,67%  DRMAD1  17,48%  16,29%  -10,63%  4,82%  18,49%  30,45%  41,04%  DRCVaR1  15,68%  17,77%  -15,27%  2,30%  16,62%  28,99%  42,30%  DRExpe1  16,49%  18,22%  -15,14%  2,17%  15,90%  29,83%  44,76%   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 11: Annual ROI on the NASDAQ100 dataset

| Approach  Mean  Vol  5%-perc  25%-perc  50%-perc  75%-perc  95%-perc  MV0  12,90%  8,07%  -0,85%  8,05%  13,60%  18,64%  25,11%  MAD0  12,41%  8,01%  -1,45%  7,29%  12,62%  17,94%  25,20%  CVaR0  15,31%  9,07%  -1,08%  9,90%  16,81%  21,61%  28,68%  Expe0  14,26%  8,80%  -0,90%  8,73%  15,13%  20,61%  26,95%  MV1  27,58%  27,26%  -12,65%  8,72%  24,02%  44,76%  79,51%  MAD1  27,88%  26,41%  -11,56%  9,55%  22,86%  44,22%  80,37%  CVaR1  25,59%  24,01%  -10,69%  8,14%  22,52%  39,93%  70,00%  Expe1  24,92%  20,89%  -8,70%  10,29%  23,61%  38,51%  62,29%  EW  22,68%  16,20%  -6,09%  12,24%  23,27%  32,25%  50,62%  RP  20,89%  13,87%  -4,56%  12,56%  21,68%  28,54%  44,86%  Index  18,44%  17,28%  -12,10%  8,14%  19,34%  28,29%  47,22%  DRvol0  24,74%  20,51%  -4,97%  12,02%  22,29%  33,98%  58,01%  DRMAD0  21,31%  15,14%  -1,43%  10,93%  19,57%  30,70%  46,05%  DRCVaR0  24,82%  20,63%  -4,01%  12,20%  21,70%  31,88%  60,05%  DRExpe0  21,81%  17,31%  -3,15%  10,57%  20,24%  30,96%  52,16%  DRvol1  36,20%  28,89%  -14,01%  15,18%  37,32%  54,65%  86,52%  DRMAD1  31,28%  26,20%  -12,07%  12,69%  31,42%  48,36%  77,71%  DRCVaR1  30,50%  26,64%  -11,86%  11,22%  28,88%  46,97%  77,05%  DRExpe1  29,57%  24,41%  -7,18%  11,67%  29,07%  43,59%  74,10%   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 12: Annual ROI on the SP500 dataset

| Approach  Mean  Vol  5%-perc  25%-perc  50%-perc  75%-perc  95%-perc  MV0  9,27%  7,38%  -3,94%  5,64%  10,15%  13,75%  18,78%  MAD0  8,72%  7,79%  -3,49%  3,28%  8,75%  13,87%  20,61%  CVaR0  9,24%  7,83%  -2,50%  4,12%  8,32%  14,22%  22,52%  Expe0  10,64%  8,44%  -6,56%  6,76%  11,03%  15,06%  23,84%  MV1  23,14%  24,85%  -15,06%  8,94%  21,25%  32,59%  68,30%  MAD1  21,79%  22,51%  -13,71%  8,82%  20,07%  30,44%  66,15%  CVaR1  21,81%  23,36%  -11,72%  9,97%  17,69%  27,48%  69,45%  Expe1  22,20%  20,74%  -11,09%  10,11%  20,60%  30,38%  63,56%  EW  17,10%  16,08%  -5,95%  6,54%  16,25%  24,48%  48,56%  RP  15,55%  13,40%  -5,29%  7,36%  14,94%  21,86%  40,94%  Index  11,94%  12,61%  -9,95%  3,92%  12,28%  18,58%  33,82%  DRvol0  20,05%  14,66%  -5,22%  11,17%  19,58%  29,26%  43,42%  DRMAD0  16,80%  12,51%  -6,09%  8,98%  17,18%  24,83%  36,95%  DRCVaR0  17,49%  14,32%  -4,21%  7,62%  15,59%  25,85%  43,40%  DRExpe0  17,85%  12,86%  -4,00%  10,30%  16,47%  24,57%  42,14%  DRvol1  28,40%  22,02%  -9,67%  14,79%  27,93%  41,04%  71,32%  DRMAD1  26,15%  20,96%  -11,69%  13,22%  27,48%  39,13%  65,03%  DRCVaR1  23,76%  20,25%  -9,52%  10,70%  23,32%  34,27%  62,16%  DRExpe1  24,16%  20,21%  -8,44%  9,93%  24,12%  36,10%  59,85%   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|