## ORIGINAL ARTICLE

## Workplace sustainability or financial resilience? Composite-financial resilience index

<!-- image -->

Elham Daadmehr 1

Accepted: 29 November 2023 © The Author(s) 2024

## Abstract

Due to the variety of corporate risks in turmoil markets and the consequent financial distress  especially  in  COVID-19  time,  this  paper  investigates  corporate  resilience and compares different types of resilience that can be potential sources of heterogeneity in firms' implied rate of return. Specifically, the novelty is not only to quantify firms'  financial  resilience  but  also  to  compare  it  with  workplace  resilience  which matters more in the COVID-19 era. The study prepares several pieces of evidence of the necessity and insufficiency of these two main types of resilience by comparing earnings expectations and implied discount rates of high- and low-resilience firms. Particularly,  results  present  evidence  of  the  possible  amplification  of  workplace resilience by the financial status of firms in the COVID-19 era. The paper proposes a novel composite-financial resilience index as a potential measure for disaster risk that significantly and persistently reveals low-resilience characteristics of firms and resilience-heterogeneity in implied discount rates.

Keywords Corporate resilience · Composite-financial resilience index · Workplace sustainability · Analysts' forecasts · Multivariate functional principal components · COVID crisis

JEL Classification C11 · C38 · G11 · G12 · Q51 · Q54

Warm thanks to Marco Pagano, Lorenzo Pandolfi and Giovanni Walter Puopolo. I acknowledge participants at the International Risk Management Conference-IRMC2023, the Global Finance Conference-GFA2023, LSC conference 'Sustainability and firm performance in Europe and the Americas', Leibniz Institute for East and Southeast European, NSEF workshop at the University of Naples Federico II (UNINA) and the Centre for Studies in Economics and Finance (CSEF) for their comments. Special gratitude to the UNINA for providing research facilities on data and to the Vienna University of Economics and Business (WU-VGSF) for visiting opportunities in 2021 and providing I/B/E/S forecasts data from Refinitiv-Eikon (Thomson Reuters).

* Elham Daadmehr elham.daadmehr@unina.it

1 Department of Economics and Statistics, University of Naples Federico II, Via Cintia, Monte S. Angelo, 80126 Napoli, Italy

Vol.:(0123456789)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Introduction

The  worldwide  economic  crisis  caused  by  COVID-19  is  systematically  different from past crises. The COVID-19 crisis was caused by a viral pandemic that severely shrank  global  economic  activities  and  the  consequences  are  completely  different from previous crises with respect to the cause, scope, and severity. Since 2020, the emergence  of  COVID-19  and  investors'  public  awareness  about  its  consequences prepares a natural experiment to study the effect of this kind of shock on price fluctuations and firms' discount rates. The COVID-19 pandemic has triggered enormous and heterogeneous stock price movements.

Different  firms  may  exhibit  different  reactions  to  the  shock  and  see  different expected returns. The goal of this paper is to investigate the importance of corporate resilience.  Since  resilience  is  closely  related  to  the  functionality  and  valuation  of firms in the COVID situation, this study proposes a measure of corporate resilience and shows whether this characteristic can be a new source of risk and variation in expected return proxies.

In general, resilience is the ability of firms to survive in crisis and to effectively recover during and after an unexpected shock. On the one side, due to the intrinsic feature of the health crisis caused by COVID-19 that immediately hit the workforce, firms  with  fewer  employees  experienced  a  severe  decline  in  employment  (Papanikolaou and Schmidt 2022), or firms with higher workforce and communication flexibility would have less managerial issues under new social distancing rules and lockdowns. On the other side, firms could increase the chance of survival from banks to  increase  their  liquidity.  Pagano  and  Zechner  (2022)  interpret  the  possibility  of the increase in firms' liquidity buffers not only through bond issuance and cash-preserving policies but also through the availability of government grants. As a consequence, firms can become more resilient during the COVID-19 crisis. These two aspects show the necessity of a hybrid definition of resilience.

Since  there  is  a  lack  of  common  vocabulary  and  definition  of  resilience,  this research clarifies the concepts of resilience considered in this paper and compares two types of resilience, to propose an appropriate meaningful hybrid measure for not only in the fever period of the COVID-19 pandemic but for all periods before and after the onset to capture different aspects of resilience.

First, the workplace resilience index is introduced based on what Koren and Peto (2020) propose for firms' flexibility towards social distancing rules. Social distancing restrictions and other mitigation rules against the COVID-19 pandemic hit businesses,  especially  those  that  depend  on  human  interactions.  These  reductions  in face-to-face activities directly affect firms' production costs (Koren and Peto 2020). Such  disruptions  from  new  social  distancing  rules  can  be  directly  related  to  new firms' characteristics showing the degree of workplace flexibility and resilience in these situations.

Second, the  heterogeneous  effect  of  COVID-19  shock  can  be  amplified  by  the financial status of companies (Ramelli and Wagner 2020). The financial strength of firms is a key element that can potentially magnify the impact of workplace resilience. Firms with an appropriate level of financial ratios can potentially overcome the side effects of social distancing rules during COVID-19 despite some resilience inconveniences in their workforce. Pagano and Zechner (2022) provide various evidence regarding the financial impact of COVID-19 shock on firms. They mention the moderating role of capital markets and corporate financial policies, specifically, they characterize a firm's performance based on net sales and total assets which could better capture the effect of COVID-19 on their balance sheets. Meanwhile, the provided credits, especially for small firms, can affect the capital structure and increase the leverage, since many of these firms were compensated by the Fed's packages, e.g.  Paycheck  Protection  Program  (PPP)  for  small  businesses.  The  provided  evidence by Fahlenbrach et al. (2021) asserts the impact of corporate leverage and cash holdings on the cross-sectional variation of U.S. firms' stock prices in the COVID19 situation. Thus, it is totally hard to understand how firms financially respond to COVID-19 shock. This paper defines the 'financial-based resilience' index as a representative measure of the financial status of firms, constructed in a screening procedure based on all firms' corporate financials, and emphasizes an important indirect role of main financial ratios on overall firms' resilience. The noteworthy feature is directly related to the 'machine-based mechanism' that chooses the most effective financial  ratios  for  both  before  the  onset  of  COVID-19  and  the  period  after  that. Moreover,  the  proposed  methodology  here  introduces  profitability,  valuation,  and liquidity as the most effective financial ratios. So, this index provides an opportunity not only to capture the effect of total assets showing the immediate impact of COVID-19 on a firm's investment decisions but also to consider the possible effect of  fiscal  support  policies  by  different  measures  of  profitability  ratios.  The  results accord with Pagano and Zechner (2022) who mention the usage of large liquidity cushions from banks and financial intermediaries to improve firms' balance sheets in order to be more resilient to the following COVID-19 consequences. The adopted methodology exhibits that among all kinds of firms' financial ratios, operating profit margin,  price-operating  earnings  and  quick  ratio  play  key  roles  in  the  characterization  of  firms'  financial-based  resilience.  Specifically,  in  line  with  Acharya  and Steffen (2020) who explain the role of liquidity on firms' performance in the first quarter of 2020, the financial-based resilience index emphasizes that the importance of  liquidity  (absolute  amount  of  estimated  loading)  increases  from  before  to  after the onset of COVID-19, as opposed to the price-operating earnings (as a valuation ratio). The proposed machine-based characterization shows a good extent of consistency with Glossner et al. (2020) findings, especially where they emphasize the relation between valuation and the amplification of severe price decline in COVID-19.

<!-- image -->

As  a  final  proposed  measure,  the  'composite-financial  resilience  index'  is introduced to exhibit firms' resilience ability not only regarding their workplace flexibility  but  also  representing  their  financial  strength.  This  paper  defines  the composite-financial resilience index based on these two intuitions that measures firm's  resilience  and  emphasizes  the  importance  of  financial  resilience.  It  proposes composite-financial resilience index as an appropriate measure to provide evidence showing to what extent the impact of workplace resilience can be potentially amplified by financial intuition of resilience. The explanation is provided by comparing the implied discount rates of high- and low-resilience groups of firms.

<!-- image -->

To do this, the paper considers the simple present value model where the implied discount rate equates discounted expected future cash flows to current prices (Landier and Thesmar 2020). Due to the importance of analysts' forecasts and the reported recommendations  (Kothari  et  al.  2016),  this  paper  considers  analysts'  earnings expectations  as  a  firm-level  proxy  of  expected  future  cash  flows.  It  provides  evidence of the strong explanatory power of analysts' expectations (in line with De la and Myers 2020; Bordalo et al. 2020) and its important role in the resilience-heterogeneous implied discount rate, especially through composite-financial definition of resilience. The evidence on earnings expectations reveals that analysts are still pessimistic about the low workplace-resilience firms with weaker corporate financials and emphasizes to what extent not only earnings expectations but also implied discount rates are resilience-heterogeneous across firms. Results reveal the inadequacy of considering just one of these two intuitions of resilience as a resilience measure and meanwhile, establish the necessity of both workplace resilience and financialbased resilience in significantly detecting the resilience-heterogeneity.

The novelty of this study is to present an appropriate index for firms' financial resilience and moreover is a unique study that proposes directly an index to capture such  aggregate  impact  of  these  two  kinds  of  resilience  attributed  to  the  COVID19 era. Finally, it shows that the composite-financial resilience index improves the two former measures of resilience and can 'significantly' and 'persistently' reveal low-resilience characteristics of firms, those that are riskier during all periods of the COVID-19 crisis.

In  order  to  reach  the  aim,  after  the  literature  and  data  description  in  'Further related  literature'  and  'Data'  sections,  respectively,  this  paper  emphasizes  the necessity of financial intuition of resilience and clarifies the definition of resilience indexes in 'Resilience indexes' section. It exhibits the appropriateness of the proposed hybrid resilience index using earnings expectations in 'Discount rate' section where it also reveals the significant resilience-heterogeneity in firms' implied discount rates and suggests the appropriate index of resilience; Then concludes.

## Further related literature

The paper contributes to plenty of literature in resilience studies which has recently attracted loads of attention in economics and finance. Resilience is the capacity of a  firm  to  absorb  disturbance  (Walker  et  al.  2004)  and  to  retain  the  same  level  of functionality. One approach to resilience is related to the status of some predefined economic variables as structural measures of firms that interpret their performance. For instance, when the economy sees an oil price shock, consumption and income are  the  most  popular  benchmarks  of  the  firms'  resilience  (Sedlmayer  and  Boehm 2011; Accorigi 2011; Bunting et al. 2011). In finance, Hua et al. (2020) introduce a measure of resilience based on liquidity and its relation to expected returns.

Resilience implicitly includes the cost of change in performance during the crisis to incorporate the idea that the nature of the crisis affects the interpretation of resilience and measurements. In other words, the type of crisis and the corresponding shock determine the definition and the role of resilience; Firms may be resilient to one type of shock but not to other types. The main contribution of this research is to measure corporate resilience that can reveal the effect of COVID-19 on the heterogeneity in stock expected returns.

<!-- image -->

In  the  COVID  era,  the  economic  concept  of  performance  should  be  related  to environmental aspects caused by COVID, specifically, it should represent to what extent  firms'  performance  depends  on  communication  restrictions  and  social  distancing rules. Since January 2020, there have been many studies about the effect of COVID-19 on the labor market due to the effect of the lockdown and new restrictions on the labor force. Many of them try to propose a measure of workplace flexibility.  Koren  and  Peto  (2020)  examine  business  disruption  and  provide  a  theorybased  measure  for  the  dependency  of  US  businesses  on  human  interaction.  They explain  how  face-to-face  communication  affects  the  cost  of  producing  goods  and introduces the average 'affected share' based on different social distancing indexes. They interpret that a higher affected share of firms implies less flexibility towards social distancing restrictions. In a separate study, Dingel and Neiman (2020) examine the economic effect of social distancing measures. They conduct surveys on a sample of US workers to find out how many jobs can be done from home. The proposed occupation-level social-distancing measure is constructed using pre-pandemic data. Meanwhile, they examine the positive correlation of these data with the data obtained  in  the  early  stage  of  the  pandemic  and  explain  that  workplace-flexible jobs pay more than inflexible jobs. They interpret how this measure can vary across industries and countries. Another study by Hensvik et al. (2020) investigates to what extent  the  COVID-19 pandemic affects the number of job searches and amplifies the  labor  demand  shock.  They  analyze  the  intensity  and  direction  of  searches  in the early COVID crisis and explain the impact of job seekers. Using the diff-in-diff method, they sort the most resilient and the least resilient occupations and individual vacancies that belong to occupations for which labor demand is more resilient to the crisis. This paper takes into account workplace resilience based on Koren and Peto (2020) in order to capture the impact of COVID-like shock and social distancing rules and improves the methodology by other financial aspects of resilience.

Moreover, during the market distress in the early 2020, the study of the relationship between corporate characteristics and market drop conducted by Ding et al. (2021) starts  to  answer  the  question  that  which  firm  characteristics  make  some  companies more 'immune' than others to the COVID-19 shock. They show that firms with better pre-COVID finances saw a less severe drop in their stock prices. Furthermore, Ramelli and Wagner (2020) identify corporate debt and cash holdings as important drivers of firms' value. They mention the key role of leverage and cash holdings in firm valuation. Specifically, less-levered nonfinancial firms with higher cash are less affected by COVID-19 (Glossner et al. 2020). All of these 1 motivate to define resilience as one of the main characteristics of firms not only in the sense of workplace flexibility that is necessary due to the special type of disaster in the pandemic era but also from the financial resilience perspective. This paper mostly contributes to the recent literature on corporate resilience and its novelty is to present a financial hybrid resilience index to capture such effects of these two kinds of resilience related to the COVID-19 era. In the methodology of the proposed composite-financial resilience index, this paper contributes to the application of cutting-edge literature on the multivariate functional principal component analysis presented by Happ and Greven (2018) and Happ-Kurz (2020).

1 Together with what is explained in 'Introduction' section.

On the other side, among huge stock market literature, Alfaro et al. (2020) explain the role of unanticipated infection changes on forecasts of aggregate equity market return and Albuquerque et al. (2020) discuss how abnormal returns react to ESG ratings. As mentioned above, many studies shed light that firms' financial status can be potentially important to overcome the economic consequences of social distancing restrictions and lockdowns. Pagano et al. (2023) demonstrate that among all firms those that are less affected by social distancing restrictions have higher returns in time of the COVID crisis. Meanwhile, Cheema-Fox et al. (2020) show that more flexible firms in terms of workforce, especially those that protect supply chains during the market decline, have higher returns. This paper contributes to a fast-growing strand  of  literature  on  COVID-disaster  risk  and  heterogeneous  expected  return  in a  different  way.  It  provides  a  comparison  between  the  three  introduced  resilience indexes to see to what extent each of these indexes can reveal significant resilience heterogeneity  in  expected  returns.  In  pricing  methodology,  the  literature  mostly introduces different types of present value models based on a wide range of assumptions. Among all studies, Botosan and Plumlee (2005) assess five proxies for firmspecific cost of equity capital. They find that the association between the target price method  and  PEG  ratio  method,  and  the  firm-risk  measures  accords  with  theory. They explain how this method can be derived from the present value model and the model of economy-wide growth presented by Ohlson and Juettner-Nauroth (2005) by assuming no growth in abnormal earnings beyond the forecast horizon. In the COVID-19 situation, Landier and Thesmar (2020) suggest that discount rate shocks are  the  main  driver  of  the  V-shaped  evolution  of  stock  prices.  They  use  analysts' expectations as forecasts of future cash flows and show the term structure of equity discount rates is not flat which is an important component of firm valuation.

In line with Landier and Thesmar (2020), Engelberg et al. (2018), Lochster and Tetlock (2020); and De la and Myers (2020), who discuss the effect of cash flow expectation movements on medium-term price fluctuation, this research considers earnings  expectations  to  obtain  implied  discount  rates,  and  follows  present  value model of Landier and Thesmar (2020) and the Gordon growth model for beyond the forecast horizon. Then, it is possible to show to what extent each index can significantly exhibit resilience-heterogeneity in implied discount rates and to see whether the riskier firms can be recognized based on the proposed composite-financial resilience index.

## Data

In  order  to  figure  out  if  the  proposed  hybrid  index  can  significantly  reveal  a  sign of  resilience  risk,  resilience  indexes  as  well  as  implied  DR  should  be  calculated. This requires a wide range of different data. The following is a short explanation to clarify all these types of data.

<!-- image -->

This paper is going to introduce three resilience indexes in the following section: workplace resilience, financial-based resilience, and composite-financial resilience. For the workplace resilience index, this paper uses the proxy presented by Koren and Peto (2020), namely, 'affected share'. This proxy is proposed based on the early period of COVID-19 observations in the first quarter of 2020 and computed for each 3-digit  NAICS industry.  About  the  full  explanation  of  'affected  share',  this  paper directly refers to the original paper; Meanwhile, 'Resilience indexes' section provides a brief explanation of this theory-based measure.

To  construct  financial-intuition  resilience  indexes,  the  computation  procedure uses more than 70 monthly financial ratios of nearly 5833 U.S. firms from 2013 to 2022, including all categories: capitalization, efficiency, profitability, liquidity, solvency, valuation, and financial soundness, available at WRDS database. Table 2 in Appendix provides the exact definition of all these financial ratios.

For earnings expectations, daily consensus analysts' earnings (I/B/E/S forecasts) is used to figure out the annualized growth of these expectations for all U.S. firms with high or low workplace flexibility, from 15 February to 11 May for the current (2020) and three following fiscal years. These earnings expectations are available at Refinitiv-Eikon, Thomson Reuters. To calculate implied discount rates, monthly consensus analysts' earnings of all U.S. firms is considered in 2020 as a current fiscal year and four following fiscal years from I/B/E/S-WRDS.

To complete the computation of implied discount rates, the paper uses closing price  over  2020-2022  and  fundamentals:  dividends,  common  stock  repurchases from  2010  to  2019,  and  net  income  from  2015  to  2019,  available  at  Compustat/ CRSP merged database for the U.S firms. 'Discount rate' section explains the pricing methodology in detail.

## Resilience indexes

## KP workplace resilience index

Due to the nature of the COVID-19 pandemic shock and the importance of defining the theory-based measure of resilience, this study firstly considers the intuition of resilience based on Koren and Peto (2020). Their methodology reveals the impact of COVID-19 social distancing restrictions on the economic functionality of firms.

In principle, Koren and Peto (2020) describe social distancing measure as a link between the effect of COVID restrictions on human interaction and the economic consequences on firms' performance. They define three dimensions of occupations: teamwork-intensive, physical presence, and customer-facing and introduce a theorybased measure that explains to what extent businesses rely on face-to-face communication (Charlot and Duranton 2004 and Tian 2019) and which firms are mainly affected by these restrictions. Their model of communication shows the sensitivity of production costs to an increase in face-to-face interaction and determines firms that perform less efficiently from home.

In their model, the firm's production process is in terms of the number of workers  and  the  firm  optimally  decides  on  task  sharing  between  workers.  In  a  cost minimization problem, they define a cost function of firms consisting of total communication and production costs and find the optimum number of workers. Furthermore,  they  define  the  social  distancing  effect  caused  by  new  COVID  restrictions which reduces face-to-face contact to an exogenous threshold amount of N. They conclude  that  production  costs  increase  with  social  distancing  when  the  optimal number of workers is greater than N. They introduce 'affected share' referring to the share of workers in any of the three occupation groups. This study defines the KP workplace resilience index as equivalent to 'affected share'; And the higher amount of affected share implies the lower resilience (Koren and Peto 2020).

<!-- image -->

By definition, the KP index shows how this measure explains the degree of firm's compatibility  with  lockdown  and  newly  legislated  rules  and  emphasizes  the  economic performance of firms. Based on Koren and Peto (2020), low-resilience firms are not economically sustainable since they encounter business disruption more than other firms, especially due to restrictions on human interaction. Thus, it is expected to see such firms to be more sensitive to new social distancing restrictions and lockdowns. In other words, the KP index of resilience measures the economic sustainability related to 'workplace' flexibility, apart from to what extent the firm was financially strong before the COVID-19 pandemic.

The important feature of the KP index is that the resilience of firms depends on their own workplace characteristics and flexibility towards the new mitigation policies which is not implied by the workplace-resilience of other firms. Despite all the prominent  features  of  this  resilience  measure,  'Discount  rate'  section  shows  the shortcoming of this  index  to  exhibit  'significantly'  the  resilience-heterogeneity  in the firm's implied discount rates and proposes how it is possible to overcome the issue.

Figure 1 reveals the heterogeneity of workplace resilience across industries and provides a relative comparison on the frequency of different sectors with the same degree of resilience for the U.S. firms. 2 This figure asserts that most firms categorized  as  high  workplace  resilience  firms,  specifically  in  'Manufacturing:  Iron  and steel equipment, agricultural machinery, and electrical and computer products' sector,  whereas  it  is  expected  not  to  be  such  high  resilient,  since  around  90%  of  the world economy had been under some form of lockdown, disrupting supply chains, depressing  consumer  demand  and  putting  millions  of  job  losses.  Moreover,  the developed  economies  were  expected  to  contract  by  5%  in  2020.  In  the  following sections, other resilience indexes are introduced to understand how it is possible to overcome this puzzle.

## Financial-based resilience index

Apart  from  workplace  flexibility  as  a  main  characteristic  that  empowers  firms  to survive in the COVID-19 era, this subsection presents a hierarchical machine-based mechanism to define a new 'financial-based resilience' index based on all financial ratios, belonging to all categories: Capitalization, efficiency, profitability, liquidity, solvency,  valuation,  and  financial  soundness, 3 in  order  to  take  into  account  the impact of corporate financials. Although the literature clearly highlights the necessity of each category, the novel presented methodology in this subsection examines which financial ratios outweigh others.

2 The sample is based on all U.S. firms with available data for computation of implied discount rate: analysts' earnings expectations, payout ratio, growth rate, etc.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 1 The  frequency  of  NAICS  sectors  in  each  category  of  workplace-resilience:  firms  with  affected share less  than  40  are  assigned  to  a  high-resilience  group  and  ones  with  greater  than  65  are  assigned to the low-resilience group. The remainders are considered for the medium-resilience category. Data source Koren and Peto (2020)

<!-- image -->

## The necessity of financial intuition of resilience

Due to the different characteristics of firms and several policies adopted to tackle the financial and economic consequences of COVID-19, it is difficult to figure out how firms' financial status plays an important role in such a chaotic situation.

Li et  al.  (2021)  interpret  the  booster  role  of  firms'  financial  characteristics,  for instance, sales, return on assets, and profit margins, on firms' corporate culture that potentially  affects  the  firms'  real  performance.  The  procedure  of  constructing  the financial-based resilience index includes the impact of different kinds of efficiency ratios (e.g. sales-to-equity and sales-to-working capital). Moreover, it is also possible to see some firms are more sensitive to cash-preserving policies during COVID19, especially firms with lower profitability and revenue growth (Pettenuzzo et al. 2022).  The  impact  of  all  profitability  ratios  (e.g.  net  profit  margin  and  operating profit margin after depreciation) is covered by the machine-based definition of financial-based resilience.

3 Pagano and Zechner (2022) mention an important relation between company size and financial variables like net sale and total assets. In this paper, the financial-based resilience index provides the overall effect of company size through its interaction impact on different financial soundness and efficiency ratios.

<!-- image -->

Meanwhile,  flexibility  in  business  prospects,  jointly  with  financial  flexibility could be an efficient path to reach COVID-resilience. Barry et al. (2022) suggest the importance of financial and investment flexibility based on internal funds and external  finance.  They  explain  how  firms  deal  with  the  related  managerial  issues by capital spending schemes. Moreover, firms' financial policies and equity-raising activities can potentially alter the asset growth rate and consequently, the impact of COVID-19 on firms' financial status. As Pagano and Zechner (2022) suggest, this could happen through raising capital (e.g. bank credit, corporate bond issuance, and equity issuance), corporate policies (e.g. capital structure and liquidity, and also dividend payout and share repurchase policies) and also public policies (e.g. loan guarantees and PPP that can potentially reduce the possibility of business bankruptcies and increase firm's survival for longer time (Wang et al. 2021) by providing more liquidity. However, all these from different perspectives affect the capital structure and emphasize the necessity of an index in order to reveal the overall 'compounding'  impact  of  all  these  policies.  For  instance,  the  increase  in  liquidity  leads  to changes in capital structure and a decrease in productivity due to the adverse effect of loan guarantees (Acharya et al. 2021b; Crouzet and Tourre 2021; Kalemli-Ozcan et al. 2022). The machine-based definition of financial-based resilience index considers all capitalization ratios (e.g. common equity-to-invested capital and long-term debt-to-invested capital) to include the effect of capital-raising, solvency ratios (e.g. total debt-to-equity and total debt-to-capital) to capture the impact on capital structure, and liquidity ratios (e.g. cash ratio and quick ratio). Moreover, it is possible that COVID-19 pushes firms to a huge reduction in dividends to compensate for their capitalization and liquidity (Cejnek et al. 2021). Consistently, this paper considers the dividend payout ratio (together with other valuation ratios) as a complementary financial variable.

In  what  follows,  it  can  be  seen  clearly  that  solvency  ratios  are  not  major  variables to explain the impact of the financial status of firms, as opposed to profitability ratios. This contributes to Blickle and Santos (2022) who compare the indebtedness and profitability of U.S. listed companies, and in line with Pagano and Zechner (2022) who explain that there is no increase in the level of leverage for listed companies due to capital-raising.

## Financial-based index

The  procedure  is  separately  conducted  cross-sectionally  for  two  periods  of  time: before the onset of COVID-19 (Jan 2013-Dec 2019) and after the emergence (Jan 2020-Dec 2021). In each period,  the  average  of  each  financial  ratio  is  computed over time for each firm.

In  the  first  step,  principal  component  analysis  determines  some  financial  ratios as  major  ratios  that  could  significantly  explain  the  overall  variation  caused  by  all 70 financial ratios. Those financial ratios that are highly and significantly correlated with  selected  principal  components  are  considered  for  the  second  step  of  screening. The 23 selected ratios in the first stage are still from all categories (Fig. 11 in Appendix contains the results on the first five components and the corresponding correlations with each of the 23 financial ratios).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2 Scree and correlation plots: the figure shows results of PCA at the second step before the COVID19 outbreak. The left panel (scree plot) shows the proportion of variation explained by each component. The right panel (correlation plot)  presents  the  correlation  of  each  financial  ratio  with  the  corresponding dimension (component). The size and color of circles represent the correlation between the financial ratios (rows) and principal components (columns). Appendix contains the full explanation of abbreviation names in Table 2. Data source Financial ratios, WRDS database. (Color figure online)

<!-- image -->

In the second step, the procedure determines 13 major ratios (out of the 23 ratios in the first step), belonging to three major components: profitability, valuation, and liquidity.  The  left  panel  of  Fig.  2  provides  statistical  evidence  that  the  first  three principal  components  are  sufficient  to  capture  the  most  variation  caused  by  these financial ratios. The right panel shows the correlation of each financial ratio with the corresponding principal components before the onset of COVID-19 4 . It clearly reveals that the first, the second, and the third PCs are related to profitability ratios, valuation  ratios,  and  liquidity  ratios,  respectively.  In  each  category,  the  financial ratio with the highest correlation with the corresponding component is considered as the most major financial ratio to define the financial-based resilience index in the third step.

4 Results for after the onset are available in Appendix, Fig. 12.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3 Correlation plot: the figure shows the results of PCA at the third step before and after COVID-19. The left panel shows the correlation between ratios and the first three components before COVID-19. The right panel shows the results after COVID-19 emergence. The size and color of circles represent the correlation between the financial ratios (rows) and principal components (columns). Appendix contains the full explanation of abbreviation names in Table 2. Data source Financial ratios, WRDS database. (Color figure online)

<!-- image -->

In the third and final step (Fig. 3), the financial-based resilience index is defined as  the  first  principal  component  of  remainder  variables:  operating  profit  margin  (profitability  ratio),  price-operating  earnings  (valuation  ratio)  and  quick  ratio (liquidity). The index is obtained for both periods, before and after the emergence of COVID-19 in the left and right panels, respectively. Table 1 compares the correlation of three selected profitability, valuation, and liquidity ratios with the first component, those that all are significant major contributors to variation originated by all financial ratios and represent the firm's financial status. As it can be seen clearly, profitability  and  valuation  ratios  have  significant  positive  loading,  as  opposed  to liquidity ratio.

Financial-based resilience index for firm i at time t is defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where opmad it , pe it and quickratio it stand for operating profit margin, price-operating earnings and quick ratio, respectively. 5 This  machine-based specification is in line with Li et al. (2021) who emphasize that profit margins and sales per employee imply strong corporate culture, especially in the COVID-19 era and consequently, mitigate  the  effect  of  COVID-19  shock  on  asset  price  fluctuation.  Moreover,  the important role of quick ratio as the major liquidity ratio accords with Pagano and Zechner (2022) who mention the significant change in liquidity of listed U.S. firms. The statistical tests on the level of quick ratio prove the significance of COVID-19's impact on the liquidity level from before to after the onset. 6

5 The results of statistical tests  determine the significant change not only in financial-based index but also in liquidity and valuation ratios from before to after the emergence of COVID-19.

6 The results are available upon request.

<!-- image -->

Table 1 Summary statistics, correlation, and significance of selected profitability, valuation, and liquidity ratios with the first corresponding PC in each period, before and after the onset. Data source Financial ratios, WRDS database

| COVID period  Financial ratio  Min  1st Qu.  Median  Mean  3rd Qu.  Max  ST.D  Correlation  with first  PC  Before  Operating profit margin  - 2100.97  - 0.61  0.03  - 22.10  0.14  0.96  146.15  0.80  Price-operating earnings  - 890.62  - 6.22  13.94  3.51  22.17  296.00  67.13  0.51  Quick ratio  0.073  1.09  1.72  3.31  3.40  104.17  4.78  - 0.52  After  Operating profit margin  - 1616.66  - 0.50  0.01  - 14.22  0.14  0.88  98.01  0.80  Price-operating earnings  - 287.91  - 4.62  10.56  10.62  22.13  347.69  39.10  0.25  Quick ratio  0.070  0.99  1.59  3.19  3.30  79.01  4.81  - 0.62   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

The decrease in coefficient of valuation ratio from 0.45 before COVID-19 to 0.21 after the onset and the higher negative loading of liquidity ratio after the onset  show  that  since  the  emergence  of  COVID-19,  liquidity  moderates  more the  impact  of  valuation  and  profitability  ratios,  possibly  due  to  the  impact  of Fed's packages, especially for small businesses. Such packages increase firm's liquidity to make them capable enough to overcome the economic consequences of COVID-19 and to compensate for their financial weakness. This can be potentially  a  sign  of  low  firms'  financial  resilience  and  shows  that  firms  with  lower financial resilience benefited from either capital raising (e.g. bank credit) or public policies (e.g. Fed's packages) and have increased their resources to a higher level since they severely needed more liquidity. This suggests the negative loadings for the liquidity ratio, consistent with what is obtained above through hierarchical PCA. Generally speaking, this evidence of a negative sign for the coefficient  of  liquidity  shows  a  penalty  for  the  degree  of  financial  resilience.  The amount of penalty equals the 10% (-0.62 + 0.52 = -0.10 ) decrease in the firm's financial-based resilience (10% increase in its absolute correlation with the first principal component).

The machine-based choice of liquidity ratio for financial-based resilience index by  PCA  and  the  significant  change  in  its  level  from  before  to  after  COVID-19, together with no choice of capitalization and solvency ratios, suggest that capitalraising  through  credit  and  bond  market,  as  Pagano  and  Zechner  (2022)  interpret, did not result a prominent change in leverage (solvency ratios), in line with what is expected about the possibility of external equity during the pandemic. The impact of the external equity could be potentially such high that the effect of COVID-19 on capitalization ratio would not be significant.

The key role of the financial-based resilience index is to quantify the impact of corporate financials. The first plus point of the financial-based resilience index is to capture the effect of all major firm's financial ratios and to reveal the impact of the financial status of firms on resilience and consequent price changes. Section 'Discount rate' compares different indexes and provides novel evidence of the amplification of workplace resilience by financial-based resilience (Section 'Implied discount rates'). Based on the definition of the financial-based resilience  index,  this  happens  due  to  changes  in  valuation  ratios  rather  than  other ratios.  The  reason  is  directly  related  to  a  higher  decrease  in  correlation  with financial-based resilience for price-operating earnings (Table 1). This evidence is in line with Glossner et al. (2020) who emphasize the key role of institutional investors in valuation and the amplification of price crashes. Moreover, to complete their approach, this paper shows in Section 'Implied discount rates' that this financial-based resilience index can exhibit the implicit role of firms' financial  status  in  heterogeneous  price  fluctuations  through  earnings  expectations. The  further  interpretation  of  the  performance  of  this  index  is  provided  in  the following sections where different resilience indexes are compared and the paper presents  an  evidence  of  resilience-heterogeneity  in  earnings  expectations  and firms' implied discount rates as well.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 4 Scree plot of multivariate functional principal components: this figure is the result of multivariate principal component analysis of the bivariate of workplace resilience and financial-based resilience. It shows the proportion of variation explained by the first five multivariate functional PCs. Data source Koren and Peto (2020) and financial ratios, WRDS

<!-- image -->

## Composite-financial resilience index

To measure the firm's resilience in COVID-19 crisis, this paper suggests an index based on workplace resilience as a main characteristic linked to the nature of this crisis and financial-based resilience, using a more general framework called multivariate functional principal component analysis.

This  method  is  an  application  of  multivariate  Karhunen-Loeve  theorem  and interprets  the X ( t ) = ( X 1 ( t ) , X 2 ( t )) T = ( KP ( t ) , FB ( t )) T ,  containing  workplace  resilience (KP) and financial-based resilience (FB), as the following aggregate of infinite eigen-functions, u1D713 m ( t ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where u1D70C m is a zero-mean random variable u1D70C m = ⟨⟨ X ( t ) , u1D713 m ( t ) ⟩⟩ with Cov ( u1D70C m , u1D70C n ) = u1D708 m u1D6FF mn . Moreover,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

⎣

‖

‖

⎦

<!-- image -->

Then, workplace resilience of each firm, KP ( t ), 7 is assumed to be affected by zeromean white-noise over time. The scree plot (Fig. 4) provides the portion of the total variation created by X ( t ), bivariate of the workplace and financial-based resilience, explained by each multivariate functional principal component and suggests a sufficient number of components ( M ). It shows that the first component explains more than 90% variation of X ( t )  and M = 1 is  sufficient  to  see  convergence  in  the  Karhunen-Loeve theorem.

The composite-financial resilience index is defined by ̂ 𝜌 i = ̂ 𝜉 ( KP ) i ̂ c ( KP ) + ̂ 𝜉 ( FB ) i ̂ c ( FB ) ,

with ̂ c as  an  eigen-vector  of ( N -1 ) -1 u1D6EC T u1D6EC ,  where 𝛬 i = ( ̂ 𝜉 ( KP ) i , ̂ 𝜉 ( FB ) i ) and ̂ 𝜉 i is  the corresponding  estimated  score  for  firm i based  on  univariate  functional  principal component analysis. Intuitively, a decrease in ̂ 𝜌 is equivalent to less dependency of a bivariate of the firm's workplace and financial resilience to 'time' variation. This implies the lower ̂ 𝜌 for  high-resilience firms since it is expected to see high-resilience firms less affected by crises happening over 'time'.

Following sections show how this index can 'significantly' exhibit the resilienceheterogeneity in firms' cost of capital, and more importantly how it can reveal the amplification impact of corporate financials.

## Discount rate

This  section  shows  to  what  extent  an  appropriate  resilience  index  can  potentially detect  the  source  of  heterogeneity  in  the  implied  discount  rates  as  a  proxy  of expected returns, especially in the COVID-19 era. Practically, it gives the opportunity to investors to assess the risk of an investment and set a benchmark for future investments based on the interest percentage that an investment may yield over its lifetime.

To calculate implied discount rate, this paper follows the present value model and considers discounted earnings expectation (analysts' forecasts) as it can better reveal the firm-level (cash flow) shock rather than future dividend streams. This is a realistic  assumption  since  in  the  COVID  situation,  investors  become  more  concerned about  earnings  and  their  beliefs  are  more  sensitive  to  it;  Thus  analysts'  earnings forecasts could be a good representative of expected cash flow by investors. Moreover, this consideration is in line with De la and Myers (2020) who reveal the strong explanatory power of analysts' expectations. 8

Following Landier and Thesmar (2020):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

7 For  simplicity,  workplace  resilience  in  this  section  is  considered  as  100-'affected  share',  where 'affected share' is introduced by Koren and Peto (2020).

8 In line with Chen and Zhao (2009) who assert large misspecification in cash flows backed out from discount rates.

<!-- image -->

where Ex t EPS ih stands for consensus earnings expectation of firm i at time t based on the current fiscal year ( h = 2020 and 2021). 9 Pit and r it are closing price and discount rate, respectively. For the payout ratio ( b i ), first sum of dividends and common stock  repurchases  is  obtained.  After  normalizing  by  net  income,  its  average  over 2010-2019 is computed and winsorized cross-sectionally at 0 and 1. At each NAICS sector, the average sale growth ( g i )  over  2015-2019 is scaled by 2015 sales, after omitting outliers.

Following subsections explain the goodness of different resilience indexes based on their ability to categorize firms into high- and low-resilience based on the earnings  expectation  of  firms  as  well  as  the  corresponding  implied  discount  rates  of these firms in the COVID era.

## Earnings expectations

One of the main drivers of heterogeneous discount rates can originate from expected cash  flow  and  earnings  expectations  due  to  its  ability  to  capture  the  effects  from the real part of the economy and to reveal the direct effect of COVID-19 on firms' performance. The evidence provided by Li et al. (2021) about the impact of COVID19 on firm's stock returns based on earnings call transcripts, made reasonable figure out resilience-heterogeneity in earnings expectations. This subsection is going to compare three indexes to see which kinds of corporate resilience are effective on earnings expectations. Using three indexes of resilience explained in the previous section, firms are categorized into three groups and high- and low-resilience firms are compared based on the annualized earnings expectations.

Figure 5 provides a detailed interpretation about the sensitivity of daily annualized growth of earnings expectations in the feverish period of COVID-19 and shows how such forecasted growth evolves negatively for high- and low-resilience firms over time 10 ,  for 2020 and the three following fiscal years. As expected, firms with low-resilience  workforce  experienced  lower  growth  of  earnings  expectations,  as opposed to the high-resilience ones. Before and during the fever period of COVID19, low-resilience firms are dominant in the current fiscal year of 2020 (upper-left panel), in the sense that aggregate earnings expectation was affected more by the earnings expectation of low-resilience firms and this dominance effect will diminish in further fiscal years (other three panels).

The  annualized  earnings  expectation  of  high-resilience  firms  for  the  following fiscal years (and similarly the one for low-resilience firms) is shown in Fig. 6. This figure compares the expected growth of these two groups of firms separately for different fiscal years.

Figure 6 reveals that for higher horizons, the growth of earnings expectations is less steep for both high- and low-resilience firms and long-term expectations did not react as much as the short-term one. Figures 5 and 6, suggest that the KP workplace resilience index is a good measure to exhibit the heterogeneity related to workplace flexibility during the fever period. This observation is not only in line with Landier and Thesmar (2020) but also quite consistent with Koren and Peto (2020) and their results on the sensitivity of firms' cost of production to social-distancing restrictions since  the  onset  of  the  pandemic  including  the  fever  period.  This  emphasizes  the necessity of KP workplace intuition as a resilience measure.

9 The calculation contains earnings expectations for the fiscal year 2023.

10 Since Koren and Peto (2020) compute 'affected shares' using data of the fever period, categorizing the firms in Figs. 5 and 6 is based on the workplace resilience index, KP.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5 Expected annualized growth of earnings: this figure shows the forecasted growth 1 h -2019 ( Ex t EPS ih -EPS i ,2019 )∕ EPS i ,2019 of  high-  and  low-resilience  firms  based  on  the  KP  workplace resilience  index  during  the  feverish  period  for  four  fiscal  years. Ex t EPS ih stands  for  earnings  expectation of firm i at time t for horizon h .  Firms with 'affected share' less than 40 are assigned to the highresilience group and ones with greater than 65 are assigned to the low-resilience group. Data source Koren and Peto (2020) and Refinitiv-Eikon platform (Thomson Reuters) daily consensus analysts' earnings (I/B/E/S forecasts)

<!-- image -->

Figure 7 shows the overall change in earnings from analysts' point of view for four  categories  of  firms  based  on  their  workplace  flexibility  (KP)  and  financialbased  resilience  (FB).  The  first-left  diagram  shows  that  among  firms  with  higher workplace flexibility,  those  with  better  financial  status  see  less  reduction  in  earnings expectations from 2020 to 2021. It is also expected to see a steeper rebound in earnings for the following fiscal years (from 2021 to 2024), especially after all Fed's interventions  in  2021.  This  implicitly  shows  the  amplification  of  workplace  resilience by financial-based resilience.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6 Expected  annualized  growth  of  earnings  of  low-  and  high-resilience  firms:  the  left  panel  compares the earnings expectations growth 1 h -2019 ( Ex t EPS ih -EPS i ,2019 )∕ EPS i ,2019 of low-resilience firms for higher  horizons. Ex t EPS ih stands  for  earnings  expectation  of  firm i at  time t for  horizon h .  The  right panel  prepares  similar  comparison  for  high-resilience  firms.  Firms  with  'affected  share'  less  than  40 are  assigned  to  the  high-resilience  group  and  ones  with  greater  than  65  are  assigned  to  the  low-resilience group. Data source Koren and Peto (2020) and Refinitiv-Eikon platform (Thomson Reuters) daily consensus analysts' earnings (I/B/E/S forecasts)

<!-- image -->

Figure 7 makes the importance of financial-based resilience more clear, specifically  its  role  in  expectations  of  those  firms  with  low  flexibility  towards  COVID19 social distancing restrictions (Second panel). It clearly suggests that even after all  Fed's  packages,  low-FB  firms  cannot  experience  overall  upward  changes  in expectations if they have low degree of workplace flexibility (blue line in the second panel), whereas firms with higher level of financial resilience can continue the upward status quo despite low flexibility in their workplace (the red line in the second panel). Moreover, making a comparison between the first and the second panel reveals the amplification of financial-based resilience by workplace resilience since within  either  high  or  low  financial-based  resilience  (high-FB  or  low-FB)  group, higher workplace resilience (high-KP) firms see less reduction in earnings expectations (red (blue) line in the first panel in comparison with a red (blue) line in the second panel). Furthermore, within the low financial-based resilience group (the blue lines in the first and the second panels), high-KP firms are expected to experience a  complete  rebound  after  four  fiscal  years  (as  opposed  to  firms  with  lower  workplace  resilience).  The  first  and  the  second  panels  suggest  that  the  impact  of  each workplace resilience and financial-based resilience on earnings expectations can be amplified by one another.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 7 Earnings expectations: this figure shows the evolution of an average of ( Ex t EPS ih -Ex t EPS i ,Jan )∕ Ex t EPS i ,Jan for four categories of firms based on financial-based resilience and KP resilience over each fiscal year. Ex t EPS ih stands for earnings expectation of firm i at time t for horizon h . It is obtained for 2020 and four following fiscal years. Based on Koren and Peto (2020), firms with an 'affected share' of less than 40 are assigned to the high-resilience group and ones with greater than 65 are assigned to the low-resilience group. Firms with an average financial-based resilience index higher than the 66th percentile are assumed as high-resilience and firms with lower than the 33rd percentile are the low-resilience ones. Data source Koren and Peto (2020) and Monthly consensus analysts' earnings (I/B/E/S-WRDS). (Color figure online)

<!-- image -->

The third panel shows two extreme cases and exhibits that as opposed to more resilient  firms  (in  the  sense  of  both  KP  and  FB),  firms  with  less  workplace  flexibility  and  less  financial  resilience  will  generally  see  downward  average  revisions in  the  COVID era. 11 The  panel  shows  that  analysts  are  still  pessimistic  about  the rebound for low-KP and low-FB stocks. This panel emphasizes to what extent earnings expectations can be heterogeneous due to either workplace or financial-based resilience  and  as  a  result,  suggests  to  what  extent  this  can  affect  heterogeneity  in firms'  implied  discount  rate.  This  figure  reproves  the  necessity  of  the  compositefinancial resilience index as a hybrid measure of resilience containing both kinds of resilience.

Figure 8 not only reveals the resilience-heterogeneity in analysts' earnings expectations but also makes empirical comparison between the descriptive power of three measures of corporate resilience. This figure shows the overall change in earnings expectations of high- and low-resilience firms categorized based on each resilience index for each fiscal year. It exhibits the inappropriateness of KP and financial-based resilience indexes although the second panel correctly shows that among all firms, those with higher financial-based resilience saw a less severe decline in expectations at the beginning and also a stable trend for the following fiscal years (red line in the second panel). The figure explicitly reveals the important role of workplace resilience  on  overall  composite-financial  (CF)  resilience  since  adding  the  intuition  of workplace resilience to financial-based measure gives an improvement in interpretation of earnings expectation growth of low-resilience 12 firms (the blue line in the third panel compared to the one in the first and second panels), in a sense that as it is expected, CF-resilience correctly shows a reduction in these expectations from 2020 to one fiscal year after the onset of pandemic; Meanwhile the effect of adding the intuition of financial-based resilience leads to a correct perception of KP-resilience impact on earnings expectation, specifically for high-resilience firms (the red line in the third panel in comparison with the one in the first and the second panels) in the sense that expectations see less reduction with respect to the one for the low-resilience firms. In general, CF-resilience compares correctly the earnings expectations on Koren and Peto (2020), firms with an 'affected share' of less than 40 are assigned to the high-resilience group and ones with greater than 65 are assigned to the low-resilience group. For the second panel, firms  with  an  average  financial-based  resilience  index  higher  than  the  66th  percentile  are  assumed  as high-resilience firms and those with lower than the 33rd percentile are the low-resilience ones. Using the composite-financial resilience index, firms with an index less than the 33rd percentile of the composite index are assumed as high-resilience firms and ones with an index higher than the 66th percentile are considered low-resilience  ones.  The  results  are  robust  to  categorization  using  other  percentiles. Data source Koren  and  Peto  (2020)  for  workplace  resilience,  WRDS  for  firm-level  financial  ratios  and Monthly consensus analysts' earnings (I/B/E/S - WRDS). (Color figure online)

11 Revision in the spirit of Landier and Thesmar (2020).

12 In the sense of multivariate functional principal components and composite-financial resilience.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 8 Average earnings expectations after COVID emergence: the plot shows the annual average effect of COVID-19 on earnings' expectations of high-resilience and low-resilience firms separately, based on each index of resilience over further fiscal years. This figure illustrates the COVID-19 effect on analysts' expectations originated from the resilience and computed as an annual average of Ex t EPS ih -Ex t EPS i ,Jan . Based

<!-- image -->

Ex t EPS i ,Jan

<!-- image -->

of  these  two  groups  of  firms  with  one  another  and  exhibits  more  realistically  the evolution of overall earnings expectations of high- and low-resilience firms.

To sum, apart from resilience-heterogeneity in earnings expectations showed by all these indexes, a measure of financial-based resilience is not capable enough to give an appropriate image of the overall corporate resilience regarding to analysts' earnings forecasts. However, this measure together with considering the effect of the social distancing rule on the economic cost of firms improves the understanding of the resilience-heterogeneous earnings expectations. As it can be seen clearly, the third panel emphasizes the importance of this aggregation of resilience intuitions and shows a smoother trend for high-resilience firms in the sense of the composite-financial index and a steeper decline for the low-resilience firms from the emergence of COVID-19 in 2020 to one fiscal year ahead. This exactly refers to the novelty of the new definition, composite-financial resilience index ('Resilience indexes' section).

This strong possibility  of  the  explanatory  power  of  analysts'  expectations  is  in line with De la and Myers (2020). All evidence in this section, in line with Bordalo et al. (2020), suggests that the expectation of earnings is not just backed out of market prices, but is formed independently by analysts, and reflects the heterogeneous expected cash flows.  Such  resilience-heterogeneity  in  earnings  expectations  sheds light on the effect of workplace resilience and financial resilience on firms' expected cash flows and raises a new interesting research idea to model this resilience-heterogeneity which is beyond the scope of this paper. In a separate study, Daadmehr (2022) focuses on this point and proposes a new asset pricing model for COVID-19 time. She shows how the cash flow stream can be affected by the firm's resilience in the time of COVID-19, in line with many studies that emphasize the existence of resilience heterogeneity in dividend stream and the expected returns as well (among all Pagano et al. 2023 and Daadmehr 2023).

In the next part, it is interesting to investigate the footprint of such amplification impact of these two intuitions of resilience and the aggregation of them on heterogeneity in firms' cost of equity capital, as a proxy of expected return, through such heterogeneous earnings expectations; And more importantly, to compare these three resilience indexes.

## Implied discount rates

So far  the  evidence  exhibits  how  each  of  resilience  indexes  is  capable  of  reasonably figuring out the expected future cash flows. This subsection tries to examine if this leads to any evidence of resilience-heterogeneity in the implied discount rate and more importantly, to compare these three resilience indexes. Figure 9 shows the average implied discount rate of high- and low-resilience firms, based on each resilience index. KP workplace resilience index is a strong measure of resilience due to its  ability not only to interpret the effect of social distancing on firms' production costs but also to classify firms into two 'more' and 'less' risky categories, as the first panel shows. This observation is consistent with the definition of the KP index as it is  proposed based on firms' performance regarding restrictions on human interaction at the onset of the pandemic; However, in what follows the provided evidence shows that the KP measure is less capable in such categorization 13 .  The KP index is  defined  based  on  firms'  production  costs  that  can  be  related  to  other  financial aspects. What a potentially appropriate resilience index needs is to take into account that firms with better financial status before and during COVID-19 can better overcome to economic consequences of this crisis.

<!-- image -->

The second panel exhibits that implied discount rate of high financial-resilience firms is smoother and these firms are less risky before the end of the fever period of COVID-19 since they have had better financial status. As time passes they fall into difficulties since some may not be workplace-flexible enough. This panel reveals a flip point in the implied discount rate. Generally speaking, this panel, especially the flip point can be novel evidence of the inappropriateness of this index since it is not possible to reach the unique categorization of high- and low-resilience firms using this measure, meaning that based on this index high-resilience firms are less risky before the end of the fever period but more risky after that. Whereas, high-resilience firms are expected to be less risky not only before but also after the end of the fever period. One may come up with the question of 'How is it possible that low-resilience firms have also a lower implied discount rate than the high-resilience ones, after the feverish period?'. The flip point is in line with the provided evidence by Pagano and Zechner (2022) who mention the importance of small firms (SMEs) in the economy and explain the puzzle that the growth in assets was larger for these firms and so are expected to be less risky but they are not.

As a piece of result, this flip point not only can be originated from the preparation of huge liquidity facilities by the Fed's packages (i.e. moderating role of liquidity) but also can be a sign of consequences of reversal in trading strategies in favor of firms with more flexible workforce after the fever period.

The novel evidence of the flip point suggests a sign of the fear of cash flow dryup that enforces firms to increase their resources by facilities from banks and capital markets, and taking loans to increase their liquidity. According to the definition of the financial-based resilience index in 'Financial-based resilience index' section, this measure captures such injections in the firm's liquidity and the higher injected liquidity is a sign of lower financial-based resilience. Even higher workplace flexible firms in the low-FB category also started increasing their liquidity because of the fears but less than lower workplace resilience firms since they encounter fewer difficulties in their workforce and are more flexible under social distancing rules. Moreover, highworkplace flexible firms are expected to be less risky with lower expected returns as the first panel suggests. Since the financial-based measure of resilience does not take into account the firms' workplace flexibility, firms in the low-resilience category (based on the FB index, in the second panel) can be either high- or low-flexible in their workforce. As a result, it is not surprising to see that low FB-resilient firms have lower implied discount rates and are less risky. If these firms are less risky, it is not because of their financial status but it is due to the workplace flexibility.

This  novel  evidence  shows  the  necessity  of  workplace  intuition  of  resilience, in line with Barry et al. (2022) who not only assert that flexibility in financial and investment strategies can potentially help to mitigate the side effects of this crisis but also emphasize the importance of distance-working and workplace flexibility in response to COVID-19 shock. All these show that financial-based resilience cannot be adequate enough to represent the real degree of firms' resilience and as a result, an appropriate resilience index should be a sort of aggregation of these two kinds of index.

13 In the sense that it cannot significantly categorize firms based on their degree of resilience (Fig. 10). The statistical significance is determined by simply comparing the monthly mean of these two groups.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Fig. 9 The evolution of implied discount rate: The plot shows the average implied discount rate of high-resilience and low-resilience firms separately, based on each index of resilience over 2020 and 2021. The implied discount rate is obtained from the present value model with analysts' earnings expectations as expected future cash flow discounted by payout ratio. For the first panel, firms with an 'affected share' less than 40 are assigned to the high-resilience group and ones with greater than 65 are assigned to the low-resilience group. For the second panel, firms with an average financialbased resilience index higher than the 66th percentile are assumed high-resilience firms and those with  lower  than  the  33rd  percentile  are  low-resilience  ones.  Using  composite-financial  resilience index,  firms  with  an  index  less  than  the  33rd  percentile  of  the  composite  index  are  assumed  as high-resilience firms and those with an index higher than the 66th percentile are considered as lowresilience ones. Data source Koren and Peto (2020) for workplace resilience, WRDS for firm-level financial  ratios,  I/B/E/S-WRDS  for  monthly  consensus  analysts'  earnings  and  Compustat/CRSP merged for closing price and fundamentals

<!-- image -->

Fig. 10 The appropriateness of different resilience indexes: this figure plots the results of statistical tests of  mean  comparison  for  cross-sectional  implied  discount  rates  of  high-  and  low-resilience  firms.  The black dash-line is a benchmark of goodness (perfect goodness), the case that the average implied discount rates of low-resilience firms are statistically and significantly different from that of high-resilience firms during all this period of time. Other lines correspond to one type of resilience index. The closer to the dash line, the better choice of resilience measure. Based on the KP resilience index, firms with an 'affected share' less than 40 are assigned to the high-resilience group and ones with greater than 65 are assigned to the low-resilience group. Based on the financial-based resilience index, firms with an average of financial-based resilience index higher than the 66th percentile are assumed high-resilience firms and those with lower than the 33rd percentile are low-resilience ones. Using the composite-financial resilience index, the solid (green dash) line is the case that firms with an index less than the 33rd (25th) percentile of the composite index are assumed as high-resilience firms and those with an index higher than the 66th (75th) percentile are considered as low-resilience ones. Data source Koren and Peto (2020) for workplace resilience, WRDS for firm-level financial ratios, I/B/E/S-WRDS for monthly consensus analysts' earnings and Compustat/CRSP merged for closing price and fundamentals. (Color figure online)

<!-- image -->

On the other hand in the third panel, composite-financial resilience index not only presents  a  smoother  implied  discount  rate  for  high-resilience  firms  showing  less riskiness (in line with what is implied by financial-based resilience index) but also reveals  the  amplification  impact  of  workplace  flexibility  by  financial-based  resilience  over  these  two  years,  in  the  sense  that  it  shows  a  relatively  higher  implied discount rate  for  low-resilience  firms  than  what  is  obtained  by  the  KP  workplace resilience index (the blue line in the third panel compared to the blue line in the first panel),  specifically  in  the  fever  period,  the  relative  higher  peak  for  low-resilience firms in the feverish period (in the third panel compared to the first panel). All these panels together with the novel evidence of the flip point emphasize the stronger and dominant impact of workplace resilience than the effect of financial-based resilience (in line with Daadmehr 2022).

<!-- image -->

This directly refers to the novel application of multivariate functional principal component analysis that proposes a sort of method for aggregation of these two  kinds  of  resilience;  meanwhile,  figures  out  the  novel  evidence  of  amplification.  The  composite-resilience  index  in  the  third  panel  not  only  suggests that  the  implied  discount  rate  of  less  resilient  firms  will  remain  significantly and  persistently  higher  than  that  of  more  resilient  firms  but  also  shows  that the implied discount rate for less resilient firms records the higher level with respect to its  initial  level,  as  opposed  to  the  one  for  more  resilient  firms  (the blue line compared to the red line in the third panel). This suggests that the CFresilience index is an appropriate resilience measure to detect the longer effect of COVID-19 on the expected return of low-resilience firms.

To  sum  up,  based  on  the  present  value  model,  not  only  heterogeneity  in expected cash flow leads to heterogeneous implied discount rates that one could expect as COVID hit the real part of the economy as well as the stock market but also composite-financial resilience index is the better choice as an index to interpret such resilience-heterogeneity.

Figure 10 shows to what extent the categorization based on each index is statistically significant. This figure shows the monthly mean comparison between the  implied  discount  rates  of  two  groups  of  firms  (high-  and  low-resilience), categorized  based  on  different  resilience  indexes,  from  2020  to  2021.  The black  dash-line  is  a  benchmark  of  goodness  (perfect  goodness),  the  case  that the average implied discount rates of low-resilience firms are statistically and significantly different from that of high-resilience firms during all this period of time. Other lines correspond to one type of resilience index. The closer to the dash line, the better choice of resilience measure. This figure shows that the composite-financial  resilience  index  can  potentially  categorize  firms  significantly into high- and low-resilience risk groups since the implied discount rate for  high-resilience  firms  cross-sectionally  significantly  differs  from  the  one for  low-resilience  firms  over  2020  and  2021,  containing  the  feverish  and  the post-COVID era. This plot is empirical proof to show neither the KP nor financial-based  resilience  index  is  appropriate  enough  to  significantly  reveal  the resilience-heterogeneity  in  implied  discount  rates.  The  appropriateness  of  the composite-financial  resilience  index  is  approved  for  after  the  Russia-Ukraine war, for the first quarter of 2022, using out-of-sample forecasting.

## Conclusion

This paper aims to propose an appropriate hybrid resilience index as a detector of  disaster  risk  and  a  new  source  of  heterogeneity  in  firms'  implied  discount rates in the pandemic era. It started to set a benchmark to capture the resilience, regarding  not  only  the  impact  of  new  social  distancing  restrictions  and  lockdown rules but also the financial strength of firms. It provided evidence of the amplification of workplace resilience by firms' financial status.

Using  the  financial-based  (FB)  resilience  index,  it  is  possible  to  capture  the impact of other effective elements like corporate financials on disaster risk and resilience-heterogeneous implied discount rates. More importantly, the paper provided an  interpretation  of  the  flip  point  in  the  evolution  of  the  implied  discount  rate  of high- and low-FB resilience firms, after the fever period of COVID-19.

In short, results suggest that financial-based resilience amplifies the impact of  social  distancing  to  identify  'significantly'  resilience-riskier  firms.  This explicitly shows the necessity and refers to the novelty of composite-financial (CF) resilience index. The paper employed a multivariate functional principal component analysis to construct and explain this kind of resilience index that can  be  potentially  applicable  for  the  assessment  of  the  pandemic's  long-run impacts on firms. The results emphasize the prominent role of the compositefinancial  resilience  index  in  providing  evidence  of  resilience-heterogeneity  in expected  payoffs  to  figure  out  and  better  understand  how  such  heterogeneity can transmit to the implied discount rates as well as price changes. This raises a  new  research  idea  on  asset  pricing  in  the  COVID-19  era  for  future  studies (Daadmehr  2022).  Results  not  only  suggest  that  the  implied  discount  rate  of less  resilient  firms,  in  the  sense  of  'composite-financial',  will  remain  significantly  and  persistently  higher  than  that  of  more  resilient  firms  but  also  show that  the  implied  discount  rate  for  less  resilient  firms  records  the  higher  level with respect to its initial level, as opposed to the one for more resilient firms. This  suggests  the  longer  effect  of  COVID-19  on  the  expected  return  of  lowresilience firms that could be investigated more in future research. The datasets generated  during  and/or  analysed  during  the  current  study  are  available  from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

## Appendix

See Table 2 and Figs. 11 and 12.

<!-- image -->

Table 2 Financial ratios and definitions: Data source Financial ratios, WRDS database

| Financial ratio  Variable name  Category  Formula  Capitalization Ratio  capital\_ratio  Capitalization  Total Long-term Debt as a fraction of the sum of Total Long-term Debt, Com-  mon/Ordinary Equity and Preferred Stock  Common Equity/Invested Capital  equityjnvcap  Capitalization  Common Equity as a fraction of Invested Capital  Long-term Debt/Invested Capital  debtjnvcap  Capitalization  Long-term Debt as a fraction of Invested Capital  Total Debt/Invested Capital  totdebt\_invcap  Capitalization  Total Debt (Long-term and Current) as a fraction of Invested Capital  Asset Turnover  at\_turn  Efficiency  Sales as a fraction of the average Total Assets based on the most recent two  periods  Inventory Turnover  inv turn  Efficiency  COGS as a fraction of the average Inventories based on the most recent two  periods  Payables Turnover  pay\_turn  Efficiency  COGS and change in Inventories as a fraction of the average of Accounts Pay-  able based on the most recent two periods  Receivables Turnover  rect\_turn  Efficiency  Sales as a fraction of the average of Accounts Receivables based on the most  recent two periods  Sales/Stockholders Equity  sale.equity  Efficiency  Sales per dollar of total Stockholders' Equity  Sales/Invested Capital  salejnvcap  Efficiency  Sales per dollar of Invested Capital  Sales/Working Capital  salejiwc  Efficiency  Sales per dollar of Working Capital, defined as difference between Current  Assets and Current Liabilities  Inventory/Current Assets  invt\_act  Financial Soundness  Inventories as a fraction of Current Assets  Receivables/Current Assets  rect\_act  Financial Soundness  Accounts Receivables as a fraction of Current Assets  Free Cash Flow/Operating Cash Flow  fcf\_ocf  Financial Soundness  Free Cash Flow as a fraction of Operating Cash Flow, where Free Cash Flow is  defined as the difference between Operating Cash Flow and Capital Expendi-  tures  Operating CF/Current Liabilities  ocfjet  Financial Soundness  Operating Cash Flow as a fraction of Current Liabilities  Cash Flow/Total Debt  cash\_debt  Financial Soundness  Operating Cash Flow as a fraction of Total Debt  Cash Balance/Total Liabilities  cashjt  Financial Soundness  Cash Balance as a fraction of Total Liabilities  Cash Flow Margin  cfm  Financial Soundness  Income before Extraordinary Items and Depreciation as a fraction of Sales  Short-Term Debt/Total Debt  short.debt  Financial Soundness  Short-term Debt as a fraction of Total Debt   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

Table 2 (continued)

| Financial ratio  Variable name  Category  Formula  Profit Before Depreciation/Current Liabilities  profitjet  Financial Soundness  Operating Income before D &amp;A as a fraction of Current Liabilities  Current Liabilities/Total Liabilities  curr\_debt  Financial Soundness  Current Liabilities as a fraction of Total Liabilities  Total Debt/EBITDA  debt\_ebitda  Financial Soundness  Gross Debt as a fraction of EBITDA  Long-term Debt/Book Equity  dltt\_be  Financial Soundness  Long-term Debt to Book Equity  Interest/Average Long-term Debt  int\_debt  Financial Soundness  Interest as a fraction of average Long-term debt based on most recent two  periods  Interest/Average Total Debt  intjotdebt  Financial Soundness  Interest as a fraction of average Total Debt based on most recent two periods  Long-term Debt/Total Liabilities  lt\_debt  Financial Soundness  Long-term Debt as a fraction of Total Liabilities  Total Liabilities/Total Tangible Assets  lt\_ppent  Financial Soundness  Total Liabilities to Total Tangible Assets  Cash Conversion Cycle (Days)  cash\_conversion  Liquidity  Inventories per daily COGS plus Account Receivables per daily Sales minus  Account Payables per daily COGS  Cash Ratio  cash\_ratio  Liquidity  Cash and Short-term Investments as a fraction of Current Liabilities  Current Ratio  curr\_ratio  Liquidity  Current Assets as a fraction of Current Liabilities  Quick Ratio (Acid Test)  quick\_ratio  Liquidity  Quick Ratio: Current Assets net of Inventories as a fraction of Current Liabili-  ties  Accruals/Average Assets  Accrual  Other  Accruals as a fraction of average Total Assets based on most recent two periods  Research and Development/Sales  RD.SALE  Other  R &amp;D expenses as a fraction of Sales  Avertising Expenses/Sales  adv\_sale  Other  Advertising Expenses as a fraction of Sales  Labor Expenses/Sales  staff\_sale  Other  Labor Expenses as a fraction of Sales  Effective Tax Rate  efftax  Profitability  Income Tax as a fraction of Pretax Income  Gross Profit/Total Assets  GProf  Profitability  Gross Profitability as a fraction of Total Assets  After-tax Return on Average Common Equity  aftret\_eq  Profitability  Net Income as a fraction of average of Common Equity based on most recent  two periods  After-tax Return on Total Stockholders' Equity  aftret\_equity  Profitability  Net Income as a fraction of average of Total Shareholders' Equity based on most  recent two periods   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

Table 2 (continued)

| Financial ratio  Variable name  Category  Formula  After-tax Return on Invested Capital  aftretjnvcapx  Profitability  Net Income plus Interest Expenses as a fraction of Invested Capital  Gross Profit Margin  gpm  Profitability  Gross Profit as a fraction of Sales  Net Profit Margin  npm  Profitability  Net Income as a fraction of Sales  Operating Profit Margin After Depreciation  opmad  Profitability  Operating Income After Depreciation as a fraction of Sales  Operating Profit Margin Before Depreciation  opmbd  Profitability  Operating Income Before Depreciation as a fraction of Sales  Pre-tax Return on Total Earning Assets  pretret\_earnat  Profitability  Operating Income After Depreciation as a fraction of average Total Earnings  Assets (TEA) based on most recent two periods, where TEA is defined as the  sum of Property Plant and Equipment and Current Assets  Pre-tax return on Net Operating Assets  pretret\_noa  Profitability  Operating Income After Depreciation as a fraction of average Net Operating  Assets (NOA) based on most recent two periods, where NOA is defined as  the sum of Property Plant and Equipment and Current Assets minus Current  Liabilities  Pre-tax Profit Margin  ptpm  Profitability  Pretax Income as a fraction of Sales  Return on Assets  roa  Profitability  Operating Income Before Depreciation as a fraction of average Total Assets  based on most recent two periods  Return on Capital Employed  roce  Profitability  Earnings Before Interest and Taxes as a fraction of average Capital Employed  based on most recent two periods, where Capital Employed is the sum of Debt  in Long-term and Current Liabilities and Common/Ordinary Equity  Return on Equity  roe  Profitability  Net Income as a fraction of average Book Equity based on most recent two peri-  ods, where Book Equity is defined as the sum of Total Parent Stockholders'  Equity and Deferred Taxes and Investment Tax Credit  Total Debt/Equity  de\_ratio  Solvency  Total Liabilities to Shareholders' Equity (common and preferred)  Total Debt/Total Assets  debt\_assets  Solvency  Total Debt as a fraction of Total Assets  Total Debt/Total Assets  debt\_at  Solvency  Total Liabilities as a fraction of Total Assets   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

Table 2 (continued)

| Financial ratio  Variable name  Category  Formula  Total Debt/Capital  debt\_capital  Solvency  Total Debt as a fraction of Total Capital, where Total Debt is defined as the sum  of Accounts Payable and Total Debt in Current and Long-term Liabilities, and  Total Capital is defined as the sum of Total Debt and Total Equity (common  and preferred)  After-tax Interest Coverage  intcov  Solvency  Multiple of After-tax Income to Interest and Related Expenses  Interest Coverage Ratio  intcov\_ratio  Solvency  Multiple of Earnings Before Interest and Taxes to Interest and Related Expenses  Dividend Payout Ratio  dpr  Valuation  Dividends as a fraction of Income Before Extra. Items  Forward P/E to 1-year Growth (PEG) ratio  PEG\_lyrforward  Valuation  Price-to-Earnings, excl. Extraordinary Items (diluted) to 1-Year EPS Growth rate  Forward P/E to Long-term Growth (PEG) ratio  PEGJtgforward  Valuation  Price-to-Earnings, excl. Extraordinary Items (diluted) to Long-term EPS Growth  rate  Trailing P/E to Growth (PEG) ratio  PEGjxailing  Valuation  Price-to-Earnings, excl. Extraordinary Items (diluted) to 3-Year past EPS  Growth  Book/Market  bm  Valuation  Book Value of Equity as a fraction of Market Value of Equity  Shillers Cyclically Adjusted P/E Ratio  capei  Valuation  Multiple of Market Value of Equity to 5-year moving average of Net Income  Dividend Yield  divyield  Valuation  Indicated Dividend Rate as a fraction of Price  Enterprise Value Multiple  evm  Valuation  Multiple of Enterprise Value to EBITDA  Price/Cash flow  pcf  Valuation  Multiple of Market Value of Equity to Net Cash Flow from Operating Activities  P/E (Diluted, Excl. EI)  pe.exi  Valuation  Price-to-Earnings, excl. Extraordinary Items (diluted)  P/E (Diluted, Incl. EI)  pejnc  Valuation  Price-to-Earnings, incl. Extraordinary Items (diluted)  Price/Operating Earnings (Basic, Excl. EI)  pe\_op\_basic  Valuation  Price to Operating EPS, excl. Extraordinary Items (Basic)  Price/Operating Earnings (Diluted, Excl. EI)  pe\_op\_dil  Valuation  Price to Operating EPS, excl. Extraordinary Items (Diluted)  Price/Sales  ps  Valuation  Multiple of Market Value of Equity to Sales  Price/Book  ptb  Valuation  Multiple of Market Value of Equity to Book Value of Equity   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Fig. 11 Screening  plot:  the  figure  shows  the  results  after  the  first  screening  (Left  panel  for  'before' COVID-19  and  right  panel  for  'after'  COVID-19).  The  size  and  color  of  the  circles  represent  the strength  of  the  correlation  between  the  financial  ratios  (rows)  and  principal  components  (columns). Table 2 contains the full explanation of abbreviations. Data source Financial ratios, WRDS database. (Color figure online)

<!-- image -->

Fig. 12 Scree  and  correlation  plot:  the  figure  shows  the  results  of  PCA  at  the  second  step  after  the COVID-19 outbreak.  The  left  panel  (scree  plot)  shows  the  proportion  of  variation  explained  by  each component. The right panel (correlation  plot)  presents  the  correlation  of  each  financial  ratio  with  the corresponding dimension (component). The size and color of the circles represent the strength  of  the correlation between the financial ratios (rows) and principal components (columns). Table 2 contains the full explanation of the abbreviation. Data source Financial ratios, WRDS database. (Color figure online)

<!-- image -->

Funding Open access funding provided by Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II within the CRUICARE Agreement.

Data availability The datasets generated during and/or analysed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

## References

- Accorigi, A. 2011. Energy and climate policy, local production of renewable energy and resilience: A case study on the Ouse valley energy service company, University of Essex (mimeo).
- Acharya, V.V., and S. Steffen. 2020. The risk of being a fallen angel and the corporate dash for cash in the midst of COVID. Review of Corporate Finance Studies 9 (3): 30-471. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1093/ rcfs/  cfaa0  13.
- Acharya, V.V., S. Lenzu, and O. Wang. 2021b. Zombie lending and policy traps. NBER Working Paper No. 29606.

<!-- image -->

- Albuquerque, R.A., Y. Koskinen, S. Yang, and C. Zhang. 2020. Love in the time of COVID-19: The resiliency of environmental and social stocks. SSRN 3583611.
- Alfaro, L., A. Chari, A. Greenland, and P. Schott. 2020. Aggregate and firm-level stock returns during pandemics, in real time. NBER Working Papers 26950. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.
- Barry, J.W., M. Campello, J.R. Graham, Y. Ma, and Y. 2022. Corporate flexibility in a time of crisis. Journal of Financial Economics 144: 780-806.
- Blickle, K., and J.A.C. Santos. 2022. The costs of corporate debt overhang. SSRN 3708502.
- Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, R. La Porta, and A. Shleifer. 2020. Expectations of fundamentals and stock market puzzles. Technical report, Working paper.
- Botosan, C.A., and M.A. Plumlee. 2005. Assessing alternative proxies for the expected risk premium. The Accounting Review 80 (1): 21-53.
- Bunting, S., N. Kundu, and N. Ahmed. 2011. Rice-shrimp farming ecocultures in the Sundarbans of Bangladesh and West Bengal, India. University of Essex (mimeo).
- Charlot, S., and G. Duranton. 2004. Communication externalities in cities. Journal of Urban Economics 56 (3): 581-613.
- Cheema-Fox, A., B.R. LaPerla, G. Serafeim, and H. Wang. 2020. Corporate resilience and response during COVID-19. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance 33 (2): 24-40.
- Cejnek, G., O. Randl, and J. Zechner. 2021. The COVID-19 pandemic and corporate dividend policy. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 56: 2389-2410.
- Chen, L., and X. Zhao. 2009. Return decomposition. Review of Financial Studies 22: 5213-5249.
- Crouzet, N., and F. Tourre. 2021. Can the cure kill the patient? Corporate credit interventions and debt overhang. SSRN 3954581.
- Daadmehr, E. 2022. Resilience and asset pricing in COVID-19 disaster. SSRN 4288219.
- Daadmehr, E. 2023. COVID intensity, resilience and expected returns. SSRN 4664619.
- De  la  O,  R.,  and  S.  Myers.  2020.  Subjective  cash  flow  and  discount  rate  expectations. Journal  of Finance 76 (3): 1339-1387.
- Ding,  W.,  R.  Levine,  C.  Lin,  and  W.  Xie.  2021.  Corporate  immunity  to  the  COVID-19  pandemic. Journal of Financial Economics 141 (2): 802-830.
- Dingel, J.I., and B. Neiman. 2020. How many jobs can be done at home? Journal of Public Economics 189: 104-235.
- Engelberg, J., R.D. Mclean, and J. Pontiff. 2018. Anomalies and news. The Journal of Finance 73: 1971-2001.
- Fahlenbrach, R., K. Rageth, and R.M. Stulz. 2021. How valuable is financial flexibility when revenue stops? Evidence from the Covid-19 crisis. Review of Financial Studies 34: 5474-5521.
- Glossner, S., P. Matos, S. Ramelli, and A.F. Wagner. 2020. Do institutional investors stabilize equity markets in crisis periods? Evidence from Covid-19. Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper No. 20-56. European Corporate Governance Institute - Finance Working Paper No. 688/2020. SSRN 3655271.
- Happ, C., and S. Greven. 2018. Multivariate functional principal component analysis for data observed on  different  (dimensional)  domains. Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association 113  (522): 649-659. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1080/  01621  459.  2016.  12731  15.
- Happ-Kurz, C. 2020. Object-oriented software for functional data. Journal of Statistical Software 93 (5): 1-38.
- Hensvik, L., T. Le Barbanchon, and R. Rathelot. 2020. Which jobs are done from home? Evidence from the American Time Use Survey. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP14611. SSRN 3594233.
- Hua, J., L. Peng, R.A. Schwartz, and N.S. Alan. 2020. Resiliency and stock returns. The Review of Financial Studies 33 (2): 747-782.
- Kalemli-Ozcan, S., L. Laeven, and D. Moreno. 2022. Debt overhang, rollover risk, and corporate investment: Evidence from the European crisis. Journal of the European Economic Association 20 (6): 2353-2395.
- Koren, M., and R. Peto. 2020. Business disruptions from social distancing. PLoS ONE 15 (9): e0239113. https://  doi.  org/  10.  1371/  journ  al.  pone.  02391  13.
- Kothari, S.P., E. So, and R. Verdi. 2016. Analysts' forecasts and asset pricing: A survey. Annual Review of Financial Economics 8 (1): 197-219.
- Landier, A., and D. Thesmar. 2020. Earnings expectations in the COVID Crisis. HEC Paris Research Paper No. FIN-2020-1377.

<!-- image -->

- Li, K., X. Liu, F. Mai, and T. Zhang. 2021. The role of corporate culture in bad times: Evidence from the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 56 (7): 2545-2583.
- Lochster,  L.A.,  and  P.C.  Tetlock.  2020.  What  drives  anomaly  returns? The  Journal  of  Finance 75: 1417-1455.
- Ohlson, J.A., and B.E. Juettner-Nauroth. 2005. Expected EPS and EPS growth as determinants of value. Review of Accounting Studies 10: 349-365.
- Pagano, M., C. Wagner, and J. Zechner. 2023. Disaster resilience and asset prices. Journal of Financial Economics . https://  doi.  org/  10.  2139/  ssrn.  36036  66.
- Pagano, M., and J. Zechner. 2022. COVID-19 and corporate finance. The Review of Corporate Finance Studies 11 (2): 849-879.
- Papanikolaou, D., and L.D.W. Schmidt. 2022. Working remotely and the supply-side impact of COVID19. The Review of Asset Pricing Studies 12: 53-111.
- Pettenuzzo, D., R. Sabbatucci, and A. Timmermann. 2022. Firm value and payout suspensions during financial market distress. Swedish House of Finance Research Paper No. 21-10. SSRN 3823258.
- Ramelli,  S.,  and  A.F.  Wagner.  2020.  Feverish  stock  price  reactions  to  covid-19. Review of  Corporate Finance Studies 9 (3): 622-655.
- Sedlmayer, A., and S. Boehm. 2011. Alternative agri-food networks in the Colchester area and their contribution to developing local resilience. University of Essex (mimeo).
- Tian, L. 2019. Division of labor and productivity advantage of cities: Theory and evidence from Brazil. CEPR Discussion Paper No. DP16590. SSRN 3960170.
- Walker, B., C. Holling, S. Carpenter, and A. Kinzig. 2004. Resilience, adaptability and transformability in social-ecological systems. Ecology and Society 9 (2): 5.
- Wang, J., J. Yang, B. Iverson, and R. Kluender. 2021. Bankruptcy and the COVID-19 crisis. Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 21-041.

Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

<!-- image -->