## Abstract

Share prices of financial companies from the S&amp;P 500 list have been modeled by a linear function of consumer price indices  in  the  USA.  The  Johansen  and  Engle-Granger  tests  for  cointegration  both  demonstrated  the  presence  of  an equilibrium  long-term  relation  between  observed  and  predicted  time  series.  Econometrically,  the  pricing  concept  is valid. For several companies, share prices are defined only by CPI readings in the past.  Therefore, our empirical pricing model is a deterministic one. For a few companies, including Lehman Brothers, AIG, Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, negative share prices could be foreseen in May-September 2008. One might interpret the negative share prices as a sign of approaching bankruptcies.

Key words

: share price, modeling, CPI, prediction, the USA, bankruptcy

JEL classification

: E4, G1, G2, G3

## Introduction

Recently,  we  have  developed  and  tested  statistically  and  econometrically  a  deterministic  model predicting share prices of selected S&amp;P 500 companies (Kitov, 2010).  We have found that there exists a linear link between various subcategories of consumer price index (CPI) and some share prices, with the latter lagging by several months. In order to build a reliable quantitative model from this link one needs to use standard and simple statistical procedures.

Following  the  general  concept  and  principal  results  of  the  previous  study,  here  we  are predicting  stock  prices  of  financial  companies  from  the  S&amp;P  500  list.  In  several  cases,  robust predictions  are  obtained  at  a  time  horizon  of  several  months.  In  close  relation  to  these  financial companies we have also investigated several cases of bankruptcy and bailout. These cases include Lehman Brothers (LH), American International Group (AIG), Fannie Mae (FNM) and Freddie Mac (FRE).    Regarding  these  bankruptcies,  we  have  tested  our  model  against  its  predictive  power  in May and September 2008. The main question was:  Could the bankruptcies be foreseen?  If  yes, which companies should or should not be bailed out as related to the size of their debt?

In the mainstream economics and finances stock prices are treated as not predictable beyond their stochastic properties.    The  existence  of  a  deterministic  model  would  undermine  the fundamental assumption of the stock market. If the prices are predictable, the participants would have  not  been  actively  defining  new  prices  in  myriads  of  tries,  but  blindly  followed  the  driving force behind the market. It is more comfortable to presume that all available information is already counted  in.  However,  our  study  has  demonstrated  that  the  stochastic  market  does  not  mean  an unpredictable one.

In this paper, we analyze sixty six financial companies from the S&amp;P 500 lists as of January 2010 as well as a few bankrupts from the financials. Some of the companies have been accurately described  by  models  including  two  CPI  subcategories  leading  relevant  share  prices  by  several

## Modeling share prices of banks and bankrupts

Ivan O.  Kitov, IDG RAS

months. Other companies are characterized by models with at least one of defining CPI components lagging behind related stock prices. We have intentionally constrained our investigation to S&amp;P 500 - we expect other companies to be described by similar models.

Our  deterministic  model  for  the  evolution  of  stock  prices  is  based  on  a  'mechanical' dependence  on  the  CPI.    Under  our  framework,  the  term  'mechanical'  has  multiple  meanings. Firstly,  it  expresses  mechanistic  character  of  the  link  when  any  change  in  the  CPI  is  one-to-one converted into the  change in related stock prices, as one would  expect with blocks or leverages. Secondly, the link does not depend on human beings in sense of their rational or irrational behavior or  expectations.  In  its  ultimate  form,  the  macroeconomic  concept  behind  the  stock  price  model relates the market prices to populations or the numbers of people in various age groups irrelevant to their  skills.  Accordingly,  the  populations  consist  of  the  simplest  possible  objects;  only  their numbers matter. Thirdly, the link is a linear one, i.e. the one often met in classical mechanics. In all these regards, we consider the model as a mechanical one and thus a physical one rather than an economic  or  financial  one.  Essentially,  we  work  with  measured  numbers  not  with  the  piles  of information behind any stock.

For  the  selected  stocks,  the  model  quantitatively  foresees  at  a  several  month  horizon. Therefore, there exist two or more CPI components unambiguously defining share prices several months ahead. It is worth noting that the evolution of all CPI components is likely to be defined, in part, by stochastic forces. According to the mechanical dependence between the share prices and the CPI, all stochastic features are one-to-one converted into stochastic behavior of share prices. Since the prices lag behind the CPI, this stochastic behavior is fully predetermined. The predictability of a measured variable using independent measured variables, as described by mathematical relationships, is one of the principal requirements for a science to join the club of hard sciences. Therefore,  our  stock  pricing  model  indicates  that  the  stock  market  is  likely  an  object  of  a  hard science.

A model predicting stock prices in a deterministic way is a sensitive issue. It seems unfair to give  advantages  to  randomly  selected  market  participants.  As  thoroughly  discussed  in  (Kitov, 2009b; Kitov and Kitov, 2008; 2009ab) the models are piecewise ones. A given set of empirical coefficients  holds  until  the  trend  in  the  difference  between  defining  CPI  is  sustained.  Such sustainable trends are observed in a majority of CPI differences and usually last between 5 and 20 years (Kitov and Kitov, 2008). The most recent trend has been reaching its natural end since 2008 and the transition to a new trend in 2009 and 2010 is likely the best time to present our model. As a result, there is no gain from the empirical models discussed in this paper. Their predictive power has been fading away since 2008. When the new trend in the CPI is established, one will be able to estimate new empirical coefficients, all participants having equal chances.

The remainder of the paper is arranged as follows. Section 1 introduces the model and data, which include stock prices of sixty six S&amp;P 500 financial companies and seventy CPI components. In Section 2, empirical models are presented both in tabulated and graphical forms. For each model we have estimated standard deviation, which serves as a proxy to the model accuracy. For a few companies,  the  estimated  models  are  robust  over  the  previous  10  months.  Section  3  tests  these models statistically  and  econometrically.  The  Johansen  (1988)  and  Engle-Granger  (Newbold  and Granger, 1967; Hendry and, Juselius, 2001) tests both demonstrate that the null hypothesis of the existence a cointegrating relation between the observed and predicted time series cannot be rejected for  a  majority  of  companies.  Therefore,  the  model  is  justified  econometrically,  and  thus,  all statistical  inferences  are  valid.  In  Section  4,  a  crucial  historical  problem  is  addressed:  Could  one predict  in  May  2008  the  evolution  of  financial  stock  prices?  For  some  companies,  the  models estimated in the beginning of 2008 hold over the next year. Hence, the empirical modeling would have  allowed  accurate  prediction  of  the  evolution  of  stock  prices,  including  those  related  to companies who filed for bankruptcy in several months.  Finally, Section 5 investigates several cases of bankruptcy and bailout in the United States. It is found that many stock price trajectories would have been predicted to dive below the zero line.

The results of the presented research open a new field for the future investigations of the stock market. We do not consider the concept and empirical models as accurate enough or final. There should be numerous opportunities to amend and elaborate the model. Apparently, one can include new and improve available estimates of consumer price indices.

## 1. Model and data

Kitov  (2009b)  introduced  a  simple  deterministic  pricing  model.  Originally,  it  was  based  on  an assumption that there exists a linear link between a share price (here only the stock market in the United States is considered) and the differences between various expenditure subcategories of the headline CPI. The intuition behind the model was simple - a higher relative rate of price growth (fall) in a given subcategory of goods and services is likely to result in a faster increase (decrease) in  stock  prices  of  related  companies.  In  the  first  approximation,  the  deviation  between  pricedefining indices is proportional to the ratio of their pricing powers.  The presence of sustainable (linear  or  nonlinear)  trends  in  the  differences,  as  described  in  (Kitov  and  Kitov,  2008;  2009ab), allows  predicting  the  evolution  of  the  differences,  and  thus,  the  deviation  between  prices  of corresponding goods and services. The trends are the basis of a long-term prediction of share prices. In  the  short-run,  deterministic  forecasting  is  possible  only  in  the  case  when  a  given  price  lags behind defining CPI components.

In its general form, the pricing model is as follows (Kitov, 2010):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where sp(tj ) is  the  share  price  at  discrete  (calendar)  times t j , j =1,…, J ; CPIi(tjτ i ) is  the i -th component of the CPI with the time lag τ i , i =1,.., I ; bi , c and d are  empirical  coefficients  of  the linear and constant term; ej is the residual error, which statistical properties have to be scrutinized. By  definition,  the  bets-fit  model  minimizes  the  RMS  residual  error.  The  time  lags  are  expected because of the delay between the change in one price (stock or goods and services) and the reaction of related prices. It is a fundamental feature of the model that the lags in (1) may be both negative and  positive.  In  this  study,  we  limit  the  largest  lag  to  fourteen  months.  Apparently,  this  is  an artificial  limitation  and  might  be  changed  in  a  more  elaborated  model.  In  any  case,  a  fourteenmonth lag seems to be long enough for a price signal to pass through.

System (1) contains J equations for I+2 coefficients.  Since  the  sustainable  trends  last  more than five years, the share price time series have more than 60 points. For the current recent trend, the involved series are between 70 and 90 readings. Due to the negative effects of a larger set of defining  CPI  components  discussed  by  Kitov  (2010),  their  number  for  all  models  is  ( I= )  2.  To resolve  the  system,  we  use  standard  methods  of  matrix  inversion.  As  a  rule,  solutions  of  (1)  are stable with all coefficients far from zero.

At the initial stage of our investigation, we do not constraint the set of CPI components in number or/and content. Kitov (2010) used only 34 components selected from the full set provided by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics (2010). To some extent, the original choice was random with many components to be similar. For example, we included the index of food and beverages and the index for food without beverages. When the model resolution was low, defining CPI components were swapping between neighbors.

For  the  sake  of  completeness  we  always  retain  all  principal  subcategories  of  goods  and services. Among them are the headline CPI ( C ),  the core CPI, i.e. the headline CPI less food and energy  ( CC ),  the  index  of  food  and  beverages  ( F ),  housing  ( H ),  apparel  ( A ),  transportation  ( T ), medical care ( M ), recreation ( R ), education and communication ( EC ), and other goods and services ( O ).  The  involved  CPI  components  are  listed  in  Appendix  1.  They  are  not  seasonally  adjusted indices  and  were  retrieved  from  the  database  provided  by  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  (2010). Many  indices  were  started  as  late  as  1998.  It  was  natural  to  limit  our  modeling  to  the  period between 2000 and 2010, i.e. to the current long-term trend.

Since the number and diversity of CPI subcategories is a crucial parameter, we have extended the set defining components to 70 from the previous set of 34 components.  As demonstrated below, the  extended  set  has  provided  a  significant  improvement  in  the  model  resolution  and  accuracy. Therefore,  we  envisage  the  increase  in  the  number  and  diversity  of  defining  subcategories  as  a powerful  tool  for  obtaining  consistent  models.  In  an  ideal  situation,  any  stock  should  find  its genuine pair of CPI components. However, the usage of similar components may have a negative effect on the model - one may fail to distinguish between very close models.

Every sector in the S&amp;P 500 list might give good examples of companies with defining CPI components  lagging  behind  relevant  stock  prices.  As  of  January  2010,  there  were  66  financial companies to model, with the freshest readings being the close (adjusted for dividends and splits) prices taken on December 31, 2009. (All relevant share prices were retrieved from http://www.finance.yahoo.com.)  Some  of  the  modeled  companies  do  present  deterministic  and robust share price models. As before, those S&amp;P 500 companies which started after 2004 are not included.  In addition, we have modeled Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which are not in the S&amp;P 500 list, and Lehman Brothers and CIT Group (CIT) which are out of the S&amp;P 500 list. Due to the fact that the latter three companies are both bankrupts, they have been modeled over the period of their existence. Apparently, there are many more bankrupts to be modeled in the future.

There  are  two  sources  of  uncertainty  associated  with  the  difference  between  observed  and predicted  prices,  as  discussed  by  Kitov  (2010).  First,  we  have  taken  the  monthly  close  prices (adjusted for splits and dividends) from a large number of recorded prices: monthly and daily open, close,  high,  and  low  prices,  their  combinations  as  well  as  averaged  prices.  Without  loss  of generality, one can randomly select for modeling purposes any of these prices for a given month. By chance, we have selected the closing price of the last working day for a given month. The larger is  the  fluctuation  of  a  given  stock  price  within  and  over  the  months  the higher  is  the  uncertainty associated with the monthly closing price as a representative of the stock price.

Second  source  of  uncertainty  is  related  to  all  kinds  of  measurement  errors  and  intrinsic stochastic properties of the CPI. One should also bear in mind all uncertainties associated with the CPI  definition  based  on  a  fixed  basket  of  goods  and  services,  which  prices  are  tracked  in  few selected places.  Such measurement errors are directly mapped into the model residual errors. Both uncertainties, as related to stocks and CPI, also fluctuate from month to month.

## 2. Modeling financial companies

The results of modeling are presented in Table 1 and Appendix 2: two defining components with coefficients and lags, linear trend  and free terms, and the standard error, σ ,  expressed in dollars. Negative lags, which correspond to leading share prices, are shown in bold.  Figure 1 and Appendix 3 depict the observed and predicted curves. Five companies will be studied in more detail in Section

5:  American  International  Group,  Citigroup  (C),  Fifth  Third  Bancorp  (FITB),  Legg  Mason  Inc. (LM), Moody's Corporation (MCO) and Morgan Stanley (MS).

Some financial companies have at least one defining CPI component lagging behind relevant stock  price.  For  these  companies,  it  is  better  to  use  the  term  'decomposition  into'  instead  of 'defining' CPI components.  For example, share price of Aflac Incorporated (AFL) is defined by the index of financial services ( FS )  and that of transportation services ( TS ),  the  former lagging 2 months behind  the  share  price  and  the  latter  leading  by  6  months.    Coefficient b1 is  positive.  It means that the  higher  is  the  price  for  financial  services  the  larger  is  the  AFL's  share  price.  The effect of the price index of transpiration services is opposite. Standard error for the model for the period between July 2003 and December 2009 is only $3.71.  Figure 1 displays the observed and predicted prices for the period between 2003 and 2010. Before July 2003, the model does not hold and the curves deviate. Otherwise both curves are is a relatively good agreement including the sharp drop in 2008. From the statistical point of view, this is a key feature because any increase in the range  of  total  change  in  the  price  and  the  defining  CPIs  is  directly  converted  into  higher  model resolution.

Overall,  standard  errors  in  Table  1  and  Appendix  2  vary  from  $0.77  for  People ' s  United Financial  Inc.  (PBCT) to  ~$92  for  AIG,  which  will  be  thoroughly  analyzed  in  Section  5.  When normalized to the stock prices averaged over the whole period, the standard errors fluctuate less. However,  for  non-stationary  time  series  with  measurement  errors  dependent  on  amplitude  the normalized errors are likely biased. The predicted curve is Figure 1 is very close to the observed one  and  foresees  one  month  ahead.  Actually,  the  predicted  curve  leads  the  observed  one  by  one month.

American  International  Group  was  the  first  company  bailed  out  by  the  US  financial authorities in September 2008.  This action introduced a bias into the link between AIG share price and defining CPIs, which existed before September 2008. The model listed in Table 1 is likely to be inappropriate as related to the link and not a robust one. The defining CPIs for the December 2009 model are as follows: the index for food away from home ( SEFV ) leading by 1 month and the index of prescribed drugs ( PDRUG ) leading by 13 months. In Section 5, we investigate the evolution of the bet-fit model from May 2008 to December 2009.

The  model  for  Apartment  Investment  and  Management  Company  (AIV)  has  both  defining CPIs leading the share price: the index of pets and pet related products ( PETS ), a subcategory of the index  for  recreation,    leads  by  one  month  and  the  index  of  prescribed  drugs  ( PDRUG )  is  five months ahead of the price. At first glance, this set of defining CPIs does not look convincing. This might  be  an  effect  of  the  changing  trend  in  the  CPI.  Before  November  2009,  the  best-fit  model included the index of food and beverages ( F ) and the PDRUG, both leading by 8 months. This set determined the best-fit model during the 12 previous months (Kitov, 2010).  In the smaller set of 34 CPI components used by Kitov (2010), the index of food and beverages and that of medical care ( M )  were the driving ones between November 2008 and October 2009 and provided the standard error of $2.058, but for a shorter period. With the PDRUG , the standard error for the same period between July 2003 and October 2009 is $2.055, i.e. only marginally better. This fact demonstrates how sensitive the model is to the defining CPIs.  When more components are included, one could expect changes in the previously obtained models and lower standard errors.

The Allstate Corporation (ALL) has a model with both defining CPIs leading the share price. This model is unstable, however, and minimizes the RMS error only for the period between July 2003 and December 2009. In 2009, one of two defining components was randomly changing and one, the index for food away from home (SEFV), fixed. It is likely that the current set of defining CPIs do not include the one related to ALL. Thus, further investigations are needed.

Table 1. Empirical 2-C models for selected S&amp;P 500 financial companies

| Company  b1  CPI1  τ  1  b2  CPI2  τ  2  c  d  σ  ,  $  AFL  0.59  FS  -2  -2.37  TS  6  12.12  349.73  3.71  AIG  -191.36  SEFV  1  38.53  PDRUG  13  727.81  21116.78  92.3  AIV  -1.64  PETS  1  1.09  PDRUG  5  -1.61  -139.18  2.15  ALL  0.07  E  11  -6.86  SEFV  2  45.20  1106.19  2.82  AVB  0.57  CM  1  1.92  AB  -1  -12.01  -345.48  1.36  AXP  -3.81  F  4  -2.00  M  10  49.93  1115.79  2.48  BAC  -2.95  FB  3  -2.97  SEFV  13  35.43  956.52  2.53  BBT  -1.57  F  3  -0.31  FRUI  13  12.58  332.95  2.06  BEN  -7.95  FB  3  6.59  VAA  13  60.58  564.48  6.46  BK  -0.69  MEAT  13  -1.65  PETS  1  15.80  270.32  2.09  BXP  4.58  MCC  5  -5.04  PETS  3  5.63  -605.31  5.04  C  2.54  HO  5  -8.26  SEFV  2  36.70  1048.90  2.53  FITB  -4.85  SEFV  2  1.45  HS  6  21.19  621.56  1.82  HBAN  -2.15  RPR  13  1.32  FOTO  13  17.23  252.80  0.93  HCN  -1.80  PETS  2  0.76  HOSP  5  -7.06  -40.40  2.20  GS  21.06  HO  10  -29.45  SEFV  3  111.40  2496.20  13.48  JPM  -2.49  F  4  3.19  ORG  0  26.31  139.00  2.49  L  -2.49  FB  5  -1.51  TS  3  28.35  679.85  2.07  LM  -6.01  F  4  -8.17  APL  13  33.07  1754.81  6.89  PNC  1.49  CM  0  -3.44  FB  4  16.37  331.72  3.49  PSA  -4.14  SEFV  3  2.04  PDRUG  5  14.25  72.98  4.43  VNO  -11.08  SEFV  3  2.23  PDRUG  5  57.23  1113.14  5.30   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Avalonbay Communities (AVB) has a model with one defining index (alcoholic beverages, AB ) lagging behind the price by one month and the headline CPI less medical care ( CM ) leading by one month.    This model is very stable over the previous 10 months and has a standard error of $1.36.

American  Express  Company  (AXP)  has  a  model  predicting  at  a  four  month  horizon.  The defining CPIs are the index for food and beverages leading by 4 months and the index for medical care leading by 10 months. In the previous study (Kitov, 2010) the model was essentially the same. So, the extended CPI set does not make a better model. The model is a robust one and minimizes the standard error for the period between July and November 2009 as well.

The model for Bank of America (BAC) is defined by the index of food and that of food away from home. The latter CPI component leads by 13 months. From our past experience, the larger is the lag the more unreliable is the model. However, both defining components provide the best fit model in the second half of 2009.   Both coefficients in the BAC model are negative. This means that increasing food price forces the share price down. The growth in the indices of food and food away from home has been compensated by linear time trend in the share price.

Franklin Resources (BEN) is driven by the index of food ( FB )  and  that  of  video  and  audio ( VAA ),  both leading by several months. The former component has a negative coefficient and the latter one - positive. Bank of New York Mellon Corporation (BK) is defined by the index of meats, poultry  and  fist  ( MEAT )  and  the  index  of  pets  and  per  related  products,  both  having  negative coefficients. The model has a standard error of $2.09.

Boston Properties (BXP) has a model with the index of medical care commodities ( MCC ) and PETS leading by 5 and 3 months, respectively. This is a relatively stable model. However, the bestfit  model  was  different  before  September  2009  and  included  the  index  of  food  and  the  index  of miscellaneous  services  ( MISS ).  This  model  had  been  reining  since  March  2009.    The  model obtained in (Kitov, 2010) was based on the CPI less energy ( CE ) and the index of food. It was a mediocre model with the RMS error of $5.54 compared to $5.11 obtained in this study for the same period.

Citigroup  is  of  special  interest.  This  company  was  bailed  out  in  November  2008.  For  the purposes of share modeling the bailout introduces a major disturbance, because the share is not the one  estimated  by  the  free  stock  market  any  more.    Accordingly,  the  models  obtained  after November 2008 are likely to be biased. In Table 1, a share of Citigroup is defined by the index of household operations (HO) and that of food away from home (SEFV). Coefficient b1 (=+2.54) is positive and the increase in HO should be converted into a higher share price. The effect of SEFV is an  opposite  one  with  a  larger  coefficient b2 =-8.26.  In  2007  and  2008,  the  index  of  household operations was increasing at almost the same rate as the SEFV , and the share fell from $50 in April 2007 to $1.5 in January 2009.

The next ten companies in Table 1 are all robust and have deterministic price models with no one  of  defining  indexes  lagging.  Huntington  Bancshares  (HBAN)  is  controlled  by  the  index  of primary residence rent ( RPR ) and the index for photography ( FOTO ), both leading by 13 months. This  model  holds  at  least  over  the  10  months  previous  to  December  2009.  Coefficient b1 is negative and any increase in RPR is converted into a decrease in the HBAN share price 13 months later. It is instructive to track this model in 2010. It must be fading away with the transition to a new trend  in  the  CPI.    The  model  standard  deviation  is  only  $0.92  for  the  whole  period.  Figure  1 displays relevant curves.  Except four of five points, the agreement is excellent.

Health Care REIT (HCN) has a model defined by the PETS and the index of hospital services ( HOSP ).  The  latter  has  a  permanent  positive  trend  and  likely  is  compensated  by  the  linear  trend term with a negative slope (-40.4). The predicted and observed curves are very close. So, the model accurately predicts at a two-month horizon.

Goldman Sachs (GS) is a famous bank. The trajectory of its share price is well predicted by the index of household operations ( HO ) and the index of food away from home ( SEFV ) at a three month horizon. Since coefficient b1 is positive the decreasing price index of household operations results in a fall in GS share price, as was observed in 2008 and 2009.  In the second half of 2009, the price was on rise.

JPMorgan  Chase  &amp;  Co.  is  defined  by  food  and  beverages  ( F )  and  other  recreation  goods ( ORG ). Since the time lag of the ORG is zero the model can predict only contemporary share price. In  Figure 1, the observed and predicted curves almost coincide before 2007.  The years between 2007 and 2009 are characterized by extremely high fluctuations in the observed price. The model failed  to  predict  this  feature.  In  2009,  the  prediction  is  good  again,  however.  Therefore,  the fluctuations are likely to be related to short-term forces not affecting fundamental long-term link between the price and the defining CPIs.

The best-fit model for Loews Corporation (L) includes the index of food ( FB )  leading by 5 months and the index of transportation  services  ( TS )  leading  by  3  months.  Both  coefficients  are negative  and  are  counteracted  by  a  positive  slope c =28.35.  The  model  for  Legg  Mason  (LM)  is based  on  the  index  of  food  and  beverages  and  the  index  of  appliances  ( APL )  from  the  housing index,  the  latter  leading  by  13  months.  Overall,  the  predicted  time  series  is  very  close  to  the observed one with standard deviation of $6.89. The largest input to the standard deviation comes from a short period in 2006. Otherwise, both curves are very close even during the dramatic fall from  $80  per  share  in  the  end  of  2007  to  $10  per  share  in  February  2009  and  during  the  fast recovery in 2009.

PNC Financial  Services  (PNC)  relies  on  the  headline  CPI  less  medical  care  ( CM )  and  the index  of  food  ( FB ),  the  model  being  a  contemporary  to  the  share.  Public  Storage  (PSA)  and Vornado Realty Trust have similar models defined by the index of food away from home and the PDRUG .  The  time  lags  are  also  identical  and  are  3  and  5  months,  respectively.  Figure  1 demonstrates that the observed prices of PCA and VNO are similar with a local peak in the first half of 2008. A similar pattern is observed for AIV, which model also includes PDRUG . The difference between PCA and VNO is in the sensitivity to SEFV : b1 (PSA)=-4.14  and b1 (VNO)=-11.08.

So, among the models with both defining CPIs leading relevant shares, there are examples of robust models and unstable models. For the latter companies, no fixed model is available over the past year.  It is likely that these models express the lack of true defining indices in the current set of CPIs and are affected by random measurement noise. One cannot exclude that true robust models do exists for these companies.

For  other  forty  four  financial  companies  relevant  models  and  graphs  are  presented  in Appendices  2  and  3.  These  models  use  quiet  several  defining  CPIs  not  mentioned  in  Table  1. Otherwise, Table 1 contains all meaningful configurations of leading and lagging share prices and those in the Appendices are given for the sake of completeness.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 1.  Observed and predicted share prices of eight financial companies from the S&amp;P 500 list. Relevant empirical models are presented in Table 1.

<!-- image -->

The principal purpose of Section 2 consists in presenting tentative empirical models for share prices  of  financial  companies.  The  current  set  of  defining  CPIs  is  far  from  a  complete  one  and further  investigation  may  reveal  more  accurate  and  reliable  models  for  the  same  companies. However, the current models might be good enough because of high correlation between various CPI components. For a given share, the currently used CPIs may be very close to the true defining CPIs,  which  are  not  included  in  the  set  yet.  Therefore,  a  direct  statistical  estimate  of  the  model accuracy and reliability is a major task.

## 3. Cointegration tests

Statistical  properties  of  the  residual  error  are  crucial  for  any  quantitative  model.  Ideally,  a  good model involving time dependent measured variables should describe the essence of real ties. The model residual error should be a stationary (and thus, integrated of order zero) stochastic process with  characteristics  close  to  the  uncorrelated  white  noise  with  Gaussian  distribution.  In  the  best case, residual errors should depend only on measurement errors, with the measurements conducted in a consistent way.

As  in  the  previous  study  (Kitov,  2010),  we  applied  the  Johansen  cointegration  test  to  the observed time series and those predicted in Section 2. For all studied companies, the test resulted in cointegration  rank  1  or,  for  two  non-stationary  variables,  in  the  presence  of  one  cointegrating relation. All results are listed in Table 2. The Johansen approach does not require both variables to be in the same order of integration.

As  an  alternative,  we  have  applied  the  augmented  Dickey-Fuller  (ADF)  and  the  PhillipsPerron (PP) tests for unit roots to all residual errors of the models in Table 1, except those with defining CPI lagging behind relevant shares. This procedure is in line with the Granger-Engle twostep method based on several specification tests applied to the residual time series. Having the same econometric  power  as  the  Johansen  procedure,  the  Granger-Engle  test  allows  a  larger  variety  of specifications.

Table 2. Results of Johansen cointegration test and unit root tests as applied to the residual errors

| ADF  PP  Johansen test  z(t), 1%CV  1  =-3.54  z(  ρ  ), 1%CV=-19.4  eigenvalue  trace statistics,  5%CV=3.76  rank  AIG  -4.10  -29.8  0.21  0.24  1  AIV  -6.19  -47.5  0.35  0.15  1  ALL  -5.95  -46.5  0.32  0.04  1  AXP  -4.98  -38.3  0.25  0.35  1  BAC  -4.87  -38.5  0.21  0.003  1  BBT  -5.96  -47.7  0.29  0.08  1  BEN  -4.53  -34.0  0.22  1.90  1  BK  -5.00  -40.0  0.26  0.07  1  BXP  -5.47  -39.6  0.33  0.87  1  C  -5.60  -41.0  0.36  0.27  1  FITB  -5.63  -45.8  0.26  2.39  1  GS  -4.56  -34.0  0.41  1.69  1  HBAN  -5.44  -41.5  0.29  0.29  1  HCN  -5.27  -39.0  0.37  1.91  1  JPM  -6.22  -51.2  0.30  1.15  1  L  -5.70  -43.5  0.37  0.96  1  LM  -4.75  -37.2  0.18  0.11  1  MS  -6.20  -48.4  0.33  0.09  1  PNC  -6.12  -50.0  0.33  0.47  1  PSA  -5.84  -44.3  0.33  2.18  1  VNO  -5.46  -40.0  0.33  0.83  1   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

1 CV - critical value

In  a  sense,  this  Section  is  a  fully  technical  one.  We  need  only  a  confirmation  that  the regression  technique  used  in  Section  2  is  applicable,  i.e.  the  regression  does  not  give  spurious results.  Both tests for cointegration unambiguously evidence the presence of long-term equilibrium relations  between  the  actual  and  predicted  prices.  The  predicted  prices  can  be  considered  as weighted sums of prices for goods and services. In this regard, they are similar to the overall CPI and can be considered as independent measurements and represent just one variable. Therefore, one does not need to test both defining CPI for cointegration with relevant share price.

So, one can derive a conclusion that the deterministic pricing model provides a statistically and econometrically valid description of share prices of S&amp;P 500 financial companies. There is a problem  with  the  model  resolution,  however.  As  happens  often  in  physics,  in  order  to  obtain  a consistent and reliable model one should have a wider dynamic range of involved variables or to increase the accuracy of measurements. The latter is hardly possible with the past CPI readings. So, one could expect a more reliable model for the companies with share prices varying the most.

## 4. May 2008 vs. December 2009

The current models predicting future prices are of crucial interest for the stock market. It is always important to know which stocks will go up/down and at what rate. However, there are significant problems related to the past performance of the stock market also to be considered.  One of these problems  is  associated  with  the  2008/2009  financial  and  economic  crisis,  which  exposed  many companies to major risks. Since the late 2007 and very  actively since July 2008, stock prices of many companies have been decreasing  at  an  accelerating  speed.  The  decrease  costs  trillions  US dollars net lost after the overall asset devaluation. This is a natural challenge to our concept: Could the model predict the fall in stock prices if available in 2008?

For all investors and owners it would have been a great relief to predict, and thus, prevent or reduce the loss. Here we would like to stress again that the model is valid only when it does not disturb  natural  functioning  of  the  stock  market,  i.e.  those  myriads  of  well-established  direct  and indirect interactions between economic and financial agents. When everybody shifts to one or few 'salvage' stocks, their behavior becomes highly distorted, biased, and thus unpredictable. A part of the financial market is never equivalent to the whole market and this model will be worthless when used by all market players.  So, we would not recommend using the model shortly after this book is published. In a sense, this publication may destroy the market configuration described by the model.

The principal question posed in this Section can be addressed quantitatively. As a first step, we move back in May 2008 and use contemporary CPI data to obtain the best-fit models for the S&amp;P 500 share prices under study.  Table 3 and Appendix 4 list these models obtained for selected financial companies. One should bear in mind that the involved prices had only limited dynamic range in the beginning of 2008 and corresponding models are not fully resolved. In this sense, the 2009 models are superior.

Then, we calculate all share prices using the 2008 models and actual CPI data between May 2008  and  December  2009.  In  Figure  2  we  compare  the  2008  predictions  to  those  obtained  in January 2010 (i.e. the models for December 2009) and described in Section 2. If both models for a given share provide similar predictions then the 2008 fall was predictable, at least for the company.

A  few  companies  in  Table  3  have  one  defining  component  of  the  same  nature  as  that  in relevant December 2009 models. For a majority, both defining indices are different. This effect is observed despite our intention to select those 2008 models which provide the best prediction.

The May 2008 model for ALL, which includes the index of diary products ( DIAR )  and the index of intracity transportation ( ITR ),  predicts the evolution of the share price relatively well till July  2009.  Then  the  May  prediction  starts  to  diverge  at  an  accelerating  rate  from  the  observed trajectory. The 2008 trough could be forecasted both in time and amplitude in May 2008.

Table 3. Defining CPI components, coefficients and time lags for the models in May 2008.

| Company  b1  CPI1  τ  1  b2  CPI2  τ  2  c  d  AFL  0.36  DIAR  0  -0.55  ITR  12  8.92  38.50  AIG  -21.11  DIAR  9  -172.66  SEFV  1  2  1148.11  31872.06  AIV  1.78  VAA  3  1.23  PDRUG  7  -10.77  -525.90  ALL  1.85  MCC  7  -2.22  APL  9  -10.18  -207.35  AVB  1.41  EC  4  1.59  AB  1  -10.47  -340.92  AXP  -7.87  SEFV  4  1.20  HS  6  47.73  1098.50  BAC  -2.72  F  3  1.77  TS  12  8.86  115.22  BBT  -1.98  RPR  13  -1.16  MISS  12  25.57  648.22  BEN  3.28  PDRUG  12  -1.90  HOSP  3  30.13  -368.96  BK  -1.44  H  11  3.13  HO  11  -2.39  -75.70  BXP  -3.96  F  4  3.17  MCC  7  14.55  -136.73  C  -4.02  FB  8  -4.00  RPR  13  46.97  1376.82  FITB  -0.40  DIAR  7  0.84  PDRUG  8  -12.03  -112.79  GS  12.87  MVP  5  27.41  FOTO  12  65.74  -4221.10  HBAN  -2.07  SEFV  6  -1.66  RPR  13  22.63  638.78  HCN  0.20  FU  8  -2.27  VAA  0  1.07  225.28  HST  -2.81  SEFV  3  0.55  PDRUG  7  13.60  290.45  JPM  -2.54  F  4  -0.45  MEAT  13  20.29  484.70  L  2.02  MVP  5  -5.37  SEFV  5  33.34  643.83  LM  -2.56  MEAT  7  -12.00  APL  13  12.38  1528.90  PNC  2.43  DUR  10  -5.69  SEFV  4  43.97  617.15  PSA  6.13  MVP  5  -9.54  RPR  6  57.57  1103.99  VNO  2.63  PDRUG  7  8.56  FOTO  10  10.67  -1683.89   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

1 same defining CPIs as in Table 1 are highlighted.

For several companies, the agreement between the May 2008 and December 2009 predictions does not disappear even when models are different. For example, the 2008 model for AXP, defined by  the SEFV and  the  index  of  household  services  ( HS ),  does  not  diverge  from  the  observed trajectory since 2008.  Similar situation is observed with the model for Host Hotels&amp;Resorts (HST). This effect shows the necessity of a complete or at least more representative set of CPIs. Otherwise, one can not distinguish between  two  neighboring models  with defining  CPI  components characterized by a high degree of correlation.

The  2008  and  2010  models  for  BXP  have  one  common  defining  variable  -  the  index  of medical  care  commodities  ( MCC ).  Nevertheless,  the  2008  model  fails  to  predict  the  future trajectory well. This is due to the difference between the indices for food and beverages and pets. Similar effect is observed with JPM.

The 2008 model for GS demonstrates a striking difference with the observed time series. It predicted the fall in the share price down to the zero line in the second half of 2009. In reality, no catastrophic drop happened and the price fell only to the level of $70. From the actual time series it is clear that the model for GS could not be well resolved because of very limited change in the share price by May 2008.  There are several financial companies with shares predicted to fall below the zero. Some predictions were accurate enough. These companies are modeled in Section 5.

Figure 2. Comparison of stock prices predicted in May 2008 and December 2009.

<!-- image -->

The number of successful models is relatively small if to consider the initial set of S&amp;P 500 companies. This fact raises delicate questions about the reliability of the models and the concept itself. One may assume that the successful models are just a lucky accident. The concept should be validated by modeling of more companies, extension of the set of defining CPI components, and usage of new data in the years to come.

We also take into account the fact that quantitative models, also in physics, are better resolved than all involved variables vary in wider ranges. Specifically, the difference between the 2008 and 2009 models consists in the sharp fall after July 2008. Therefore, the models obtained in 2009 are better  resolved  and  thus  superior  to  those  from  2008.  Data  available  in  2008  did  not  allow identification of right models because of high correlation between subcategories of the consumer price index. Good news is that the right models hold once and for all, but with new coefficients.

## 5. Predicting bankruptcy

In Section 4, we have modeled the evolution of share prices of several financial companies from the S&amp;P 500 list between May 2008 and December 2009. It was found that some predicted share prices sank  below  the  zero  line.  Under  our  framework,  the  presence  of  a  negative  stock  price  may  be considered as an equivalent to a net debt. When long enough and without any positive prospective, such a debt would likely result in a bankruptcy.

In  reality,  some  companies  with  negative  predicted  share  prices  declared  bankruptcy,  some were bailed out and some have been suffering tremendous difficulties since 2008. The first group is represented by Lehman Brothers who filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on September 15, 2008. The net bank debt was estimated at the level of $600 billion.  More than 100 banks filed for bankruptcy since then.

Several banks were bailed out, with American International Group the first to obtain a $150 billion government bailout.  The AIG bailout was presented as a major move to save the collapsing US financial system.  The biggest examples of bailout are also Fannie May and Freddie Mac. All three companies had a sharp share price fall in the second half of 2008.

CIT Group  Inc.  (CIT)  got  $2.3  billion  of  bailout  money  in  December  2008  and  $3  billion bond  holder  bailout  in  July  2009.  However,  it  did  not  help  and  CIT  declared  bankruptcy  in November 2009. These companies and many others have been struggling and likely will struggle in the future trying to restructure their debts and re-enter the stock market.

Section 5 seeks to answer a number of questions:

- Was it possible to predict the evolution of total debt of the bankrupts?
- Was it possible to predict the dates of these bankruptcies?
- Is it possible to predict the date of recovery?
- It is possible to predict future bankruptcies?
- Which company had to be bailed out and when?

All S&amp;P 500 models with negative share prices were obtained together with other models for May 2008. In this regard we should not distinguish them. The reason for a separate investigation consists in the fact that negative share prices might result in bankruptcies. This is a phenomenon no described quantitatively by our models and thus deserving special attention. Otherwise, all models were equivalent and obtained according to the same procedures. It is worth noting that the models for  the  same  companies  obtained  in  October  2009  are  highly  biased  by  bailouts  or  do  not  exist together with bankrupt companies.

Table 4. Models for 10 companies: May, September and December 2008, and October 2009. May 2008

Company

AIG

C

CIT

FITB

FNM

FRE

LEH

LM

MCO

b1

-21.11

-4.33

-4.84

1.46

9.62

-3.54

-6.27

-2.57

-5.50

MS

7.788

## September 2008

Company b1

AIG

C

CIT

FITB

FNM

FRE

LEH

LM

MCO

MS

-22.10

-4.26

-0.77

-3.07

-15.39

-1.14

-7.37

-2.62

3.28

-0.42

## December 2008

b2

-172.66

-3.63

11.51

-0.32

10.84

-9.66

-1.38

-12.02

-5.83

-0.85

b2

-178.42

-3.62

-8.20

1.06

4.64

-14.11

-5.29

-12.20

-9.26

-0.95

CPI2

SEFV

RPR

SEFV

DIAR

SEFV

RPR

HOSP

APL

RPR

DIAR

CPI2

SEFV

RPR

RPR

PDRUG

HS

SEFV

MISS

APL

RPR

DIAR

1

τ

9

4

5

9

3

2

4

7

5

7

τ

1

9

9

8

12

10

0

4

7

9

0

τ

2

2

12

6

8

6

13

3

13

9

4

τ

2

1

12

11

8

6

5

2

13

9

4

CPI1

DIAR

FB

F

MCC

RS

DUR

FB

MEAT

F

R

CPI1

DIAR

FB

DAIR

F

SEFV

COMM

FB

MEAT

DUR

TPU

c

1148.11

46.79

96.99

13.01

24.36

57.75

77.60

12.40

75.37

1.49

c

1198

46.39

59.95

-0.97

68.38

90.59

102.3

12.46

72.78

12.95

d

31872

1358

2610

227.5

733.0

2180

1411

1532

1909

-658.8

d

32967

1345

1584

250.50

1937.7

2433

2477.7

1558

1237.5

235.2

| Company  b1  CPI1  τ  1  b2  CPI2  τ  2  c  d  AIG  -22.34  DIAR  9  -173.7  SEFV  1  1169  32260  C  -3.74  FB  9  -3.76  RPR  13  44.39  1287.6  CIT  2.60  NC  12  -9.66  RPR  13  63.46  1375  FITB  -3.48  F  7  -0.93  LS  11  23.20  781.5  FNM  -5.67  F  8  -2.28  TS  0  35.61  1436  FRE  -2.21  TS  0  -8.40  RPR  13  62.87  1976.6  LEH  -5.21  F  5  -4.97  PETS  0  59.65  1323  LM  -7.27  F  5  -8.31  APL  13  39.48  1967.8  MCO  2.98  DUR  9  -9.70  RPR  10  74.58  1350  MS  -12.55  SEFV  3  2.83  HS  10  74.88  1589   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

October 2009

| Company  b1  CPI1  τ  1  b2  CPI2  τ  2  c  d  AIG  -22.79  DIAR  9  -156.05  SEFV  0  1066  29580  C  -0.59  DIAR  4  -5.88  SEFV  5  38.84  1054.8  CIT  4.92  HFO  10  -9.37  RPR  12  62.02  1058  FITB  -4.99  SEFV  2  1.54  HS  6  21.86  630.7  FNM  -15.39  SEFV  10  4.64  HS  6  68.38  1837.7  FRE  -1.13  COMM  0  -14.12  SEFV  5  90.59  2433.8  LEH  -7.39  FB  4  -5.29  MISS  2  102.3  2477.7  LM  -5.82  FB  4  -8.18  APL  13  32.36  1722  MCO  -12.98  RPR  10  3.19  MISG  8  97.83  1981  MS  5.16  HO  10  -9.61  SEFV  3  39.62  1017   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 4 lists 10 models with predicted negative or very close to negative prices as obtained in May, September and December 2008 as well as in October 2009.  Figure 3 displays corresponding predicted  and  observed  curves  between  July  2003  and  December  2009.    American  International Group  has  a  very  stable  model  for  the  entire  period  as  defined  by  the DIAR and SEFV . Theoretically, the company should suffer a rapid drop in share price from ~$1400 to the level of about -$300. In reality, this fall was stopped by a bailout with the share price hovering between $10 and $50 by the end of 2008 and through 2009. According to all four models the price should start growing in 2010. It will be an important test for our pricing concept.

For Citigroup, the models obtained in 2008 are similar and are based on the indices of food and rent of primary residence. Figure 3 demonstrate that negative prices were expected in the end of 2008.  All  three  models  predicted  the  bottom  price  at  -$30.  In  October  2009,  the  defining  CPI components are different as the model tries to describe the price near $2.

The  history  of  CIT  Group  (CIT)  includes  two  attempts  of  bailout  and  a  bankruptcy  in November 2009 with a total debt of $10 billion. In Figure 3, the May 2008 model predicts a very deep fall in the share price. Other two models in 2008 demonstrate just a modest fall below the zero line. The bailouts have likely biased the October 2009 model and it predicts the company to recover in 2010.  It would be a good exercise similar to that for the AIG model. Unfortunately, the history of CIT Group has ended with a bankruptcy, as expected.

Fanny Mae and Freddie Mac were both bailed out in September 2008. As depicts Figure 3, the models between May and December 2008 are all different. However, all of them predicted negative prices.  The  models  for  FNM  imply  the  bottom  price  level  of  -$50  to  -$60  and  the  pivot  point somewhere in 2009. The models for FRE do predict negative prices with the bottom at -$30, but only the September model has a pivot point.

Lehman Brothers was one of the  first  giant  companies  to  file  for  bankruptcy  protection  in September 2008.  The May 2009 model does predict negative prices in the beginning of 2009. The September and December 2009 models are likely biased by the bankruptcy but both indicate a deep fall in the price. It is important to stress that the bottom price for LEH was predicted at -$20 with a quick return into the positive zone.  Therefore, the risk might be overestimated.

The models predicted for FITB, LM, MCO and MS are presented to emphasize the problem of resolution  and  selection  of  a  valid  model.  For  these  four  companies  there  is  at  least  one  model predicting negative or very close to zero prices. In reality, no one of them has touched the zero line. Moreover, they have not been falling since  the  end  of  2008.    So,  in  order  to  obtain  an  accurate prediction  one  should  the  best  resolution,  which  might  be  guaranteed  by  the  higher  possible dynamic range. The 2008 crisis and the following recovery allowed the biggest change in the S&amp;P share prices. Hence, the models obtained in 2010 have to be the most resolved and thus the most reliable.  Good news is that these models will be valid in the future, but with different coefficients (Kitov, 2010).

<!-- image -->

Figure  3.  Comparison  of  stock  prices  for  several  financial  companies  as  predicted  in  May, September and December 2008, and October 2009

<!-- image -->

There  are  six  companies,  all  with  predicted  negative  prices  but  different  fate.    We  have  a question on relative merits of the previous bank bailouts - which bank did deserve a bailout and how much would it really cost? The models in Table 4, although they are only tentative ones and should  be  used  with  all  necessary  precautions,  might  provide  a  measure  of  debt  size.  One  can estimate  the  debt  as  a  product  of  the  number  of  shares  and  relevant  market  price,  which  was negative for the bailed out and not bailed out companies. Table 5 lists the estimated debts. Lehman Brothers  had  a  much  smaller  debt  than  that  of  Citigroup,  CIT  and  AIG.  So,  it  would  have  been much easier to bail out LEH from the mathematical point of view. Also, the joint debt of AIG, FRE and FNM is less than $200 billion.

So, we have answered all questions formulated in the beginning of this Section. When having valid pricing models for the companies under consideration, one could foresee all problems before they  become  serious  and  select  appropriate  measures  including  bailouts.    Moreover,  taking  into account the deterministic evolution of the CPI and linear trends in the CPI differences (Kitov and Kitov,  2008),  one  could  predict  major  problems  long  before  they  happen  and  avoid  most  of  the 2008/2009  turmoil.  For  this,  financial  companies  should  learn  the  CPI  components  defining  the evolution of their stocks.

Table 5. Total debt as calculated from negative share prices.

| Company  ## Shares  Share price, $  Debt, $  LEH  6.89·10  8  -20  1.4·10  10  C  1.1·10  9  -30  3.3·10  11  CIT  8.12·10  9  -20  1.6·10  11  AIG  1.34·10  8  -360  1.0·10  11  FRE  6.8·10  8  -40  2.6·10  10  FNM  1.11·10  9  -50  5.5·10  10   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## Discussion

A deterministic model has been developed for the prediction of stock prices at a horizon of several months. The model links the shares of traded companies to consumer price indices. In this paper, we presented empirical models for financial companies from the S&amp;P 500 list. In May 2008, the model predicted negative share prices in the second half of 2008 for Lehman Brothers, American International  Group,  Freddie  Mac.  With  known  defining  CPI  components  one  could  predict  the approaching  bankruptcies.  This  makes  of  crucial  importance  the  estimation  of  correct  empirical models,  i.e.  defining  CPIs,  for  all  shares.  When  reversed,  the  model  also  makes  it  is  possible  to predict the evolution of various CPI subcategories.

Despite its apparent opposition to the mainstream concepts, the pricing model is deeply rooted in  economics:  a  higher  pricing  power  achieved  by  a  given  company  should  be  converted  into  a faster growth in corresponding consumer price index. This link works excellent for many S&amp;P 500 companies.  A  further  improvement  in  the  model's  predictive  power  is  likely  possible  using advanced methods of statistical and econometrical analysis.  However, one should bear in mind that the model will work until its influence on the market is negligible. When a good portion of market participants uses the model it should fail because the market functioning will be disturbed.

Observed  and  predicted  share  prices  are  measured  variables  and  the  link  between  them  is likely  of  a  causal  character  during  the  studied  period.    Therefore,  the  mainstream  stock  pricing models  are,  in  part,  valid  -  when  the  evolution  of  the  driving  force  is  random  the  price  is  also random, but predictable.

An important possibility arises from our analysis. Using different subsets of the CPI, one can improve  our  tentative  models  for  the  studied  companies,  and  easily  obtain  similar  quantitative relationships for other companies. By extrapolating previously observed trends into the future, one may forecast share prices at various horizons. What likely is more important for a broader investor community, the proposed model also allows predicting the turning points between adjacent trends, when share prices are subject to a substantial decline.

The  presented  results  are  preliminary  ones  and  do  not  pretend  to  provide  an  optimal  price prediction.  A  comprehensive  investigation  with  smaller  components  of  the  CPI  will  likely  give superior  results.  So,  we  recommend  refining  the  model  in  order  to  obtain  accurate  quantitative results  for  actual  investment  strategies.      All  in  all,  the  lagged  differences  between  two  CPI components provide a good approximation for the evolution of many stock prices.

One may pose a question: Why did the researches in economics and finances fail to derive the model many years ago? The answer is a scientific one. There were no appropriate data. First, the partition of the headline CPI in hundreds of components is a very new development. Moreover, this process is ongoing and a researcher obtains a more adequate set of defining variables. This brings both  higher  resolution  and  reliability.  Second,  the  reliability  critically  depends  on  the  dynamic range of data. The crisis of 2008 and 2009 has resulted in a dramatic change in both share prices and  CPI  components.  The  increased  resolution  and  dynamic  range  allowed  deriving  a  sound quantitative model. There was no chance to find the link between the share prices and CPI before the data allow. This is a general consideration applicable to all economic and financial models adequate data must come first (Kitov, 2009a).

## References

- Bureau  of  Labor  Statistic.  (2010).  Consumer  price  index.  Table,  retrieved  01.02.2010  from http://www.bls.gov/data/.
- Granger, C., Newbold, P. (1967). Spurious regression in econometrics. Journal of Econometrics, v. 2, pp. 111-120.
- Hendry, D., Juselius, K. (2001). Explaining Cointegration Analysis: Part II. Energy Journal, v. 22, pp. 75-120
- Johansen, S. (1988). Statistical analysis of cointegrating vectors. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, v. 12, pp. 231-254.
- Kitov, I., (2009a). Does economics need a scientific revolution?, MPRA Paper 14476, University Library of Munich, Germany.
- Kitov,  I.  (2009b).  Predicting  ConocoPhillips  and  Exxon  Mobil  stock  price,  Journal  of  Applied Research in Finance, v., issue 2(2), Winter 2009, pp.129-134.
- Kitov,  I.  (2010). Deterministic  mechanics  of  pricing .  Saarbrucken,  Germany:  LAP  LAMBERT Academic Publishing.
- Kitov,  I.,  Kitov,  O.  (2008).  Long-Term  Linear  Trends  In  Consumer  Price  Indices,  Journal  of Applied Economic Sciences, Spiru Haret University, Faculty of Financial Management and Accounting Craiova, vol. III(2(4)\_Summ), pp. 101-112.
- Kitov,  I.,  Kitov,  O.  (2009a).  Sustainable  trends  in  producer  price  indices,  Journal  of  Applied Research in Finance, Spiru Haret University, Faculty of Financial  Management  and Accounting Craiova, vol. I(1(1)\_ Summ), pp. 43-51.
- Kitov, I., Kitov, O. (2009b). A fair price for motor fuel in the United States, MPRA Paper 15039, University Library of Munich, Germany.

Appendix 1. List of seventy CPI components used in the study; in alphabetic order

| Acronym  Description  Acronym  Description  A  apparel  MAP  men's and boy's apparel  AB  alcoholic beverages  MCC  medical care commodities  APL  appliances  MCS  medical care services  C  CPI  MEAT  meats, poultry, and fish  CC  core CPI  MF  motor fuel  CE  CPI less energy  MISG  miscelleneous goods  CF  CPI less food  MISS  miscellenous services  CFSH  CPI less food and shelter  MVI  motor vehicle insurance  CFSHE  CPI less food shelter and energy  MVP  motor vehicle parts  CM  CPI less medcare  MVR  motor vehicle repaire  CO  communication  NC  new cars  COMM  commodities  NDUR  nondurables  CSH  CPI less shelter  O  other goods and services  DIAR  diary products  ORG  other recreation goods  DUR  durables  OS  other services  E  energy  PC  personal care  EC  education and communication  PDRUG  prescription drugs  ED  education  PETS  pets and related goods  F  food and beverages  R  recreation  FB  food less beverages  RENT  rent  FISH  fish  RPR  rent primary residence  FOOT  footware  RRM  recreational reading materials  FOTO  photography  RS  recreation services  FRUI  fruits and vegetables  SEFV  food away from home  FS  financial services  SERV  services  FU  fuels and utilities (housing)  SH  shelter  H  housing  SPO  sporting goods (apparel)  HFO  household furnishing and operations  T  transportation  HO  household operations  TOB  tobacco  HOSP  hospital services  TPR  private transportation  HS  housekeeping supplies  TPU  public transportation  ITR  intracity transportation  TS  transportation services  JEW  jewelry and watches  TUIT  tuition  LS  legal services  VAA  video and audio  M  medical care  WAP  women's and girl's apparel   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Appendix 2. Empirical 2-C models for S&amp;P 500 financial companies

| Company  b1  CPI1  τ  1  b2  CPI2  τ  2  c  d  σ  ,  $  AIG  -191.36  SEFV  1  38.53  PDRUG  13  727.81  21166.78  92.31  C  2.94  HO  5  -8.26  SEFV  2  36.70  1048.90  2.53  CB  -1.27  F  3  -0.41  O  -3  16.53  313.52  1.70  CINF  -0.06  TOB  -3  -2.79  SEFV  -4  21.53  486.92  1.41  CME  -38.62  PETS  0  -30.86  AB  10  458.48  8475.35  41.43  EQR  -3.16  SEFV  3  1.12  PDRUG  4  11.48  187.90  2.14  FHN  1.52  MCC  8  -4.10  SEFV  -5  14.30  340.70  1.90  FII  1.49  HO  12  -1.78  PETS  2  4.02  38.95  2.01  HCBK  0.03  E  1  0.47  MISS  -2  -4.43  -113.67  0.83  HCP  1.31  MCC  5  0.30  FS  -1  -8.35  -365.78  2.10  HES  3.37  CSH  -2  3.81  MISS  -5  -47.75  -1480.90  4.87  HIG  0.53  TPU  12  -8.35  PETS  1  44.41  741.76  4.79  HST  -1.30  FB  4  -1.39  RPR  11  18.91  451.01  1.12  IVZ  2.44  HO  11  -1.52  PETS  3  -1.04  -99.66  1.79  JNS  -2.99  PETS  2  3.14  RPR  7  -4.93  -257.86  2.63  KEY  -0.36  DIAR  9  -3.92  RPR  11  28.68  763.73  1.59  KIM  3.15  RS  -3  -5.14  SEFV  2  25.07  454.58  2.17  LNC  -4.59  F  5  -2.35  TS  3  41.28  1212.45  3.80  LUK  0.65  TPR  -2  -1.42  MVI  3  7.66  332.12  3.13  MCO  -0.95  MEAT  4  -8.58  RPR  9  69.27  1664.39  3.90  MET  0.36  TPU  13  -4.41  PETS  2  26.48  364.93  2.88  MI  -2.54  SEFV  4  -2.44  RPR  13  32.35  850.83  1.64  MS  5.27  HO  8  -9.75  SEFV  2  39.55  1031.57  3.72  MTB  -3.96  FB  3  -4.65  RPR  11  57.08  1510.23  4.87  NTRS  -3.02  PETS  2  3.66  RPR  5  -5.16  -340.09  3.94  PBCT  0.65  MCC  7  -0.75  MVP  13  0.12  -82.64  0.77  PCL  -0.81  MCC  -1  0.57  FS  -2  5.27  79.01  2.02  PFG  -3.01  PETS  -2  0.97  FS  -2  14.95  85.06  3.55  PGR  0.13  FU  -2  -1.74  RPR  2  11.47  309.11  1.29  PLD  -3.09  PETS  -1  1.17  FS  -2  14.18  42.98  3.44  PRU  -8.13  PETS  2  0.18  TOB  0  45.25  723.38  5.44  RF  -1.29  F  -3  -2.04  FB  7  18.09  554.44  1.48  SLM  1.91  PETS  13  -9.31  RPR  12  53.36  1490.40  4.12  SPG  -5.78  F  3  0.98  FS  -1  38.82  693.54  5.36  STI  -5.70  FB  4  -0.16  TOB  5  37.05  1010.63  3.65  STT  5.12  HO  11  -4.61  PETS  4  3.78  -50.41  5.02  TMK  -8.45  SEFV  3  0.77  HOSP  2  36.15  1140.20  3.24  TROW  -1.54  FB  3  -2.09  TS  5  26.41  644.30  3.51  UNM  -0.17  FU  6  -0.91  PETS  2  8.82  110.67  1.56  USB  -1.10  FB  4  0.32  FS  0  6.26  117.85  1.67  VTR  0.45  FS  -2  -1.60  MISS  8  18.93  276.81  2.41  WFC  -1.15  O  -3  0.09  TOB  0  10.72  281.54  2.06  XL  -13.65  RPR  13  6.35  MVR  13  45.24  1413.75  4.37  ZION  -2.19  F  4  -8.09  RPR  13  67.14  1812.98  3.21   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Appendix 3. Observed and predicted stock prices of S&amp;P 500 financial companies

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Appendix 4. Empirical models, as of May 2008.

| Company  b1  CPI1  τ  1  b2  CPI2  τ  2  c  d  CB  -0.39  FISH  8  -2.48  RS  13  17.32  335.17  CINF  -2.09  F  8  -3.41  PC  1  27.78  906.09  CME  6.79  TOB  6  -169.02  SEFV  6  1014.46  23534.41  EQR  3.33  MVP  5  -5.53  RPR  6  31.91  670.54  FHN  -6.62  SEFV  4  1.02  PDRUG  8  25.99  810.51  FII  2.27  DUR  10  -1.54  HS  1  11.38  -48.93  HCBK  0.07  TOB  13  -0.25  PDRUG  9  3.12  45.50  HCP  4.91  R  5  0.94  OS  3  -9.23  -713.62  HES  -7.91  HO  5  17.05  SEFV  9  -44.26  -1925.87  HIG  -5.74  RPR  7  2.65  PDRUG  13  17.33  307.40  IVZ  -0.46  MEAT  7  -0.39  MVI  4  8.04  181.92  JNS  1.14  DUR  11  -2.97  FOTO  5  -4.86  183.10  KEY  -3.14  RPR  6  0.98  PDRUG  11  11.84  304.61  KIM  0.98  PDRUG  6  2.00  FOTO  11  0.13  -496.62  LNC  3.12  MVP  4  -10.95  SEFV  4  61.51  1455.18  LUK  -4.26  VAA  8  1.74  OS  13  -5.82  46.26  MCO  3.69  DUR  9  -9.51  RPR  8  75.41  1232.98  MET  -1.56  SH  11  1.13  PDRUG  12  4.74  -22.58  MI  -0.86  FB  3  -5.19  SEFV  4  37.48  979.40  MTB  -7.20  RPR  11  -3.57  MISS  12  87.49  2180.14  NTRS  -1.10  MEAT  8  0.45  DIAR  2  11.12  102.13  PBCT  -0.73  O  3  0.38  PDRUG  7  4.68  81.62  PCL  -0.22  FU  6  -0.16  TPU  0  7.81  59.81  PFG  1.57  APL  3  6.50  FOTO  13  25.34  -840.96  PGR  0.40  MVI  9  1.45  RRM  12  -5.52  -368.27  PLD  -2.16  FB  4  -1.02  FS  13  26.75  547.08  PRU  2.00  PDRUG  13  -1.65  HOSP  4  31.56  -71.92  RF  -3.31  RPR  13  -1.89  RRM  3  25.57  967.64  SLM  4.67  VAA  12  -6.52  RPR  13  41.17  706.86  SPG  15.04  R  5  -5.63  PETS  3  24.43  -1021.99  STI  -8.07  SEFV  0  1.57  PDRUG  11  35.94  893.58  STT  -3.79  SERV  11  5.71  HO  11  8.40  131.84  TMK  1.22  MCC  8  0.59  ITR  8  -9.63  -348.07  TROW  1.54  EC  0  0.75  PDRUG  13  -4.58  -370.49  UNM  -1.09  FB  4  -0.84  MCC  4  14.36  374.29  USB  -0.04  E  1  -1.23  MISS  12  15.68  307.26  VTR  1.04  MCC  4  0.85  FS  10  -7.35  -430.76  WFC  -1.62  F  13  -1.38  FB  0  18.21  491.21  XL  -2.86  O  12  2.95  PDRUG  11  -14.86  19.28  ZION  -3.22  AB  3  -7.99  RPR  13  70.08  1989.05   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|