## A new behavioral model for portfolio selection using the Half-Full/Half-Empty approach

F Cesarone 1 , M Corradini 1 , L Lampariello 1 , J Riccioni 1 ∗

1 Roma Tre University - Department of Business Studies

Via Silvio D'Amico, 77 - 00145, Rome, Italy

francesco.cesarone@uniroma3.it, massimiliano.corradini@uniroma3.it,

lorenzo.lampariello@uniroma3.it, jessica.riccioni@uniroma3.it

December 19, 2023

## Abstract

We focus on a behavioral model, that has been recently proposed in the literature, whose rational can be traced back to the Half-Full/Half-Empty glass metaphor. More precisely, we generalize the Half-Full/Half-Empty approach to the context of positive and negative lotteries and give financial and behavioral interpretations of the Half-Full/Half-Empty parameters. We develop a portfolio selection model based on the Half-Full/Half-Empty strategy, resulting in a nonconvex optimization problem, which, nonetheless, is proven to be equivalent to an alternative Mixed-Integer Linear Programming formulation. By means of the ensuing empirical analysis, based on three real-world datasets, the Half-Full/Half-Empty model is shown to be very versatile by appropriately varying its parameters, and to provide portfolios displaying promising performances in terms of risk and profitability, compared with Prospect Theory, risk minimization approaches and Equally-Weighted portfolios.

Keywords: Portfolio optimization; Behavioral models; Prospect theory; Performance analysis.

## 1 Introduction

Theoretical models of individual behavior in decision-making under risk conditions begun to have a solid foundation in the mid-1900s with the development of the Expected Utility Theory (EUT) by von Neumann (von Neumann et al., 1944). According to EUT, if the preferences of individuals in risky decision making satisfy some fundamental axioms, the Decision Maker (DM) maximizes the expected utility function, and such choice is considered to be rational (Keeney et al., 1993): in this framework, individuals are taken to be rational agents. However, many criticisms have followed over the years due to the discrepancy between the theorized rational behavior and the real one, which can actually be influenced by multiple factors.

The evolution of the literature on decision-making under risk has long been driven by the discovery of paradoxes (Fox and Poldrack, 2014; Luce et al., 2008; Wu et al., 2004). Old paradoxes such as the Allais one (Allais, 1953) and its variations (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979) challenged the descriptive power of EUT. For this reason, over the last 60 years, decision theorists have been trying to develop a theory of choice that can give a satisfactory description of decision-makers' behavior in risky situations.

∗ Corresponding author.

Although several theories have been proposed over time (see, e.g., Fox and Poldrack, 2014; Starmer, 2000; Wu et al., 2004), Prospect Theory (PT) (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979) and Cumulative Prospect Theory (CPT) (Tversky and Kahneman, 1992) have emerged as the leading descriptive paradigm for modeling decision-making under risk (Camerer, 1998; Fox and Poldrack, 2014; Starmer, 2000; Wu et al., 2004) and have inspired a large body of theoretical and empirical work (Abdellaoui, 2000, 2002; Camerer, 1992; Diecidue and Wakker, 2001; Gonzalez and Wu, 1999; Karni and Safra, 1987; Luce, 2014, 2001; Machina, 1982; Prelec, 1998; Quiggin, 2012; Schmeidler, 1989; Starmer and Sugden, 1989; Tversky and Wakker, 1995; Viscusi, 1989; Wakker, 1994, 1996, 2001; Wakker et al., 1994; Wu and Gonzalez, 1996, 1998, 1999; Yaari, 1987). Despite this apparent success, several scholars have questioned the underlying assumptions and applicability of PT and CPT, which seem not to describe some empirical evidence (Baltussen et al., 2006; Blavatskyy, 2005; Brandstätter et al., 2006; Hertwig et al., 2004; Humphrey, 1995; Levy and Levy, 2002; Lopes and Oden, 1999; Marley and Luce, 2005; Neilson and Stowe, 2002; Payne, 2005; Starmer, 2000; Starmer and Sugden, 1993; Weber and Kirsner, 1997; Wu and Gonzalez, 1999; Wu and Markle, 2008; Wu et al., 2005).

PT and CPT are, thus, at the same time, 'one of the most confirmed and falsified decision-making models currently in circulation' (Wakker, 2010). However, Birnbaum (2008) has recently produced systematic empirical cases that confute both PT and CPT approaches and have received considerable attention in the relevant literature (Fox and Poldrack, 2014; Luce et al., 2008; Wakker, 2010). In fact, the author has presented 11 new paradoxes showing 'self-contradiction or systematic false predictions' (Birnbaum, 2008, p. 463), leading to the conclusion that PT and CPT cannot 'be retained as a descriptive model of decision making' (Birnbaum, 2008, p. 464).

The transfer of attention exchange (TAX) model 'correctly predicts results with all 11 new paradoxes' (Birnbaum and Stegner, 1979; Birnbaum and Chavez, 1997; Birnbaum, 2008, p. 463). But, while this model fits the data better than PT and CPT (Birnbaum, 2008; Fox and Poldrack, 2014; Wakker, 2010), it is less parsimonious (Wu et al., 2004, p. 408), involving the presence of a large number of free parameters, and does not have 'the particularly tractable form of prospect theory, with psychological interpretations for its parameters' (Wakker, 2010, p. 351).

In Cenci et al. (2015), a simple decision-making under risk approach for positive lotteries has been proposed to explain the well-known 'old and new' paradoxes at a stroke. The rationale behind the resulting model can be easily understood through the metaphor of the 'glass half-full, glass half-empty': different individuals may evaluate the same situation differently and are typically divided between those who focus on positive aspects (the optimists/glass half-full) and those who focus on negative ones (the pessimists/glass half-empty). The Half-Full/Half-Empty (HF/HE) model suggests that a DM's evaluation of a choice situation may depend on how the DM assesses the difference between outcomes above and below the mean value of the lottery considered. The DM's evaluation of the lottery (and the consequent attitude towards risk) depends on two parameters only: the DM's degree of optimism/pessimism, and a probability distortion parameter that determines the DM's decision weights. In Corradini (2022), the author investigates how to suitably calibrate this model to explain 'old and new' paradoxes, even in the case of negative lotteries (Note that, in Corradini (2022), only calibration of negative lotteries in Kahneman and Tversky (1979) is considered since negative lotteries in Birnbaum (2008) are trivially explained).

Compared to other decision-making models that have been recently proposed to address the paradoxes in Birnbaum (2008), the advantages of the HF/HE approach are twofold. On the one hand, it is very intuitive, as it is closely related to the Expected Value (EV) criterion, and the related parameters have a clear and well-established behavioral interpretation (see, e.g., Hurwicz, 1951; Arrow and Hurwicz, 1972; Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Tversky and Wakker, 1995). On the other hand, the HF/HE approach is highly parsimonious and flexible, providing an extremely simple way of modeling behavior, based on just three parameters.

Behavioral models for portfolio selection incorporate investor's perception of risk into the decisionmaking process, avoiding the pitfalls of suboptimal investment choices. Theoretical evidence exists in the literature on risk reduction in portfolio selection models based on the behavior of DMs who are naturally loss averse (Hens and Bachmann, 2008; Grishina et al., 2017). Benartzi and Thaler (1995) focus their study on a particular loss aversion concept, i.e. the so-called myopic loss aversion, which is key in PT, to explain the equity premium puzzle (see also Mehra and Prescott, 1985) for DMs who evaluate their portfolios annually. Levy and Levy (2003), among the Pareto-optimal mean-variance portfolios, propose to select the ones with the highest prospect utility, in case of normally distributed asset returns. Pirvu and Schulze (2012) generalize the results of Levy and Levy (2003) for elliptic symmetric distributions of risky assets. De Giorgi et al. (2007) apply the PT approach to portfolio selection, assuming equally likely historical scenarios for the asset returns. The PT portfolios are obtained by solving a nonconvex optimization problem through a heuristic. Other scholars investigate portfolio selection models based on CPT (see Bernard and Ghossoub, 2010; He and Zhou, 2011; Consigli et al., 2019). Barro et al. (2020) compare different portfolio selection models, including models based on PT and CPT, and approaches based on risk minimization, where risk is measured by variance and mean absolute deviation.

In this paper, we refine the approach in Cenci et al. (2015) and Corradini (2022) by tailoring it to portfolio selection problems. More precisely, we generalize the HF/HE approach to the context of mixed (i.e. positive and negative) lotteries and discuss financial and behavioral interpretation of the HF/HE-related parameters. We develop a portfolio selection model based on the HF/HE approach that results in a nonconvex optimization problem, for which we suggest an alternative, equivalent MixedInteger Linear Programming (MILP) formulation. By means of the empirical analysis we give, based on three real-world data sets, the HF/HE model is shown to be very versatile by appropriately setting its parameters, providing portfolios that display promising performances in terms of risk and profitability, compared with Prospect Theory and risk minimization approaches and the Equally-Weighted portfolio.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe how to apply the HF/HE approach to portfolio selection. More in detail, in Section 2.1, we introduce some preliminary concepts related to the decision-making model under risk in Cenci et al. (2015) and Corradini (2022). In Section 2.2, we extend the HF/HE approach to the context of positive and negative lotteries and present a detailed discussion about the financial interpretation of HF/HE parameters. In Section 2.3, we adapt the HF/HE approach for portfolio selection purposes, obtaining a nonconvex optimization problem, for which, in Section 2.4, we propose a (MILP) equivalent formulation. In Section 3, we present the PT-based portfolio selection model and two minimum-risk portfolio strategies that referred to for comparative purposes. In Section 4, we provide an extensive empirical analysis based on three real-world datasets, where the performance of the HF/HE portfolio is compared with that of Prospect Theory, Equally-Weighted, minimum variance and Mean Absolute Deviation (MAD) portfolios. Conclusions are drawn in Section 5.

## 2 Half-Full/Half-Empty approach

After gaining insight, in Section 2.1, about the decision-making model under risk that has been developed in Cenci et al. (2015) and Corradini (2022), we show in Section 2.3 how to tailor it to portfolio selection purposes: as for the resulting nonconvex optimization problem, we propose, in Section 2.4, a MILP equivalent formulation.

## 2.1 Preliminary concepts

We recall here some preliminary notions of the HF/HE approach in Cenci et al. (2015), where the authors consider only nonnegative random variables.

Denoting by Y a generic nonnegative lottery, we can express its EV as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where obviously µ = E [ Y ] . Distinguishing the part of Y below the mean from the part above the mean, we can write ( Y -µ ) = ( Y -µ ) + +( Y -µ ) -, where ( Y -µ ) + = max { Y -µ, 0 } and ( Y -µ ) -= min { Y -µ, 0 } . Expression (1) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The expected value of Y can be generalized by assuming that the DM assigns a weight λ different from 1 2 for realizations of Y above and those below the mean, according to the DM's degree of optimism/pessimism. Therefore, expression (2) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where λ ∈ [0 , 1] and represents the DM's degree of optimism/pessimism. More precisely, an optimistic DM sets λ ∈ ( 1 2 , 1] , thus assigning a weight, that is larger than 1 2 , to the average of the values of Y above µ . If a DM is pessimistic , then λ ∈ [0 , 1 2 ) , i.e. the DM attributes a weight, that is larger than 1 2 , to the average of the values of Y below µ . If λ = 1 2 , (3) coincides with (2).

## 2.2 The HF/HE functional with positive and negative lotteries

To rely on the HF/HE functional H λ in portfolio selection, we need to reformulate it in the context of mixed lotteries, namely when Y ∈ R . Suffice it to repeat the rationale behind (1) and (2) for a random variable Y , which admits both positive and negative values.

Let Y + = max { Y, 0 } and Y -= min { Y, 0 } , then Y = Y + + Y -, | Y | = Y + -Y -, and µ = E [ Y ] = µ + + µ -, where µ + = E [ Y + ] and µ -= E [ Y -] . Starting from (1), we can write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Considering the relations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and substituting them in (4), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to (3), the functional H 1 [ Y ] can be generalized as follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where λ + and λ -are the weights that the DM assigns to the outcomes above the mean in the case of gains and losses, respectively; 1 -λ + and 1 -λ -are the weights when the lotteries are below the mean in the case of gains and losses, respectively.

Using relations (5), H 2 [ Y ] can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Again from (5), we have E [ | Y + -µ + | ] = 2 E [( Y + -µ + ) + ] and E [ | Y --µ -| ] = 2 E [( Y --µ -) + ] . Thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We point out that the HF/HE functional (9) depends on two parameters only, which, as shown in the next section, have a clear and well-established financial interpretation.

## 2.2.1 Financial interpretation of the HF/HE parameters

If a DM adopts the value function h ( Y ) to evaluate the lottery Y , then the certainty equivalent of Y , CE Y , is defined as h ( CE Y ) = h ( Y ) : the DM is risk-adverse (risk-seeking) when CE Y &lt; µ ( CE Y &gt; µ ), while for CE Y = µ , the DM is risk-neutral.

In case h ( Y ) = H 2 ( Y ) , we have H 2 ( CE Y ) = CE Y , hence CE Y = H 2 ( Y ) . Thus, accordingly, a DM is risk-adverse (risk-seeking) when H 2 ( Y ) &lt; µ ( H 2 ( Y ) &gt; µ ), while if H 2 ( Y ) = µ , the DM is risk-neutral.

For positive lotteries ( Y &gt; 0 ), (9) becomes H 2 ( Y ) = µ +(2 λ + -1) E [ | Y + -µ + | ] . Therefore, a DM is

- risk-adverse, when 2 λ + -1 &lt; 0 ⇔ λ + ∈ [0 , 1 2 ) ;
- risk-seeking, when 2 λ + -1 &gt; 0 ⇔ λ + ∈ ( 1 2 , 1] ;
- risk-neutral, when 2 λ + -1 = 0 ⇔ λ + = 1 2 .

For negative lotteries ( Y &lt; 0 ), we have H 2 ( Y ) = µ +(2 λ --1) E [ | Y --µ -| ] . Hence, a DM is

- risk-adverse, when 2 λ --1 &lt; 0 ⇔ λ -∈ [0 , 1 2 ) ;
- risk-seeking, when 2 λ --1 &gt; 0 ⇔ λ -∈ ( 1 2 , 1] ;

Figure 1: DM risk attitudes vs. ( λ + , λ -) for m ∈ (0 , 1)

<!-- image -->

- risk-neutral, when 2 λ --1 = 0 ⇔ λ -= 1 2 .

In the general case of mixed lotteries (i.e. Y ∈ R ), the DM is risk-averse when H 2 ( Y ) &lt; µ , thus, if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, (2 λ + -1) &lt; (1 -2 λ -) E [ | Y --µ -| ] E [ | Y + -µ + | ] yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Inequality (10) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where m = E [ | Y --µ -| ] E [ | Y + -µ + | ] &gt; 0 and k = 1 2 (1 + m ) &gt; 1 2 .

In Figure 1, we report the typologies of risk attitudes of a DM, based on the values assumed by λ + ∈ [0 , 1] and λ -∈ [0 , 1] in the general case of mixed lotteries, with m ∈ (0 , 1) . The blue and red highlighted parts represent the values of λ + and λ -for which a DM is risk-averse and risk-seeking, respectively. The values of λ + and λ -belonging to the line r ( λ -) : λ + = -mλ -+ k represents a risk-neutral DM .

Figure 2 shows the categories of risk attitudes of a DM w.r.t. the values of λ + and λ -when m &gt; 1 (left side) and m = 1 (right side).

## 2.2.2 About the distortion of probabilities

A refinement of the functional defined in (9) can be obtained by including the distortion of the lottery's probabilities (see, e.g., Fehr-Duda and Epper, 2012; Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Tversky and Wakker, 1995). In the case of a discrete random variable Y = { y 1 , y 2 , . . . , y T } with probabilities p = { p 1 , p 2 , . . . , p T } , it consists of transforming the probabilities p i by an appropriate weighting function. An example of weighting function is given by

Figure 2: DM risk attitudes vs. ( λ + , λ -) for m&gt; 1 (left side) and m = 1 (right side)

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where q is a suitable positive parameter that needs to be calibrated.

In Fig. 3, we exhibit the behavior of the weighting function (12) for a binary lottery Y = { ( y 1 , p ); ( y 2 , 1 -p ) } in the case when 0 &lt; q &lt; 1 e q &gt; 1 .

Figure 3: Graph of the weighting function (12).

<!-- image -->

If 0 &lt; q &lt; 1 (left side), the probability of the most likely events is underestimated, and that of the least likely events is overestimated; vice versa , in case q &gt; 1 (right side). When q = 1 , there is no probability distortion (see the red lines in Fig. 3). Then, expression (9) can be generalized as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ q = E q [ Y ] = ∑ T j =1 w q ( p j ) y j , E q [ g ( Y )] = ∑ T j =1 w q ( p j ) g ( y j ) , and w q ( p j ) = p q j ∑ T i =1 p q i .

## 2.3 The HF/HE portfolio selection model

In this section, we adapt the HF/HE approach to portfolio selection problems. We consider asset returns defined on a discrete probability space with T states of nature, where each state has a probability of occurrence equal to π t , t = 1 , . . . , T . Furthermore, we use a look-back approach where the realizations of the discrete random returns correspond to the historical scenarios, which are equally likely, i.e., π t = 1 T ∀ t , as typically assumed in portfolio optimization (see, e.g., Mansini et al., 2007; Carleo et al., 2017; Bellini et al., 2021, and references therein). If p kt is the price of asset k at time t , the return of asset k at time t is denoted by r kt = p kt -p k ( t -1) p k ( t -1) . Assuming an investment universe composed of n assets and denoting by x the vector of portfolio weights, the portfolio return at time t is given by R t ( x ) = ∑ n k =1 x k r kt . For all models we consider, feasible portfolios are those identified by the budget constraint ∑ n k =1 x k = 1 and the no-short-selling requirements x k ≥ 0 k = 1 , . . . , n .

Note that in case of equally likely scenarios, the weighting function (12) is w ( π t , π, q ) = π t ≡ 1 T , t = 1 , . . . , T , for every q .

Thus, the HF/HE functional (9) applied to the portfolio return becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, we obtain the following portfolio optimization problem:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is a nonconvex nonsmooth optimization problem. However, as shown in the next section, it can be equivalently formulated as a MILP problem.

Furthermore, under specific (but unrealistic) assumptions, optimal solutions of (15) can coincide with efficient portfolios obtained by relying on the Mean-MAD model developed by Konno and Yamazaki (1991) (see Remark 1).

## 2.4 A MILP reformulation of the HF/HE model

The nonconvex nonsmooth optimization problem (15) can be equivalently recast according to a suitable MILP formulation, as shown below. Relying on such an alternative version of the model opens the door to different possible numerical treatments in order to address the problem in practice.

Preliminarily, one can introduce: ( i ) T auxiliary variables d + t defined as the deviation of the portfolio return ∑ n i = k x k r kt from 0 when ∑ n k =1 x k r kt &gt; 0 , and 0 otherwise; ( ii ) T auxiliary variables d -t defined as the deviation of the portfolio loss -∑ n k =1 x k r kt from 0 when -∑ n k =1 x k r kt &gt; 0 , and 0 otherwise.

We remark that the sets

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

are equal. The inclusion F ⊆ S follows easily from the definitions. As for S ⊆ F , suffice it to observe that, if ( y, b + , b -) ∈ S , b + t &gt; 0 yields b -t = 0 and, in turn, b + t = ∑ n k =1 y k r kt , while b + t = 0 entails b -t = -∑ n k =1 y k r kt . Hence, the HF/HE model (15) can be equivalently recast as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As shown in Section 2.2.1, considering a DM that is risk-adverse for gains and risk-seeking for losses, we have (2 λ + -1) &lt; 0 and (2 λ --1) &gt; 0 . In this case, we notice that -(2 λ + -1) 1 T ∑ T t =1 | d + t -1 T ∑ T t =1 d + t | is a convex function, while -(2 λ --1) 1 T ∑ T t =1 | d -t -1 T ∑ T t =1 d -t | is concave. Via the epigraph form of Problem (16) (see, e.g., Grippo and Sciandrone, 2023, Section 2.5), we get the following equivalent version of it:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We finally deal with the difficult-to-handle disjunctive-type constraints -z -t - | d -t -1 T d -t | ≤ 0 and complementarity conditions d + t d -t = 0 , t = 1 , . . . , T , in (17) through the big-M reformulation, thus obtaining the mixed-integer linear program

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where M is a suitably large positive scalar.

## 3 Other portfolio selection models to be compared with

We introduce several portfolio selection models to be compared with the HF/HE approach. More precisely, in Section 3.1, we briefly describe the behavioral portfolio selection model based on PT. In Section 3.2, we present two minimum risk approaches, using variance and MAD, as a risk measures, respectively. Furthermore, we also test the so-called Equally Weighted (EW) portfolio, defined by x k = 1 n , k = 1 , · · · , n , whose performances would seem to be barely improved by optimized portfolios in practice (DeMiguel et al., 2009).

## 3.1 Prospect Theory portfolio

Kahneman and Tversky (1979) suggest to interpret individuals' experimentally observed economic choices by modeling their satisfaction level through a nonconcave function. A DM exhibits a riskaverse attitude toward gains and a risk-seeking attitude toward losses. A crucial property of PT is loss aversion: individuals are more sensitive to losses than gains (see Sun, 2009). Furthermore, among different alternatives, investors evaluate potential gains and losses with respect to a reference point. They overestimate the probabilities of significant gains and losses. Accordingly, on the one hand, the satisfaction levels of a DM are modeled by a function that is concave for gains and convex for losses, thus incorporating a risk-averse attitude for gains and a risk-seeking attitude for losses. The value function is steeper below the reference since people tend to focus more on losses than gains. On the other hand, a DM transforms objective probabilities through a weighting function, by underestimating medium-high probabilities and overestimating low probabilities associated with extreme events (see Section 2.2.2).

To make comparisons, we refer to the PT-based behavioral portfolio selection model proposed by De Giorgi et al. (2007):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α ≤ 1 leads to a concave objective for gains and convex for losses, and controls the DM's risk attitude. Furthermore, β represents loss aversion. Also, if β &gt; 1 , the function is asymmetric, so that DM is more loss-averse than gain-averse. Model (19), thus, is a nonconvex nonsmooth optimization problem. As in De Giorgi et al. (2007), we fix α = 0 . 88 and β = 2 . 25 .

## 3.2 Minimum variance and minimum MAD portfolios

The long-only minimum variance portfolio (Markowitz, 1952, 1959) can be obtained by solving the following convex quadratic programming problem:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where σ k,j is the covariance of returns of asset k and asset j , k, j = 1 , . . . n .

An alternative deviation risk measure in the sense of Rockafellar et al. (2006), which has been often used in the literature (see, e.g., Ararat et al., 2021; Carleo et al., 2017; Cesarone et al., 2015, 2016; Cesarone, 2020, and references therein), is the MAD: it is defined as the expected value of the absolute deviation of the portfolio return from its mean. Thus, the long-only minimum MAD portfolio (Konno and Yamazaki, 1991) can be obtained by solving the following optimization problem:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ k represents the expected return of asset k . As in Konno and Yamazaki (1991), one can linearize problem (21) by introducing T auxiliary variables d t defined as the absolute deviation of the portfolio return from its mean, thus obtaining, following a similar logic as in Section 2.4, the Linear Programming (LP) problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 1 (HF/HE vs. Mean-MAD) Assuming R ( x ) &gt; 0 , if λ + ∈ [0 , 1 2 ) , the HF/HE portfolio coincides with the Mean-MAD portfolio

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assuming R ( x ) &lt; 0 , if λ -∈ [0 , 1 2 ) , the HF/HE portfolio coincides with the Mean-MAD portfolio

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Whenever R ( x ) ∈ R , Mean-MAD and HF/HE portfolios are different. Indeed, the HF/HE model weighs positive and negative outcomes differently, while MAD is a symmetric risk measure and equally penalizes outcomes above and below the portfolio expected return.

## 4 Empirical analysis

By means of a thorough empirical analysis, we test the performances of HF/HE portfolios in comparison with EW, minimum variance and MAD, and PT ones.

Summing up, in Section 4.1, we describe datasets and performance measures. We, then, discuss the computational results: more precisely, in Section 4.2, we test and validate HF/HE portfolios, choosing parameters λ + and λ -values that satisfy old and new paradoxes (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Birnbaum, 2008); in Section 4.3, we explore the flexibility of the HF/HE approach in terms of the out-of-sample performances by varying λ + and λ -outside the paradoxes' constraints.

For the out-of-sample performance analysis, we adopt a rolling time window mechanism: using a time window of 500 (daily) observations (in-sample period), we solve the problem for overlapping windows constructed by moving forward in time in steps of 20 days. The optimal portfolio that is computed in an in-sample period is then maintained for the next 20 days (out-of-sample period), so that we can evaluate its performances by considering the aforementioned measures.

All experiments have been implemented on a laptop with an Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-7500U CPU @ 2.70 GHz processor and 8 GB of RAM, using MATLAB R2022b. We address problems (15) and (19) using a multi-start heuristic, while the remaining models are coped with by means of standard built-in solvers.

## 4.1 Description of datasets and performance measures

We consider the following datasets that are publicly available on https://www.francescocesarone. com/data-sets and consist of daily prices, adjusted for dividends and stock splits and retrieved from Refinitiv (see, for more details, Cesarone et al., 2022):

- DIJA (Dow Jones Industrial Average, USA): composed of 28 assets and 3715 observations (October 2006 - December 2020);
- NASDAQ 100 (National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation, USA): composed of 54 assets and 3715 observations (October 2006 - December 2020);
- FTSE 100 (Financial Times Stock Exchange, UK): composed of 80 assets and 3715 observations (October 2006 - December 2020).

To evaluate the out-of-sample performances of the portfolio strategies we analyze, we use the following measures that are typically resorted to in the literature (see, e.g., Cesarone et al., 2015, 2016, 2020; Bruni et al., 2017; Cesarone and Colucci, 2017, and references therein):

- out-of-sample daily expected return ˆ µ out ( ExpRet ) and out-of-sample daily volatility ˆ σ out ( Vol ).
- Sharpe ratio (Sharpe, 1966, 1998), i.e. gain per unit of risk:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we fix r f = 0 ;

- Maximum Drawdown ( MaxDD , see, e.g., Chekhlov et al., 2005), i.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where T in is the length of the in-sample window, W τ = W τ -1 (1 + R out τ ) is the value of wealth after τ periods, W T in = 1 is the initial wealth, and R out τ denotes the out-of-sample portfolio returns for each portfolio strategy;

- Sortino ratio (Sortino and Satchell, 2001), which, again, is a gain-risk ratio performance measure defined as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where √ E [( r out -r f ) 2 -] represents the Target Downside Deviation and r f = 0 ;

- Rachev ratio (Biglova et al., 2004), which measures the upside potential and is defined as the ratio between expected return in the best α % values of R out -r f and expected losses in the worst β % values of R out -r f :

where α = β = 5 and r f = 0 ;

- average Return On Investment ( aveROI , see, e.g., Phillips and Phillips, 2005), which indicates the return generated by each portfolio strategy for a given time horizon ∆ τ :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where W τ -∆ τ represents the capital invested at the beginning of the time horizon, W τ = W τ -∆ τ ∏ τ t = τ -∆ τ +1 (1 + R out t ) is the portfolio wealth, and T is the entire number of the available realizations;

- Herfindahl index (Rhoades, 1993), which is a concentration measure, defined as HI = ∑ n k =1 x 2 k . The normalized version of the index ( NHI ) is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, NHI = 0 represents the maximum concentration, while NHI = 1 indicates the maximum diversification;

- average number of assets ( ave # ) selected by each portfolio strategy.

## 4.2 Comparison of out-of-sample performance results

We collect in some tables the results of our empirical analysis for all the portfolio strategies we examine. To facilitate the interpretation of the data, we exhibit the rank of the performance measures for the different approaches with different colors: for each row corresponding to a specific performance measure, the colors range from deep green to deep red, where deep green represents the best value and deep red is the worst.

In Tables 1, 2, and 3, we report the out-of-sample performance results for the five portfolio selection models, considering DIJA, NASDAQ100, and FTSE100 datasets, respectively.

We point out that, preliminarily, we examine HF/HE portfolios setting parameters λ + and λ -within a range of values so that all the paradoxes described in Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and Birnbaum (2008) are satisfied: thus, λ + ∈ [0 . 29 , 0 . 32] and λ -∈ [0 . 68 , 0 . 72] , according to the results in (Cenci et al., 2015; Corradini, 2022). Then, among the portfolios that have been obtained for different values of the parameters, we select the best one, namely the portfolio for which λ + = 0 . 30 and λ -= 0 . 69 .

On the one hand, from Tables 1, 2, and 3, we can observe that the HF/HE strategy seems to be the most profitable one: it shows the best performances in terms of ExpRet , Rachev , and AveROI , all the datasets considered, and it is superior in terms of Sharpe and Sortino with respect to the other approaches, in the context of DIJA and NASDAQ100 datasets. On the other hand, as expected, the minimum-risk strategies present the best results in terms of risk, as shown by out-of-sample volatility and MaxDD . In this sense, the HF/HE strategy seems to be rather aggressive, since it tends to select

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Table 1: Out-of-sample performance results for DIJA

| DIJA  EW  MinV  MinMAD  PT  HF/HE  0.30-0.69  ExpRet  0,048%  0,026%  0,032%  0,035%  0,073%  Vol  0,013  0,010  0,010  0,011  0,018  Sharpe  0,038  0,027  0,033  0,033  0,040  MaxDD  -0,466  -0,332  -0,366  -0,383  -0,580  Sortino  0,054  0,038  0,047  0,046  0,060  Rachev  0,968  0,921  0,946  0,932  1,030  AveROI  45%  26%  32%  35%  65%  NHI  -  0,818  0,829  0,820  0,427  ave #  28  11,6  11,3  11,3  2,9   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2: Out-of-sample performance results for NASDAQ 100

| NASDAQ100  EW  MinV  MinMAD  PT  HF/HE  0.30-0.69  ExpRet  0,068%  0,040%  0,039%  0,053%  0,141%  Vol  0,014  0,010  0,010  0,012  0,024  Sharpe  0,049  0,040  0,039  0,043  0,058  MaxDD  -0,524  -0,348  -0,326  -0,424  -0,582  Sortino  0,070  0,056  0,056  0,061  0,086  Rachev  0,949  0,937  0,937  0,931  1,054  AveROI  68%  41%  41%  66%  233%  NHI  -  0,850  0,854  0,849  0,448  ave #  54  14,6  14,5  16,6  3,6   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 3: Out-of-sample performance results for FTSE 100

| FTSE100  EW  MinV  MinMAD  PT  HF/HE  0.30-0.69  ExpRet  0,039%  0,035%  0,026%  0,040%  0,076%  Vol  0,013  0,009  0,009  0,011  0,021  Sharpe  0,031  0,038  0,027  0,035  0,035  MaxDD  -0,487  -0,353  -0,366  -0,459  -0,712  Sortino  0,044  0,053  0,038  0,049  0,051  Rachev  0,972  0,938  0,922  0,916  1,023  AveROI  39%  37%  29%  48%  108%  NHI  -  0,926  0,924  0,895  0,549  ave #  80  21,6  20,6  29,4  4,2   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

a handful of stocks. However, as shown in the next section, by appropriately varying λ + and λ -, our model appears to be very versatile in that it is able to identify more diversified and less risky portfolios.

## 4.3 Flexibility of the HF/HE portfolio selection model

By giving a sensitivity analysis, we aim at studying the behavior of the HF/HE approach for different values of λ + and λ -, even if they do not necessarily satisfy all paradoxes.

## 4.3.1 A sensitivity analysis: varying HF/HE parameters values

The question arises on how the HF/HE approach behaves when the values of parameters λ + and λ -do not necessarily satisfy all the paradoxes presented in Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and Birnbaum (2008).

As mentioned in Section 2.1, the higher the value of λ + , the lower the degree of risk-aversion/pessimism, and the higher the value of λ -, the higher the degree of risk-seeking/optimism. More precisely, by decreasing λ + , a DM, from being less risk-averse, becomes more risk-averse. Whereas, by decreasing λ -, a DM, from more risk-seeking, becomes less risk-seeking.

Table 4: Computational results of the HF/HE approach by varying λ + and λ -on DIJA

| DIJA  ExpRet  λ  +  Vol  λ  +  0.15  0.20  0.25  0.15  0.20  0.25  λ  -  0.30  0,030%  0,030%  0,031%  λ  -  0.30  0,0099  0,0100  0,0101  0.40  0,030%  0,033%  0,035%  0.40  0,0101  0,0102  0,0104  0.66  0,036%  0,039%  0,058%  0.66  0,0113  0,0123  0,0139  Sharpe  λ  +  ave #  λ  \_  +  0.15  0.20  0.25  0.15  0.20  0.25  λ  -  0.30  0,0307  0,0298  0,0301  λ  -  0.30  10,8  10,6  10,0  0.40  0,0301  0,0319  0,0338  0.40  11,0  10,2  9,6  0.66  0,0322  0,0313  0,0414  0.66  9,8  8,2  6,1   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 5: Computational results of the HF/HE approach by varying λ + and λ -on NASDAQ100

| NASDAQ100  ExpRet  λ  +  Vol  λ  +  0.15  0.20  0.25  0.15  0.20  0.25  λ  -  0.30  0,041%  0,041%  0,043%  λ  -  0.30  0,0105  0,0107  0,0110  0.40  0,042%  0,045%  0,047%  0.40  0,0107  0,0110  0,0114  0.66  0,060%  0,080%  0,107%  0.66  0,0128  0,0150  0,0179  Sharpe  λ  +  ave #  λ  +  0.15  0.20  0.25  0.15  0.20  0.25  λ  -  0.30  0,0393  0,0392  0,0395  λ  -  0.30  14,6  14,5  13,2  0.40  0,0386  0,0407  0,0414  0.40  14,8  13,7  12,5  0.66  0,0467  0,0534  0,0598  0.66  13,2  10,7  7,4   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

In Tables 4, 5, and 6, we report the results in terms of ExpRet , Vol , Sharpe , and ave # , that we obtain for several HF/HE portfolios, by setting different values of λ + and λ -.

Interestingly, on the one hand, by simultaneously decreasing λ + and λ -, the corresponding HF/HE portfolios tend to show a reduction in terms of volatility and an increase in terms of the number of selected assets: values of Vol and ave # turn out to be comparable with those obtained through the minimum risk strategies. On the other hand, by simultaneously increasing λ + and λ -, the HF/HE portfolios tend to exhibit an increase in terms of ExpRet and Sharpe .

Table 6: Computational results of the HF/HE approach by varying λ + and λ -on FTSE100

| FTSE 100  ExpRet  λ  +  Vol  λ  +  0.15  0.20  0.25  0.15  0.20  0.25  λ  -  0.30  0,036%  0,037%  0,038%  λ  -  0.30  0,0100  0,0101  0,0104  0.40  0,036%  0,037%  0,038%  0.40  0,0102  0,0104  0,0107  0.66  0,040%  0,051%  0,057%  0.66  0,0115  0,0127  0,0146  Sharpe  λ  +  ave #  λ  +  0.15  0.20  0.25  0.15  0.20  0.25  λ  -  0.30  0,0363  0,0360  0,0370  λ  -  0.30  18,3  18,1  16,4  0.40  0,0358  0,0351  0,0357  0.40  18,2  16,6  15,2  0.66  0,0350  0,0403  0,0389  0.66  15,5  12,9  9,2   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 4.3.2 Comparing HF/HE portfolios

It is appropriate to compare the out-of-sample performances of the HF/HE portfolio whose parameters satisfy all the experiments of Kahneman and Tversky (1979) and Birnbaum (2008) (i.e., λ + = 0 . 30 and λ -= 0 . 69 ) with those of several HF/HE portfolios that are obtained corresponding to different values of λ + and λ -. Hence, we consider the following selection strategies:

- HF/HE 0.25-0.66: Model (15) with λ + = 0 . 25 and λ -= 0 . 66 ;
- HF/HE 0.25-0.40: Model (15) with λ + = 0 . 25 and λ -= 0 . 40 ;
- HF/HE 0.20-0.66: Model (15) with λ + = 0 . 20 and λ -= 0 . 66 ;
- HF/HE 0.20-0.40: Model (15) with λ + = 0 . 20 and λ -= 0 . 40 ;
- HF/HE 0.15-0.30: Model (15) with λ + = 0 . 15 and λ -= 0 . 30 .

In Tables 7, 8, and 9, we indicate the out-of-sample performance results for the HF/HE portfolios listed above. Note that the different values adopted for λ + and λ -are marked in pink and blue, respectively.

On the one hand, we can observe again that the HF/HE portfolio with λ + = 0 . 30 and λ -= 0 . 69 appears to yield the most profitable strategy, achieving the best performances in terms of ExpRet , Rachev , and AveROI , all the datasets considered. On the other hand, choosing smaller values for parameters λ + and λ -, we obtain HF/HE portfolios that are very competitive in terms of risk and diversification with respect to PT and minimum risk strategies.

## 5 Conclusions

Taking a cue from Cenci et al. (2015) and Corradini (2022), we have extended the so-called HF/HE behavioral approach to encompass the general case of mixed positive and negative lotteries. Also, we have been able to present a novel and detailed discussion about the financial meaning of the model's relevant parameters. Such analysis, in turn, prompted us to tailor this strategy to portfolio selection purposes: as a result, we devised a nonconvex optimization model together with its MILP reformulation. Concerning testing and validation, we have presented an extensive empirical analysis based on several real-world datasets, which confirms, by means of numerical evidences, the out-ofsample competitiveness of the method.

Table 7: Computational results on DIJA

<!-- image -->

Table 8: Computational results on NASDAQ100

| NASDAQ100  HF/HE  0.30-0.69  HF/HE  0.25-0.66  HF/HE  0.25-0.40  HF/HE  0.20-0.66  HF/HE  0.20-0.40  HF/HE  0.15-0.30  ExpRet  0,141%  0,107%  0,047%  0,080%  0,045%  0,041%  Vol  0,024  0,018  0,011  0,015  0,011  0,011  Sharpe  0,058  0,060  0,041  0,053  0,041  0,039  MaxDD  -0,582  -0,442  -0,397  -0,411  -0,365  -0,346  Sortino  0,086  0,089  0,058  0,077  0,057  0,055  Rachev  1,054  1,028  0,914  0,974  0,917  0,921  AveROI  233%  153%  57%  98%  52%  46%  NHI  0,448  0,726  0,851  0,820  0,858  0,862  ave #  3,6  7,4  12,5  10,7  13,7  14,6   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 9: Computational results on FTSE100

| FTSE 100  HF/HE  0.30-0.69  HF/HE  0.25-0.66  HF/HE  0.25-0.40  HF/HE  0.20-0.66  HF/HE  0.20-0.40  HF/HE  0.15-0.30  ExpRet  0,076%  0,057%  0,038%  0,051%  0,037%  0,036%  Vol  0,021  0,015  0,011  0,013  0,010  0,010  Sharpe  0,035  0,039  0,036  0,040  0,035  0,036  MaxDD  -0,712  -0,538  -0,431  -0,507  -0,426  -0,424  Sortino  0,051  0,055  0,049  0,056  0,048  0,050  Rachev  1,023  0,950  0,903  0,934  0,899  0,896  AveROI  108%  76%  49%  66%  47%  45%  NHI  0,549  0,785  0,892  0,859  0,901  0,911  ave #  4,2  9,2  15,2  12,9  16,6  18,3   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Future research will be directed toward (a) a better understanding of the role played by the probabilistic bias parameter q in portfolio selection, (b) a thorough investigation of different algorithmic strategies to address the problem in practice, and (c) a 'behavioral evaluation' of financial derivative contracts.

## References

- Abdellaoui, M. (2000). Parameter-free elicitation of utility and probability weighting functions. Management Science , 46(11):1497-1512.
- Abdellaoui, M. (2002). A genuine rank-dependent generalization of the Von Neumann-Morgenstern expected utility theorem. Econometrica , 70(2):717-736.
- Allais, M. (1953). Le comportement de l'homme rationnel devant le risque: Critique des postulats et axiomes de L'Ecole Americaine. Econometrica , 21(4):503-546.
- Ararat, Ç., Cesarone, F., Pınar, M. Ç., and Ricci, J. M. (2021). MAD Risk Parity Portfolios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.12282 .
- Arrow, K. J. and Hurwicz, L. (1972). An optimality criterion for decision-making under ignorance. Uncertainty and expectations in economics , 1.
- Baltussen, G., Post, T., and Vliet, P. V. (2006). Violations of cumulative prospect theory in mixed gambles with moderate probabilities. Management Science , 52(8):1288-1290.
- Barro, D., Corazza, M., and Nardon, M. (2020). Cumulative Prospect Theory portfolio selection. Working papers, Department of Economics, University of Venice "Ca' Foscari".
- Bellini, F., Cesarone, F., Colombo, C., and Tardella, F. (2021). Risk parity with expectiles. European Journal of Operational Research , 291(3):1149-1163.
- Benartzi, S. and Thaler, R. H. (1995). Myopic loss aversion and the equity premium puzzle. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 110(1):73-92.
- Bernard, C. and Ghossoub, M. (2010). Static portfolio choice under cumulative prospect theory. Mathematics and Financial Economics , 2(4):277-306.
- Biglova, A., Ortobelli, S., Rachev, S., and Stoyanov, S. (2004). Different approaches to risk estimation in portfolio theory. Journal of Portfolio Management , 31(1):103.
- Birnbaum, M. H. (2008). New paradoxes of risky decision making. Psychological Review , 115(2):463.
- Birnbaum, M. H. and Chavez, A. (1997). Tests of theories of decision making: Violations of branch independence and distribution independence. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 71(2):161-194.
- Birnbaum, M. H. and Stegner, S. E. (1979). Source credibility in social judgment: Bias, expertise, and the judge's point of view. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 37(1):48.
- Blavatskyy, P. R. (2005). Back to the St. Petersburg paradox? Management Science , 51(4):677-678.
- Brandstätter, E., Gigerenzer, G., and Hertwig, R. (2006). The priority heuristic: making choices without trade-offs. Psychological review , 113(2):409.
- Bruni, R., Cesarone, F., Scozzari, A., and Tardella, F. (2017). On exact and approximate stochastic dominance strategies for portfolio selection. European Journal of Operational Research , 259(1):322-329.
- Camerer, C. (1998). Bounded rationality in individual decision making. Experimental economics , 1:163-183.

- Camerer, C. F. (1992). Recent tests of generalizations of expected utility theory. In Utility theories: Measurements and applications , pages 207-251. Springer.
- Carleo, A., Cesarone, F., Gheno, A., and Ricci, J. M. (2017). Approximating exact expected utility via portfolio efficient frontiers. Decisions in Economics and Finance , 40(1):115-143.
- Cenci, M., Corradini, M., Feduzi, A., and Gheno, A. (2015). Half-Full or Half-Empty? A model of decision making under risk. Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 68-69:1-6.
- Cesarone, F. (2020). Computational Finance: MATLAB® Oriented Modeling . Routledge.
- Cesarone, F. and Colucci, S. (2017). Minimum risk versus capital and risk diversification strategies for portfolio construction. Journal of the Operational Research Society , pages 1-18.
- Cesarone, F., Martino, M. L., and Carleo, A. (2022). Does ESG impact really enhance portfolio profitability? Sustainability , 14(4):2050.
- Cesarone, F., Moretti, J., Tardella, F., et al. (2016). Optimally chosen small portfolios are better than large ones. Economics Bulletin , 36(4):1876-1891.
- Cesarone, F., Scozzari, A., and Tardella, F. (2015). Linear vs. quadratic portfolio selection models with hard real-world constraints. Computational Management Science , 12:345-370.
- Cesarone, F., Scozzari, A., and Tardella, F. (2020). An optimization-diversification approach to portfolio selection. Journal of Global Optimization , 76(2):245-265.
- Chekhlov, A., Uryasev, S., and Zabarankin, M. (2005). Drawdown measure in portfolio optimization. International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance , 8(01):13-58.
- Consigli, G., Hitaj, A., and Mastrogiacomo, E. (2019). Portfolio choice under cumulative prospect theory: sensitivity analysis and an empirical study. Computational Management Science , 16:1-26.
- Corradini, M. (2022). Half-Full Half-Empty Functional: An Extension to Negative Lotteries. Applied Mathematical Sciences , 16(12):645-648.
- De Giorgi, E., Hens, T., and Mayer, J. (2007). Computational aspects of prospect theory with asset pricing applications. Computational Economics , 29(3):267-281.
- DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., and Uppal, R. (2009). Optimal versus naive diversification: How inefficient is the 1/N portfolio strategy? The Review of Financial Studies , 22(5):1915-1953.
- Diecidue, E. and Wakker, P. P. (2001). On the intuition of rank-dependent utility. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 23:281-298.
- Fehr-Duda, H. and Epper, T. (2012). Probability and risk: Foundations and economic implications of probabilitydependent risk preferences. Annu. Rev. Econ. , 4(1):567-593.
- Fox, C. R. and Poldrack, R. A. (2014). Prospect theory and the brain. In Neuroeconomics: Decision making and the brain, 2nd ed. , pages 533-567. Elsevier.
- Gonzalez, R. and Wu, G. (1999). On the shape of the probability weighting function. Cognitive psychology , 38(1):129-166.
- Grippo, L. and Sciandrone, M. (2023). Introduction to Methods for Nonlinear Optimization . Springer.
- Grishina, N., Lucas, C., and Date, P. (2017). Prospect theory-based portfolio optimization: an empirical study and analysis using intelligent algorithms. Quantitative Finance , 17(3):353-367.
- He, X. D. and Zhou, X. Y. (2011). Portfolio choice under cumulative prospect theory: An analytical treatment. Management Science , 57(2):315-331.
- Hens, T. and Bachmann, K. (2008). Behavioural finance for private banking . The Wiley Finance Series. Wiley-Blackwell, Hoboken, NJ.

- Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E. U., and Erev, I. (2004). Decisions from experience and the effect of rare events in risky choice. Psychological science , 15(8):534-539.
- Humphrey, S. J. (1995). Regret aversion or event-splitting effects? more evidence under risk and uncertainty. Journal of risk and uncertainty , 11:263-274.
- Hurwicz, L. (1951). Optimality criteria for decision making under ignorance. Technical report, Cowles Commission discussion paper, statistics.
- Kahneman, D. and Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica , 47(2):263-291.
- Karni, E. and Safra, Z. (1987). 'Preference reversal' and the observability of preferences by experimental methods. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pages 675-685.
- Keeney, R. L., Raiffa, H., and Meyer, R. F. (1993). Decisions with multiple objectives: preferences and value trade-offs . Cambridge University Press.
- Konno, H. and Yamazaki, H. (1991). Mean-Absolute Deviation Portfolio Optimization Model and Its Applications to Tokyo Stock Market. Management Science , 37(5):519-531.
- Levy, H. and Levy, M. (2003). Prospect Theory and Mean-Variance Analysis. The Review of Financial Studies , 17(4):1015-1041.
- Levy, M. and Levy, H. (2002). Prospect theory: much ado about nothing? Management Science , 48(10):1334-1349.
- Lopes, L. L. and Oden, G. C. (1999). The role of aspiration level in risky choice: A comparison of cumulative prospect theory and SP/A theory. Journal of mathematical psychology , 43(2):286-313.
- Luce, R. D. (2001). Reduction invariance and Prelec's weighting functions. Journal of Mathematical Psychology , 45(1):167-179.
- Luce, R. D. (2014). Utility of gains and losses: Measurement-theoretical and experimental approaches . Psychology Press.
- Luce, R. D., Ng, C., Marley, A., and Aczél, J. (2008). Utility of gambling II: Risk, paradoxes, and data. Economic Theory , 36:165-187.
- Machina, M. J. (1982). 'Expected Utility' Analysis without the Independence Axiom. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pages 277-323.
- Mansini, R., Ogryczak, W., and Speranza, M. G. (2007). Conditional value at risk and related linear programming models for portfolio optimization. Annals of Operations Research , 152(1):227-256.
- Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio selection. The Journal of Finance , 7(1):77-91.
- Markowitz, H. (1959). Portfolio selection: Efficient diversification of investments . Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics at Yale University, Monograph 16. John Wiley &amp; Sons Inc., New York.
- Marley, A. A. and Luce, R. D. (2005). Independence properties vis-à-vis several utility representations. Theory and decision , 58:77-143.
- Mehra, R. and Prescott, E. C. (1985). The equity premium: A puzzle. Journal of monetary Economics , 15(2):145-161.
- Neilson, W. and Stowe, J. (2002). A further examination of cumulative prospect theory parameterizations. Journal of risk and uncertainty , 24:31-46.
- Payne, J. W. (2005). It is whether you win or lose: The importance of the overall probabilities of winning or losing in risky choice. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 30:5-19.
- Phillips, P. P. and Phillips, J. J. (2005). Return on investment (ROI) basics . American Society for Training and Development.
- Pirvu, T. A. and Schulze, K. (2012). Multi-stock portfolio optimization under prospect theory. Mathematics and Financial Economics , 6(4):337-362.

- Prelec, D. (1998). The probability weighting function. Econometrica , pages 497-527.
- Quiggin, J. (2012). Generalized expected utility theory: The rank-dependent model . Springer Science &amp; Business Media.
- Rhoades, S. A. (1993). The herfindahl-hirschman index. Fed. Res. Bull. , 79:188.
- Rockafellar, R. T., Uryasev, S., and Zabarankin, M. (2006). Generalized deviations in risk analysis. Finance and Stochastics , 10:51-74.
- Schmeidler, D. (1989). Subjective probability and expected utility without additivity. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pages 571-587.
- Sharpe, W. F. (1966). Mutual fund performance. The Journal of business , 39(1):119-138.
- Sharpe, W. F. (1998). The sharpe ratio. Streetwise-the Best of the Journal of Portfolio Management , 3:169-185.
- Sortino, F. A. and Satchell, S. (2001). Managing downside risk in financial markets . Butterworth-Heinemann.
- Starmer, C. (2000). Developments in non-expected utility theory: The hunt for a descriptive theory of choice under risk. Journal of economic literature , 38(2):332-382.
- Starmer, C. and Sugden, R. (1989). Violations of the independence axion in common ratio problems: An experimental test of some competing hypotheses. Annals of Operations Research , 19(1):79-102.
- Starmer, C. and Sugden, R. (1993). Testing for juxtaposition and event-splitting effects. Journal of risk and uncertainty , 6(3):235-254.
- Sun, L. (2009). Loss aversion in prospect theory.
- Tversky, A. and Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of Uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 5(4):297-323.
- Tversky, A. and Wakker, P. (1995). Risk attitudes and decision weights. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pages 1255-1280.
- Viscusi, W. K. (1989). Prospective reference theory: Toward an explanation of the paradoxes. Journal of risk and uncertainty , 2:235-263.
- von Neumann, J., Morgenstern, O., and Rubinstein, A. (1944). Theory of Games and Economic Behavior . Princeton University Press.
- Wakker, P. (1994). Separating marginal utility and probabilistic risk aversion. Theory and decision , 36:1-44.
- Wakker, P. (1996). The sure-thing principle and the comonotonic sure-thing principle: An axiomatic analysis. Journal of mathematical Economics , 25(2):213-227.
- Wakker, P., Erev, I., and Weber, E. U. (1994). Comonotonic independence: The critical test between classical and rank-dependent utility theories. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 9:195-230.
- Wakker, P. P. (2001). Testing and characterizing properties of nonadditive measures through violations of the sure-thing principle. Econometrica , 69(4):1039-1059.
- Wakker, P. P. (2010). Prospect theory: For risk and ambiguity . Cambridge university press.
- Weber, E. and Kirsner, B. (1997). Reasons for rank-dependent utility evaluation. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 14:41-61.
- Wu, G. and Gonzalez, R. (1996). Curvature of the probability weighting function. Management science , 42(12):16761690.
- Wu, G. and Gonzalez, R. (1998). Common consequence conditions in decision making under risk. Journal of Risk and uncertainty , 16:115-139.

- Wu, G. and Gonzalez, R. (1999). Nonlinear decision weights in choice under uncertainty. Management science , 45(1):7485.
- Wu, G. and Markle, A. B. (2008). An empirical test of gain-loss separability in prospect theory. Management Science , 54(7):1322-1335.
- Wu, G., Zhang, J., and Abdellaoui, M. (2005). Testing prospect theories using probability tradeoff consistency. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 30(2):107-131.
- Wu, G., Zhang, J., and Gonzalez, R. (2004). Decision under risk. In Blackwell handbook of judgment and decision making , pages 399-423. Oxford University Press.
- Yaari, M. E. (1987). The dual theory of choice under risk. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pages 95-115.