## One-shot entanglement assisted classical and quantum communication over noisy quantum channels: A hypothesis testing and convex split approach

Anurag Anshu ∗

Rahul Jain †

Naqueeb Ahmad Warsi ‡

November 10, 2017

## Abstract

Capacity of a quantum channel characterizes the limits of reliable communication through a noisy quantum channel. This fundamental information theoretic question is very well studied specially in the setting of many independent uses of the channel. An important scenario, both from practical and conceptual point of view, is when the channel can be used only once. This is known as the one-shot channel coding problem. We provide a tight characterization of the one-shot entanglement assisted classical capacity of a quantum channel. We arrive at our result by introducing a simple decoding technique which we refer to as position-based decoding . We also consider two other important quantum network scenarios: quantum channel with a jammer and quantum broadcast channel. For these problems, we use the recently introduced convex split technique [1] in addition to position based decoding. Our approach exhibits that the simultaneous use of these two techniques provides a uniform and conceptually simple framework for designing communication protocols for quantum networks.

## 1 Introduction

A classical description of our world entails several limitations on what can be achieved physically. Law of conservation of energy prevents energy to be created out of nothing, thermodynamics disallows machines with efficiency beyond the Carnot's limit, inertia restrains motion when there is no force as a motive. These limitations have been so pivotal in the scientific revolution that they can now be found even in the laws of information (Landauer's principle [2], Shannon's capacity theorem [3]) and computation (Turing's halting theorem [4], P vs NP conjecture [5]). Their knowledge allows us to optimize our efforts as we seek the best possible results.

The theory of quantum information and computation, aided with the power of entanglement, opens up new possibilities. Bell's landmark theorem [6] tells us that quantum systems possess correlations that go beyond those achievable by classical means. Shor's algorithm [7] shows how a quantum computer can perform integer factoring exponentially faster than known classical algorithms. Quantum cryptography offers protocols which achieve information theoretic security in the task of key distribution [8]. As these results begin to point to a physical reality that surpasses some well known boundaries in classical physics and computing, a fundamental technological limitation is brought upon us, quite ironically, by quantum entanglement itself. This is the limitation imposed by quantum noise.

Quantum noise, also known as a quantum channel , describes the process by which a quantum particle (possessed by an experimenter) gets correlated or entangled with the environment (upon which experimenter has no control). This can be particularly unsuitable when two experimenters wish to send messages to each other and the intermediate channel has noisy behavior. Efforts to understand and mitigate quantum noise have largely developed on two fronts: communication through a quantum channel (starting from the work of Holevo [9] and Schumacher and Westmoreland [10]) and quantum error correction (starting from the work of Shor [11]).

∗ Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore, Singapore. a0109169@u.nus.edu

† Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore and MajuLab, UMI 3654, Singapore. rahul@comp.nus.edu.sg

‡ Centre for Quantum Technologies and SPMS, NTU, Singapore and IIITD, Delhi. warsi.naqueeb@gmail.com

Here, we consider the case of communication through a quantum channel, and more specifically, the entanglement assisted classical capacity of a quantum channel. Entanglement assistance, a widely used terminology for communicating with the help of entanglement shared between Alice (sender) and Bob (receiver), leads to two very important protocols in quantum information theory. Quantum teleportation [12] allows Alice to send a qubit to Bob using two bits of classical communication and superdense coding [13] allows Alice to send two bits of message with one qubit. These two protocols strongly suggest that the presence of entanglement (upon which Alice and Bob have full control) can play important role in the process of reliable communication through a quantum channel.

Bennett et al. [14] characterized the limits of classical communication over a noisy quantum channel when the sender and receiver share entanglement between them. They studied the case where Alice was allowed to use the channel arbitrarily many times and after each use, the channel had no memory of this use. In practice however there could be several issues, for example the channel between Alice and Bob may not be memoryless and Alice may even be forced to use the channel only once (this has been a driving force behind the emerging field of one-shot information theory). Often there are more than one sender and receiver. For example, a quantum satellite may be beaming back information simultaneously to different base stations on earth, and these base stations may have no way of reliable collaboration between themselves. Sometimes the receiver may not have a complete knowledge of the channel characteristics, such as in the case of a quantum communication channel with an adversary or a jammer.

We consider each of the scenarios mentioned above and provide a unified approach for designing communication protocols for them. We use two ingredients in our protocols: the technique of position based decoding that we introduce for the protocol described in Figure 2, and the technique of convex split (introduced in [1], discussed in our context for the protocols described in Figures 4 and 6). Position based decoding (where the term decoding refers to the strategy performed by the receiver) allows the receiver to accomplish the task of quantum hypothesis testing . In a communication protocol between Alice and Bob, as Alice sends messages to Bob through the channel, different quantum states are formed on Bob's side as a function of the message Alice has sent. Bob, who does not know the message, should be able to distinguish between these quantum states in order to learn the message. A simplification of this problem is the task of quantum hypothesis testing, where Bob should be able to distinguish between two possible quantum states with small error. Position based decoding allows Bob to distinguish between many possible quantum states that may arise from Alice's messages, if he is able to distinguish between two given quantum states.

Point to point case: The first protocol we design concerns point to point quantum channels, where there are two parties Alice (sender) and Bob (receiver). Alice, who is allowed to use the channel only once, wants to communicate message m chosen with some a priori distribution from the set [1 : 2 R ] to Bob across the quantum channel N A → B such that Bob is able to guess the correct message with probability at least 1 -ε ( ε is a small constant). This we refer to as an ( R,ε ) entanglement assisted code for the quantum channel N A → B . The goal here is to determine largest possible value of R (the amount of reliable communication in bits between Alice and Bob). Figure 2 gives a schematic of our protocol for this scenario. We show that the largest possible value of R is quantified in terms of the hypothesis testing divergence . Given two quantum states ρ and σ , the hypothesis testing divergence D ε H ( ρ ‖ σ ) captures the probability that an experimenter, who only wishes to accept ρ , ends up accepting σ . Formally, it is defined as D ε H ( ρ ‖ σ ) := max Λ:Tr(Λ ρ ) ≥ 1 -ε log 1 Tr(Λ σ ) , where 0 ≺ Λ ⪯ I is a positive operator. Using this quantity, our main theorem is as follows, which is discussed in detail in Section 3.

Theorem 1. Let N A → B be the quantum channel and let ε, δ ∈ (0 , 1) . Let A ′ ≡ A be a purifying register. Then, for any R smaller than

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

there exists an ( R, 2 ε +2 δ ) entanglement assisted code for the quantum channel N A → B .

Outline of the protocol: Fix a quantum state | ψ 〉 AA ′ . Alice and Bob share 2 D ε H ( N A → B ( ψ A ′ A ) ‖N A → B ( ψ A ) ⊗ ψ A ′ ) independent copies of the state | ψ 〉 A ′ A , where the register A is held by Alice and the register A ′ is held by Bob. Each of these

̸

copies are uniquely assigned to a message m ∈ [1 : 2 R ] . This assignment is known to both Alice and Bob. To send the message m, Alice transmits her part of the m -th copy of the shared state over the channel. Notice that at the end of this transmission the joint state between the m -th register of Bob and the channel output is N A → B ( ψ AA ′ ) and the joint state for every other register j = m and the channel output is N A → B ( ψ A ) ⊗ ψ A ′ . Thus, if Bob is equipped with a binary measurement Λ (obtained from the definition of D ε H ( N A → B ( ψ AA ′ ) ‖N A → B ( ψ A ) ⊗ ψ A ′ ) ) which can differentiate the state N A → B ( ψ AA ′ ) from N A → B ( ψ A ) ⊗ ψ A ′ , then he can design his (multiple outcome) decoding measurement as follows. His measurement operator corresponding to the outcome m is Λ ⊗ I , where Λ acts only on the channel output B and the m -th copy of A ′ and I is the identity operator on the rest of Bob's registers. We term this decoding strategy as position based decoding . Our protocol discussed above guarantees that Alice can communicate with Bob max | ψ 〉〈 ψ | AA ′ D ε H ( N A → B ( ψ AA ′ ) ‖N A → B ( ψ A ) ⊗ ψ A ′ ) + O (log( ε )) bits. This rate is also near optimal, owing to the converse bound shown in [15].

Resource utilization: The number of qubits of entanglement required in the above one-shot protocol is quite large, and in the asymptotic and i.i.d. setting it can grow exponentially in the number of channel uses. In order to reduce the number of qubits of the shared entanglement, we make two observations. First is that our one-shot protocol consumes only one copy of the shared entanglement and returns the rest with very small error. Thus, a large part of the shared entanglement serves as a catalyst . The second observation, motivated by the work [16] and made precise in Theorem 3 (Section 4) below, is that the entanglement can be efficiently consumed by encoding the messages in the sets of positions (instead of just one position). Both observations are used in Section 4 to construct an appropriate asymptotic and i.i.d. version of the position-based decoding. This leads to a protocol that has the same rate of communication and the rate of required entanglement as the protocol constructed in [14].

Gel'fand-Pinsker Channel: Our second protocol concerns communication in the presence of a malicious jammer, where Alice is aware of this jammer, whereas Bob has no information about this jammer. This model was analyzed in the classical case by Gel'fand-Pinsker in their seminal work [17]. The formal setting in the quantum case is as follows (see, for example, [18]): Alice shares an entangled state | φ 〉 S ′ S with the channel itself, where the register S ′ is held by Alice and the register S is held by the channel. Unlike in the point to point case, the channel (represented by N AS → B ) takes as input both S and A . Alice wants to communicate message m chosen from the set [1 : 2 R ] to Bob across the quantum channel N AS → B . It is quite natural to expect that because of the absence of the knowledge of register S at Bob's side, the value of R (the amount of reliable communication in bits between Alice and Bob) will be smaller than the one achieved for the point to point channel. A schematic of our protocol for this task is presented in Figure 4 and details appear in Section 5.

Outline of the Protocol: Fix a state ψ A ′ SA such that ψ S = φ S . At the start of the protocol Alice and Bob share 2 D ε H ( N AS → B ( ψ A ′ SA ) ‖N AS → B ( ψ AS ) ⊗ ψ A ′ ) independent copies of the state | ψ 〉 A ′′ A ′ where the register A ′′ is held by Alice and A ′ by Bob ( | ψ 〉 A ′′ A ′ is a purification of ψ A ′ ). These copies are subdivided into bands of equal size 2 ˜ I ε max ( A : S ) ψ A ′ SA . There is a unique band B ( m ) for each message m ∈ [1 : 2 R ] . To send the message m , Alice creates the state (close to) ψ A ′ SA in the register A in her possession, the register S with the jammer and a random register A ′ in the band B ( m ) , using the convex split technique (along with Uhlmann's theorem) . Alice then transmits the register A over the channel. Now, using position based decoding, Bob is able to decode the correct message with high probability. Thus, Alice is able to communicate D ε H ( N AS → B ( ψ A ′ SA ) ‖N AS → B ( ψ AS ) ⊗ ψ A ′ ) -˜ I ε max ( A : S ) ψ A ′ SA bits to Bob.

Quantum Broadcast Channel : The final case that we consider is that of quantum broadcast channel studied in the classical case (among others) by Marton in her seminal work [19]. Here, Alice wishes to communicate message m 1 to Bob and message m 2 to Charlie simultaneously. While Bob and Charlie are not allowed to collaborate with each other, the noisy channel may give correlated output to them, which makes the setting different from two independent cases of point to point channel. The channel N F → BC takes input F from Alice and produces outputs B (with Bob) and C (with Charlie).

Our protocol for this task is again based on similar framework of using convex split technique and position based decoding. Convex split technique is used by Alice to establish an appropriate correlated state between Bob, Charlie and the channel output, following which Bob and Charlie perform position based decoding on their respective shares of this correlated state. A schematic of our protocol is discussed in Figure 6 and details appear in Section 6

Outline of the Protocol: Fix a state ψ FA 1 A 2 . At the start of the protocol Alice and Bob share

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

independent copies of the state | ψ 〉 A ′ 1 A 1 where the register A ′ 1 is held by Alice and A 1 by Bob ( | ψ 〉 A ′ 1 A 1 is a purification of ψ A 1 ). These copies are subdivided into bands of equal sizes, where each band is uniquely assigned to a message m 1 ∈ [1 : 2 R 1 ] . Similarly, Alice and Charlie share

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

independent copies of the state | ψ 〉 A ′ 2 A 2 where the register A ′ 2 is held by Alice and A 2 by Charlie ( | ψ 〉 A ′ 2 A 2 is a purification of ψ A 2 ). These copies are subdivided into bands of equal sizes where each band is uniquely assigned to a message m 2 ∈ [1 : 2 R 2 ] . The constraint on the band size is that for every ( m 1 , m 2 ) ∈ [1 : 2 R 1 ] × [1 : 2 R 2 ] , we have |B ( m 1 ) |×|C ( m 2 ) | = 2 ¯ I ε,δ max ( A 1 : A 2 ) ψ A 1 A 2 , where B ( m 1 ) is the band corresponding to the message m 1 and likewise C ( m 2 ) for the message m 2 . To send the message pair ( m 1 , m 2 ) Alice uses the convex split technique (along with Uhlmann's theorem) to prepare the state ψ FA 1 A 2 , where register F is held by Alice, register A 1 is a random register in B ( m 1 ) held by Bob and register A 2 is a random register in C ( m 2 ) held by Charlie. Alice transmits her share F of the state ( ψ FA 1 A 2 ) over the quantum channel N F → BC . On receiving their respective shares of the channel output, Bob and Charlie employ the position based decoding to output their respective messages.

## Comparision to previous works

These tasks have been studied previously in classical and quantum one-shot and asymptotic settings. The works [20, 18, 21] obtained a bound for point-to-point entanglement assisted quantum channel. However, their bounds do not match the converse result obtained in [15]. The quantum Gel'fand-Pinsker channel and quantum broadcast channel were studied in [18] where they obtained one-shot bounds different from ours (their bounds and our bounds converge in the asymptotic i.i.d case). An important feature of our one-shot bounds is that their forms bear close resemblance to the known results in the classical and classical-quantum settings, for example, for the point-to-point channel [22], broadcast channel [23] and Gelf'and-Pinsker channel [24, 25]. Such is not the case with the bounds obtained in the aforementioned works on one-shot entanglement assisted quantum capacities. Another important point is that most of the previous works including [20, 18] used the technique of decoupling through random unitaries to obtain their bounds, which is different from our techniques.

Classical analogues of our proof techniques of convex-split and position-based decoding have recently been presented in [26]. Using these, we can obtain analogous results for classical versions of all the tasks considered in this paper. In the classical case, it is in fact possible to remove shared randomness by standard derandomization arguments (in the setting of average error for a prior distribution over the messages, instead of worst case error).

## 2 Preliminaries

Consider a finite dimensional Hilbert space H endowed with an inner product 〈· , ·〉 (in this paper, we only consider finite dimensional Hilbert-spaces). The ℓ 1 norm of an operator X on H is ‖ X ‖ 1 := Tr √ X † X and ℓ 2 norm is ‖ X ‖ 2 := √ Tr XX † . A quantum state (or a density matrix or a state) is a positive semi-definite matrix on H with trace equal to 1 . It is called pure if and only if its rank is 1 . A sub-normalized state is a positive semi-definite matrix on H with trace less than or equal to 1 . Let | ψ 〉 be a unit vector on H , that is 〈 ψ, ψ 〉 = 1 . With some abuse of notation, we use ψ to represent the state and also the density matrix | ψ 〉〈 ψ | , associated with | ψ 〉 . Given a quantum state ρ on H , support of ρ , called supp ( ρ ) is the subspace of H spanned by all eigen-vectors of ρ with non-zero eigenvalues.

A quantum register A is associated with some Hilbert space H A . Define | A | := dim( H A ) . Let L ( A ) represent the set of all linear operators on H A . Let P ( A ) represent the set of all positive semidefinite operators on H A . We denote by D ( A ) , the set of quantum states on the Hilbert space H A . State ρ with subscript A indicates ρ A ∈ D ( A ) . If two registers A,B are associated with the same Hilbert space, we shall represent the relation by A ≡ B . Composition of two registers A and B , denoted AB , is associated with Hilbert space H A ⊗H B . For two quantum states ρ ∈ D ( A ) and σ ∈ D ( B ) , ρ ⊗ σ ∈ D ( AB ) represents the tensor product (Kronecker product) of ρ and σ . The identity operator on H A (and associated register A ) is denoted I A . For any operator O on H A , we denote by { O } + the subspace spanned by non-negative eigenvalues of O and by { O } -the subspace spanned by negative eigenvalues of O . For a positive semidefinite operator M ∈ P ( A ) , the largest and smallest non-zero eigenvalues of M are denoted by λ max ( M ) and λ min ( M ) , respectively.

Let ρ AB ∈ D ( AB ) . We define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where {| i 〉} i is an orthonormal basis for the Hilbert space H A . The state ρ B ∈ D ( B ) is referred to as the marginal state of ρ AB . Unless otherwise stated, a missing register from subscript in a state will represent partial trace over that register. Given a ρ A ∈ D ( A ) , a purification of ρ A is a pure state ρ AB ∈ D ( AB ) such that Tr Bρ AB = ρ A . Purification of a quantum state is not unique.

Aquantum map E : L ( A ) →L ( B ) is a completely positive and trace preserving (CPTP) linear map (mapping states in D ( A ) to states in D ( B ) ). A unitary operator U A : H A → H A is such that U † A U A = U A U † A = I A . An isometry V : H A → H B is such that V † V = I A and V V † = I B . The set of all unitary operations on register A is denoted by U ( A ) .

Definition 1. We shall consider the following information theoretic quantities. Reader is referred to [27, 28, 29, 30, 31] for many of these definitions. We consider only normalized states in the definitions below. Let ε ≥ 0 .

1. Fidelity For ρ A , σ A ∈ D ( A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For classical probability distributions P = { p i } , Q = { q i } ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

2. Purified distance For ρ A , σ A ∈ D ( A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

3. ε -ball For ρ A ∈ D ( A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

4. Von-Neumann entropy For ρ A ∈ D ( A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

5. Relative entropy For ρ A , σ A ∈ D ( A ) such that supp ( ρ A ) ⊂ supp ( σ A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

6. Relative entropy variance For ρ A , σ A ∈ D ( A ) such that supp ( ρ A ) ⊂ supp ( σ A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

7. Max-relative entropy For ρ A , σ A ∈ P ( A ) such that supp ( ρ A ) ⊂ supp ( σ A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

8. Smooth max-relative entropy For ρ A ∈ D ( A ) , σ A ∈ P ( A ) such that supp ( ρ A ) ⊂ supp ( σ A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

9. Smooth min-relative entropy For ρ A ∈ D ( A ) , σ A ∈ P ( A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

10. Information spectrum relative entropy For ρ A ∈ D ( A ) , σ A ∈ P ( A ) such that supp ( ρ A ) ⊂ supp ( σ A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

11. Information spectrum relative entropy [Alternate definition] For ρ A ∈ D ( A ) , σ A ∈ P ( A ) such that supp ( ρ A ) ⊂ supp ( σ A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

12. Max-information For ρ AB ∈ D ( AB ) , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

13. Smooth max-information For ρ AB ∈ D ( AB ) , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

14. Smooth max-information [Alternate definition] For ρ AB ∈ D ( AB ) , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

15. Restricted smooth max-information For ρ AB ∈ D ( AB ) , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We will use the following facts.

- Fact 1 (Triangle inequality for purified distance, [29]) . For states ρ A , σ A , τ A ∈ D ( A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fact 2 (Monotonicity under quantum operations, [32],[33]) . For quantum states ρ , σ ∈ D ( A ) , and quantum operation E ( · ) : L ( A ) →L ( B ) , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, for bipartite states ρ AB , σ AB ∈ D ( AB ) , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fact 3 (Uhlmann's Theorem, [34]) . Let ρ A , σ A ∈ D ( A ) . Let ρ AB ∈ D ( AB ) be a purification of ρ A and | σ 〉 AC ∈ D ( AC ) be a purification of σ A . There exists an isometry V : C → B such that,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where | θ 〉 AB = (I A ⊗ V ) | σ 〉 AC .

Fact 4 (Pinsker's inequality, [35]) . For quantum states ρ A , σ A ∈ D ( A ) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fact 5 (Alicki-Fannes inequality, [36]) . Given bipartite quantum states ρ AB , σ AB ∈ D ( AB ) , and P( ρ AB , ρ AB ) = ε ≤ 1 2e , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fact 6 (Triangle property of smooth max- relative entropy) . For ρ A ∈ D ( A ) , σ A , τ A ∈ P ( A ) , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let k def = D max ( σ A ‖ τ A ) , which implies that σ A ≤ 2 k τ A . Let ρ ′ A ∈ B ε ( ρ A ) be the state achieving the infimum in R def = D ε max ( ρ A ‖ σ A ) . Then ρ ′ A ≤ 2 R σ A ≤ 2 R + k τ A . This implies that D max ( ρ ′ A ‖ τ A ) ≤ R + k , which concludes the fact using the inequality D ε max ( ρ A ‖ τ A ) ≤ D max ( ρ ′ A ‖ τ A ) .

Fact 7 (Gentle measurement lemma,[37, 38]) . Let ρ be a quantum state and 0 &lt; A &lt; I be an operator. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let | ρ 〉 be a purification of ρ . Then (I ⊗ A ) | ρ 〉 is a purification of AρA . Now, applying monotonicity of fidelity under quantum operations (Fact 2), we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In last inequality, we have used A &gt; A 2 .

Fact 8 (Hayashi-Nagaoka inequality, [39]) . Let 0 &lt; S &lt; I , T be positive semi-definite operators. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fact 9 ([31, 40]) . Let ε ∈ (0 , 1) and n be an integer. Let ρ ⊗ n , σ ⊗ n be quantum states. Define Φ( x ) = ∫ x -∞ e -t 2 / 2 √ 2 π dt . It holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and Fact 10. For the function Φ( x ) = ∫ x -∞ e -t 2 / 2 √ 2 π dt and ε ≤ 1 2 , it holds that | Φ -1 ( ε ) | ≤ 2 √ log 1 2 ε .

Proof. We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, Φ -1 ( ε ) ≥ -2 √ log 1 2 ε

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Following fact says that if a collection of quantum operations do not change a given state much, then successive application of them brings limited change.

Fact 11 (Fact 21, [41]) . Let ρ 1 be a quantum state and {E 2 , E 3 , . . . } be a collection of quantum maps. Define a series of quantum states { ρ 2 , ρ 3 , . . . } recursively as ρ i = E i ( ρ i -1 ) . It holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We shall also need the following series of results, that are central to our achievability approach.

Fact 12 ( [1]) . Let µ 1 , µ 2 , . . . µ n , θ be quantum states and { p 1 , p 2 , . . . p n } be a probability distribution. Let µ = ∑ i p i µ i be the average state. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 1. Let ρ and σ be quantum states. Then, for every let 0 &lt; Λ &lt; I be an operator,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let θ, φ ∈ [0 , π 2 ] be such that Tr[Λ ρ ] := cos( θ ) and Tr[Λ σ ] := cos( φ ) . Thus, using monotonicity of fidelity we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last inequality follows because of the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the inequality above follows because θ, φ ∈ [0 , π 2 ] . The claim of the Lemma now follows from (1) and the relation between the purified distance and fidelity between two quantum states.

Lemma 2 (Convex-split lemma,[1]) . Let ρ PQ ∈ D ( PQ ) and σ Q ∈ D ( Q ) be quantum states such that supp ( ρ Q ) ⊂ supp ( σ Q ) . Let k def = D max ( ρ PQ ‖ ρ P ⊗ σ Q ) . Define the following state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

on n +1 registers P, Q 1 , Q 2 , . . . Q n , where ∀ j ∈ [ n ] : ρ PQ j = ρ PQ and σ Q j = σ Q . Then for δ ∈ (0 , 1) and n = ⌈ 2 k δ 2 ⌉ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have the following corollary of above lemma.

Corollary 1 (Corollary of convex-split lemma) . For an ε &gt; 0 . Let ρ PQ ∈ D ( PQ ) and σ Q ∈ D ( Q ) be quantum states such that supp ( ρ Q ) ⊂ supp ( σ Q ) . Let k def = inf ρ ′ ∈B ε ( ρ PQ ) D max ( ρ ′ PQ ∥ ∥ ∥ ρ ′ P ⊗ σ Q ) . Define the following state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

on n +1 registers P, Q 1 , Q 2 , . . . Q n , where ∀ j ∈ [ n ] : ρ PQ j = ρ PQ and σ Q j = σ Q . For δ ∈ (0 , 1) and n = ⌈ 2 k δ 2 ⌉ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let ρ ′ PQ be the state achieving infimum in

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It holds that P( ρ PQ , ρ ′ PQ ) ≤ ε. Define the state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then by convex-split lemma, and the choice of n , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, using the concavity of fidelity (Theorem 9 . 7 , [42] ), P( τ ′ PQ 1 Q 2 ...Q n , τ PQ 1 Q 2 ...Q n ) ≤ P( ρ ′ PQ , ρ PQ ) ≤ ε . Similarly, P( τ ′ P , τ P ) = P( τ ′ P , ρ P ) ≤ ε . Thus, by triangle inequality for purified distance (Fact 1),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We will use the following new version of the convex split lemma.

Lemma 3 (Bi-partite convex-split lemma) . Let ρ PQ ∈ D ( PQ ) be a quantum state, ε, δ &gt; 0 and k def = ¯ I ε,δ max ( P : Q ) ρ . Choose integers n, m &gt; 1 δ and define the following state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

on registers P 1 , P 2 . . . P m , Q 1 , Q 2 , . . . Q n , where ∀ i, j ∈ [ n ] : ρ P i Q j = ρ PQ , ρ P i = ρ P and ρ Q j = ρ Q . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, if it is possible to further choose n, m such that n · m ≥ ⌈ 2 k δ ⌉ , we find that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof closely follows the original proof of convex split lemma from [1].

Proof. Let ρ ′ PQ be the quantum state achieving the optimum in the definition of ¯ I ε,δ max ( P : Q ) ρ . We shall work with the state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define,

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, we from Fact 12 we have the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that,

D ( ρ ′ P i Q j ⊗ ρ -( i,j ) ∥ ∥ ∥ ρ ) = D ( ρ ′ P i Q j ∥ ∥ ∥ ρ P i ⊗ ρ Q j ) and D ( ρ ′ P i Q j ⊗ ρ -( i,j ) ∥ ∥ ∥ τ ′ P 1 P 2 ...P m Q 1 Q 2 ...Q n ) ≥ D ( ρ ′ P i Q j ∥ ∥ ∥ τ ′ P i Q j ) ,

as relative entropy decreases under partial trace. Further,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By assumption, ρ ′ P i Q j ≤ 2 k ρ P i ⊗ ρ Q j , ρ ′ P i ≤ (1+ δ ) ρ P i , ρ ′ Q i ≤ (1+ δ ) ρ Q i . Hence τ ′ P i Q j ≤ (1+ 1+ δ n + 1+ δ m + 2 k -1 n · m ) ρ P i ⊗ ρ Q j . Since log( · ) is operator monotone, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now have the following upper bound on Equation 2:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the first inequality above follows from (3). Above, the last inequality follows by the choice of n, m . Thus, by Pinsker's inequality (Fact 4), we obtain that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since P( τ ′ P 1 P 2 ...P m Q 1 Q 2 ...Q n , τ P 1 P 2 ...P m Q 1 Q 2 ...Q n ) ≤ P( ρ ′ PQ , ρ PQ ) ≤ ε , triangle inequality for purified distance (Fact 1) shows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This proves first part of the lemma. The second part follows from our choice of n · m .

## 3 Point to point channel

## Description of task

Figure 1: A sketch of general entanglement assisted protocol for point to point channel

<!-- image -->

There are two parties Alice and Bob . Alice wants to communicate a classical message M chosen from [1 : 2 R ] to Bob over a quantum channel such that Bob is able to decode the correct message with probability at least 1 -ε 2 , for all message m . To accomplish this task Alice and Bob also share entanglement between them. Let the input to Alice be given in a register M . We now make the following definition, illustrated in Figure 1:

Definition 2. Let | θ 〉 E A E B be the shared entanglement between Alice and Bob . An ( R,ε ) -entanglement assisted code for the quantum channel N A → B consists of

- An encoding unitary E : ME A → A for Alice .
- A decoding operation D : BE B → M ′ for Bob , with M ′ ≡ M being the output register such that for all m ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

## An achievability protocol

We show the following result.

Theorem 2 (Restatement of Theorem 1) . Let N A → B be the quantum channel and let ε, δ ∈ (0 , 1) . Let A ′ ≡ A be a purifying register. Then, for any R satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

there exists an ( R, 2 ε +2 δ ) entanglement assisted code for the quantum channel N A → B .

Figure 2: A schematic for the achievability protocol. Upon receiving the message m , Alice sends the m -th register in the entanglement through the channel to Bob .

<!-- image -->

Proof. Fix ψ AA ′ and R as given in Equation 4. Introduce the registers A 1 , A 2 , . . . A 2 R , such that A i ≡ A and A ′ 1 , A ′ 2 , . . . A ′ 2 R such that A ′ i ≡ A ′ . Alice and Bob share the state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Alice holds the registers A 1 , A 2 , · · · , A 2 R and Bob holds the registers A ′ 1 , A ′ 2 , · · · , A ′ 2 R . Let, 0 ⪯ Π BA ′ ⪯ I be such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our protocol is as follows (see also Figure 2):

Encoding: Alice on receiving the message m ∈ [1 : 2 R ] sends the register A m over the channel. Notice that after this transmission over the channel the state in Bob 's possession is the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, notice that ˆ Θ BA ′ j state between the register A ′ j and the channel output B is the following

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Decoding: For each m ∈ [1 : 2 nR ] , we have the operators Π A ′ m as defined in (5). Using this, we define for each m ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The decoding POVM element corresponding to m is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is easy to observe that ∑ m Ω( m ) = I , and hence it forms a valid POVM.

̸

Probability of error: Let M be the message which was transmitted by Alice using the strategy above and let M ′ be the decoded message by Bob using the above mentioned decoding POVMs. Notice that by the symmetry of the encoding and decoding strategy, it is enough to show that Pr { M ′ = 1 | M = 1 } ≤ 2 ε +4 δ , under the event that M = 1 is the transmitted message.

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where a follows from Hayashi-Nagaoka operator inequality (Fact 8); b follows from the definition of Λ( m ) , and from the definition of Π BA ′ and c follows from the choice of R as mentioned in the Theorem. This completes the proof.

For the same task without shared entanglement, we run the same protocol in which the state ψ AA ′ is classicalquantum with A ′ being classical, which is held by Bob . We can fix the classical part and obtain a protocol without shared entanglement, for average bounded error under a given input distribution.

## 4 Asymptotic and i.i.d. case and its resource requirement

In the asymptotic and i.i.d. case, we are allowed many uses of the channel. A naive application of Theorem 2 shows that the amount of resource required is exponentially large in the number of channel use. Here, we shall develop an appropriate asymptotic and i.i.d. version of the position-based decoding and use it to construct an entanglement assisted code with its resource requirement matching that of [14]. To measure the performance of this code, we define the rate of communication and the rate of entanglement required in a protocol.

Definition 3. A pair ( R,E ) is an achievable pair of communication rate and entanglement rate for the quantum channel N A → B , if for every ε, δ ∈ (0 , 1) , there exists a large enough n such that there exists an ( n ( R -δ ) , ε ) -entanglement assisted code for the quantum channel N ⊗ n A → B with the number of qubits of pre-shared entanglement required at most n ( E + δ ) .

We will need some notations for our analysis. Let S n,w be the set of all subsets of { 1 , 2 , . . . w } of size n . For an s ∈ S n,w , let s ( i ) be the i -th element of s , when s is in ascending order. Further, let ¯ s be the complement of s , which is a subset of size w -n . Let ¯ s ( i ) represent the i -th element of ¯ s , when ¯ s is in ascending order.

The following theorem shall be used later to construct a protocol for entanglement assisted communication over a quantum channel N A → B in the asymptotic and i.i.d. setting, with the pair ( R,E ) in Definition 3 matching with that of [14]. It is partly inspired by the work [16].

Theorem 3. Let N A → B be the quantum channel, ε ∈ (0 , 1 7 ) and positive integers n, w such that w &gt; 2 n . Let A ′ ≡ A be a purifying register. Then, for any quantum state ψ AA ′ and any R satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

there exists a ( nR, 7 ε ) -entanglement assisted code for the quantum channel N ⊗ n A → B . The protocol requires w copies of ψ AA ′ as shared entanglement. The number of bits of shared randomness used in the protocol is at most nR + n log w .

Proof. Let ψ AA ′ be the quantum state as given in the statement. Define F := D max ( ψ AA ′ ‖ ψ A ⊗ ψ A ′ ) . Let Π B n A ′ n (where B n , A ′ n are n copies of B,A ′ respectively) be defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Alice and Bob share w copies of ψ AA ′ in registers A 1 A ′ 1 , A 2 A ′ 2 , . . . A w A ′ w . Additionally, Alice and Bob share the following randomness in registers S 1 , S 2 , . . . S 2 nR ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where | S i | = ( w n ) , s i ∈ S n,w and ¯ q is a pairwise independent probability distribution (that is, ¯ q ( s i , s j ) = ¯ q ( s i )¯ q ( s j ) ) satisfying ¯ q ( s i ) = 1 ( w n ) for all s i .

Encoding: Alice takes a sample from the shared randomness. Let the sample be s 1 , s 2 , . . . s 2 nR . To send the message m ∈ { 1 , 2 , . . . 2 nR } , Alice looks at the set s m and sends the registers A s m (1) , A s m (2) , . . . A s m ( n ) with n uses of the channel.

Further, if Alice sends the message m , the quantum state between Bob's registers and the channel output is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ¯ s is the complement of the set s .

Decoding: Bob takes a sample from the shared randomness. This sample is the same as that obtained by Alice, that is, s 1 , s 2 , . . . s 2 nR . For each m ∈ { 1 , 2 , . . . 2 nR } , define the operator

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The decoding POVM for message m is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is easy to observe that ∑ m Ω( m ) ⪯ I , and hence it forms a valid POVM once the POVM element I -∑ m Ω( m ) (interpreted as 'no outcome') is added.

Probability of error: Let M be the message which was transmitted by Alice using the strategy above and let M ′ be the decoded message by Bob using the above mentioned decoding POVMs. We proceed in a manner similar to the proof of Theorem 2. Consider,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where (1) uses the Hayashi-Nagaoka operator inequality (Fact 8) and (2) uses the pairwise independence of ¯ q . Recalling that

we can substitute

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in Equation 7 to obtain

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

Here, (1) uses Equation 6 and rest of the equations follow by simple analysis. Last inequality follows from the relation 1 + x ≤ 2 x log e . The desired upper bound now follows by the definition of R . The upper bound on the number of bits of shared randomness follows from the explicit construction of pairwise independent random variables given in [43, Section 3].

We observe that in above protocol, only n copies of the shared entanglement (that is, | ψ 〉〈 ψ | AA ′ ) are used and rest of the shared copies are close to the original with fidelity 1 -ε . This shows that rest of the shared copies serve as catalysts . In fact, this observation allows us to prove the following improved result.

Theorem 4. Let n, b be positive integers such that b &lt; n and ε, δ ∈ (0 , 1) . For every quantum state ψ AA ′ , there exists an ( nR,ε ) entanglement assisted code for the channel N ⊗ n A → B , if R satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The code requires w copies of the shared entanglement ψ AA ′ , where w satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The number of bits of shared randomness required is equal to nR + n log w .

Proof of Theorem 4. Fix a quantum state ψ AA ′ . Let n 0 := n b , which is assumed to be an integer without loss of generality. Every message m ∈ { 1 , 2 , . . . 2 nR } can be decomposed as m = m 1 m 2 . . . m b , where each m i ∈ { 1 , 2 , . . . 2 n 0 R } .

Alice and Bob share w copies of ψ AA ′ in the registers A 1 A ′ 1 , . . . A w A ′ w . Additionally, Alice and Bob share b copies of the following randomness in registers S 1 , S 2 , . . . S 2 n 0 R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where | S i | = ( w n 0 ) , s i ∈ S n 0 ,w and ¯ q is a pairwise independent probability distribution satisfying ¯ q ( s i ) = 1 ( w n 0 ) for all s i . Protocol: The protocol proceeds in the following rounds.

- Set i = 1 .
- While i ≤ b :
- Alice and Bob run a ( n 0 R, ε b 3 ) entanglement assisted protocol with their current shared entanglement and current shared randomness, as guaranteed by Theorem 3.
- Upon decoding the message m , Bob discards the registers A ′ s m (1) , . . . A ′ s m ( n 0 ) (the subsets s 1 , s 2 , . . . which are used for coding are known to both Alice and Bob, being generated using shared randomness).
- Alice and Bob consider the remaining quantum registers as their shared entanglement. They invoke a fresh copy of shared randomness for the next round.
- Set i ← i +1 . Go to Step 2.

Error Analysis: Let Θ i be the quantum state on the shared entanglement at the beginning of round i . We have Θ 1 = ψ ⊗ w AA ′ . For i &gt; 1 , Θ i is obtained from Θ i -1 by running above protocol in round i and tracing out the used shared entanglement. Let the resulting quantum map be E i . From the gentle measurement lemma (Fact 7) and the fact that the protocol in Theorem 3 makes an error of at most ε b 3 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Constraints on R : From Theorem 3, the protocol can be run as long as for every round i , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The choice of w ensures that w -n 0 · ( i -1) -2 n 0 ≥ n 0 · 2 Dmax ( ψ AA ′ ‖ ψ A ⊗ ψ A ′ ) log e δ , for all i . Thus, we can use Fact 9 to show that the following constraint on R suffices.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Fact 10, this is achievable if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This completes the proof of the theorem.

An immediate corollary of Theorem 4 is the following.

Corollary 2. For every pure quantum state | ψ 〉 AA ′ , the following is an achievable pair of communication rate and entanglement rate for the quantum channel N A → B :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, Fact 11 implies that

From Lemma 1 we have

Thus, Proof. Fix ε ′ , δ ′ ∈ (0 , 1) and an integer ℓ such that the following holds: let Π be the projector onto the eigenvectors of ψ ⊗ ℓ A with eigenvalues in the range [2 -(1+ δ ) S ( ψ A ) , 2 -(1 -δ ) S ( ψ A ) ] . Then Tr(Π ψ ⊗ ℓ A ) ≥ 1 -ε ′ . Existence of such an ℓ is guaranteed by the Chernoff-Hoeffding bound [44]. Let ψ ′ A ℓ A ′ ℓ := Π | ψ 〉〈 ψ | ⊗ ℓ AA ′ Π Tr(Π ψ ⊗ ℓ ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A Let n be large enough such that n = ℓ . We apply Theorem 4 to the quantum state ψ ′ A ℓ A ′ ℓ and the channel N ⊗ ℓ A → B , with b = n 1 / 2 and δ = n -1 4 (these constants may further be optimized). This gives an ( nℓ · R,ε ) entanglement assisted code with

Using Alicki-Fannes inequality (Fact 5), it suffices to have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The rate of shared entanglement is at most (1+ O ( n -1 / 4 )) · (1+ δ ′ ) H ( ψ A ) . This completes the proof of the corollary.

## 5 Quantum side information about the channel at the encoder

## Description of task

Figure 3: A sketch of general entanglement assisted protocol for point to point channel with quantum side information at the encoder

<!-- image -->

Alice wants to communicate a classical message M chosen from [1 : 2 R ] to Bob over a quantum channel N AS → B such that Bob is able to decode the correct message with probability at least 1 -ε 2 . Alice shares entanglement with the channel as well. This model in the classical setting is called as the Gel'fand-Pinsker channel, depicted in Figure 3.

Definition 4. Let | θ 〉 E A E B be the shared entanglement between Alice and Bob and let | φ 〉 SS ′ be the state shared between Alice and Channel. An ( R,ε ) -entanglement assisted code for the quantum channel N AS → B consists of

- An encoding operation E : ME A S → A for Alice .
- A decoding operation D : BE B → M ′ for Bob , with M ′ ≡ M being the output register such that for all m ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

## An achievability protocol

Theorem 5. Let N AS → B be a quantum channel, φ SS ′ be a pure quantum state and let ε, δ ∈ (0 , 1) . Then, for any R satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

there exists an ( R, 6 ε +4 δ ) -entanglement assisted code for the quantum channel N AS → B .

Figure 4: A schematic for the achievability protocol. Upon receiving the message m , Alice uses the block B ( m ) to transmit the message to Bob .

<!-- image -->

Proof. Fix ψ AA ′ S such that ψ S = φ S , which achieves the maximum in Equation 8 and fix an R as given in Equation 8. Set r = ˜ I ε max ( A ′ : S ) ψ +2log 1 δ .

Let A ′′ be a register such that | ψ 〉 A ′′ A ′ is a purification of ψ A ′ . Introduce the registers A ′′ 1 , A ′′ 2 , . . . A ′′ 2 R + r , such that A ′′ i ≡ A ′′ and A ′ 1 , A ′ 2 , . . . A ′ 2 R + r such that A ′ i ≡ A ′ . Alice and Bob share the state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Alice holds the registers A ′′ 1 , A ′′ 2 , · · · , A ′′ 2 R + r and Bob holds the registers A ′ 1 , A ′ 2 , · · · , A ′ 2 R + r .

We divide these copies of shared entanglement into blocks, each of size 2 r , where the block B ( j ) involves the registers A ′′ ( j -1) · 2 r +1 A ′ ( j -1) · 2 r +1 , . . . A ′′ j · 2 r A ′ j · 2 r . For brevity, we set st ( j ) = ( j -1) · 2 r +1 , en ( j ) = j · 2 r . Define the following state corresponding to block j .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Introduce a register C such that | Ψ 〉 CAA ′ S is a purification of ψ AA ′ S . Consider the following purification of τ j SA ′ st ( j ) ...A ′ en ( j ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the corollary of convex split lemma (Corollary 1), and the choice of r , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, there exists an isometry U j : S ′ A ′′ st ( j ) . . . A ′′ en ( j ) → KACA ′′ st ( j ) . . . A ′′ en ( j ) such that (by Uhlmann's Theorem, Fact 3)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our protocol works as follows, also depicted in Figure 4.

Encoding: Alice on receiving the message m ∈ [1 : 2 R ] considers the block B ( m ) . She applies the isometry U m on registers S ′ A ′′ st ( m ) . . . A ′′ en ( m ) and sends the register A through the channel. Let the state in Bob 's possession after this transmission over the channel be ˆ Θ BA ′ 1 ··· A ′ 2 R . Define the state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Equation 9, and monotonicity of fidelity under quantum operations (Fact 2), it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Decoding: Let, 0 ⪯ Π BA ′ ⪯ I be such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using this, we define for each j ∈ [1 : 2 R 1 ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For j ∈ [1 : 2 R + r ] , define the operator

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is easy to observe that ∑ j Ω( j ) = I , and hence it forms a valid POVM. Bob applies the POVM { Ω( j ) } j . Upon obtaining the outcome j , he outputs the block number corresponding to j .

Probability of error: Let M be the message which was transmitted by Alice using the strategy above and let M ′ be the decoded message by Bob using the above mentioned decoding POVMs. Notice that by the symmetry of the encoding and decoding strategy, it is enough to bound Pr { M ′ = 1 | M = 1 } , which we do as follows:

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a follows from Lemma 1 and b follows from Equation (10) and because of the following set of inequalities:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Above a follows from the definition of Θ A ′ 1 ,B 1 ··· ,B 2 R + r ; b follows from the symmetry of the code construction; c follows from Hayashi-Nagaoka operator inequality (Fact 8); d follows from the definition of Λ( m ) and from the definition of Π BA ′ and e follows from the choice of R + r . This completes the proof.

## 6 Quantum broadcast channel

Figure 5: Quantum broadcast channel

<!-- image -->

̸

## Description of task:

Alice wishes to communicate message pair ( m 1 , m 2 ) simultaneously to Bob and Charlie over a quantum broadcast channel, where m 1 is intended for Bob and m 2 is intended for Charlie , such that both Bob and Charlie output the correct message with probability at least 1 -ε 2 . Please refer to Figure 5.

Definition 5. Let | θ 〉 E A 1 E B and | θ 〉 E A 2 E C be the shared entanglement between Alice and Bob and Alice and Charlie respectively. An ( R 1 , R 2 , ε ) entanglement assisted code for the quantum broadcast channel N F → BC consists of

- An encoding operation E : M 1 M 2 E A 1 E A 2 → F for Alice .
- A pair of decoding operations ( D B , D C ) , D B : BE B → M ′ 1 and D C : CE C → M ′ 2 , with ( M ′ 1 , M ′ 2 ) ≡ ( M 1 , M 2 ) being the output registers, such that for all ( m 1 , m 2 )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## One-shot Marton inner bound

Our achievability protocol is inspired by the work[23].

Theorem 6. Fix ε, δ &gt; 0 . Let N : F → BC be a quantum broadcast channel and let ψ FA 1 A 2 be a quantum state. Then for any R 1 , R 2 satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the tuple ( R 1 , R 2 , 4 ε +9 √ δ ) is achievable.

Proof. Given R 1 , R 2 as in the statement of the theorem, choose r 1 , r 2 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

The existence of such r 1 , r 2 follows from [23].

Let A ′ 1 be a register such that | ψ 〉 A ′ 1 A 1 is a purification of ψ A 1 . Introduce the registers

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

such that A ′ ( i ) ≡ A ′ 1 and A (1) , A (2) , . . . A (2 R 1 + r 1 ) such that A ( i ) ≡ A 1 . Alice and Bob share the state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Alice holds the registers A ′ (1) , A ′ (2) , · · · , A ′ (2 R 1 + r 1 ) and Bob holds the registers A (1) , A (2) , · · · , A (2 R 1 + r 1 ) . We divide these copies of shared entanglement into blocks, each of size 2 r 1 , where the block B ( j ) involves the registers A ′ (( j -1) · 2 r 1 +1) A (( j -1) · 2 r 1 +1) , . . . A ′ ( j · 2 r 1 ) A ( j · 2 r 1 ) . For brevity, we set st ( j ) = ( j -1) · 2 r 1 +1 , en ( j ) = j · 2 r 1 .

Similarly, let A ′ 2 be a register such that | ψ 〉 A ′ 2 A 2 is a purification of ψ A 2 . Introduce the registers ˆ A ′ (1) , ˆ A ′ (2) , . . . , ˆ A ′ (2 R 2 + r 2 ) such that ˆ A ′ ( i ) ≡ A ′ 2 and ˆ A (1) , ˆ A (2) , . . . , ˆ A (2 R 2 + r 2 ) such that ˆ A ( i ) ≡ A 2 . Alice and Charlie share the state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 6: Schematic for the achievability proof of quantum broadcast channel.

<!-- image -->

where Alice holds the registers ˆ A ′ (1) , ˆ A ′ (2) , , ˆ A ′ (2 R 2 + r 2 ) and Charlie holds the registers ˆ A (1) , ˆ A (2) , , ˆ A 2 ( R 2 + r 2 ) .

We divide these copies of shared entanglement into blocks, each of size 2 2 , where the block C ( j ) involves the registers ˆ A ′ (( j -1) · 2 r 2 +1) ˆ A ( j -1) · 2 r 2 +1 , . . . ˆ A ′ ( j · 2 r 2 ) ˆ A ( j · 2 r 2 ) . For brevity, we set ˜ st ( j ) = ( j 1) 2 r 2 +1 , ˜ en ( j ) = j 2 r 2 .

For the block pair ( ( i ) , ( j )) , where ( i, j ) [1 : 2 1 ] [1 : 2 2 ] ,

· · · · · · r -· · B C ∈ R × R define the following state:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Introduce a register G such that | Ψ 〉 GFA 1 A 2 is a purification of ψ FA 1 A 2 . Now, consider the following purification of τ ( i,j ) A ( st ( i )) ...A ( en ( i )) ˆ A ( ˜ st ( j )) ... ˆ A ( ˜ en ( j )) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Lemma 3, and the choice of r 1 , r 2 , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, there exists an isometry

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

such that (by Uhlmann's Theorem)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our protocol is as follows. Please refer to Figure 6.

Encoding: Alice on receiving the message pair ( m 1 , m 2 ) ∈ [1 : 2 R 1 ] × [1 : 2 R 2 ] considers the block pair ( B ( m 1 ) , C ( m 2 )) . She applies the isometry U ( m 1 ,m 2 ) on registers A ′ ( st ( i )) . . . A ′ ( en ( i )) ˆ A ′ ( ˜ st ( j )) . . . ˆ A ′ ( ˜ en ( j )) . Then she sends the register F through the channel.

Let the joint state between the channel output, Bob and Charlie after this transmission over the channel be

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define the state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Equation 12, and monotonicity of fidelity under quantum operations, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Decoding: Let, 0 ⪯ Π BA 1 ⪯ I be such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We begin to define the decoding POVM for Bob . For each j ∈ [1 : 2 R 1 + r 1 ] , define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For j ∈ [1 : 2 R 1 + r 1 ] , define the operator

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let, 0 ⪯ Π CA 2 ⪯ I be such that It is easy to observe that ∑ j Ω( j ) = I , and hence it forms a valid POVM. Bob applies the POVM { Ω( j ) } j . Upon obtaining the outcome j , he outputs the block number corresponding to j . Charlie 's decoding POVM is constructed similarly using the projector Π CA 2 .

Probability of error: Let ( M 1 , M 2 ) be the message pair which was transmitted by Alice using the strategy above and let ( M ′ 1 , M ′ 2 ) be the decoded message by Bob and Charlie using the above mentioned decoding POVMs. Notice that by the symmetry of the encoding and decoding strategy, it is enough to show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

under the event that ( M 1 , M 2 ) = (1 , 1) is the transmitted message pair. We upper bound this probability as follows:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

We now upper bound Pr { M ′ 1 = 1 | ( M 1 , M 2 ) = (1 , 1) } as follows:

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a follows from Lemma 1 and b follows from Equation (13) and because of the following set of inequalities:

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

Above a follows from the definition of Θ A ′ 1 ,B 1 ··· ,B 2 R ; b follows from the symmetry of the code construction; c follows from Hayashi-Nagaoka operator inequality (Fact 8); d follows from the definition of Λ( m ) and from the definition of Π BA ′ ; and e follows from the choice of R 1 + r 1 . The calculation for Pr { M ′ 2 = 1 | ( M 1 , M 2 ) = (1 , 1) } follows in the similar fashion. This completes the proof.

̸

̸

## 7 Asymptotic limit of our bounds

An important property of smooth information theoretic quantities is that in asymptotic setting, they converge to relative entropy based quantities. The achievability bound for point to point channel uses hypothesis testing relative entropy. Fact 9 exhibits its asymptotic behaviour.

To exhibit the asymptotic behaviour for quantum channel with side information and rate limited quantum channel with side information (which use an alternative definition of smooth max-information), we shall require the following fact.

Fact 13. Let ρ ⊗ n AB ∈ D ( A n B n ) be a quantum state. It holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The proof follows from Corollary B.22 ([45]) and Theorem 3 in [46].

Now, the following lemma can be used to show that the quantity ˜ I ε max ( A : B ) ρ approaches I( A : B ) ρ in asymptotic and i.i.d setting.

Lemma 4. For ρ AB ∈ D ( AB ) and σ A ∈ D ( A ) , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof.

Finally, we show that the restricted smooth max-information that we have introduced also converges properly. It is crucial in our achievability bound for quantum broadcast channel. We start with the following fact.

Fact 14 (Lemma 12 and Proposition 13,[31]) . For quantum state ρ A ∈ D ( A ) , σ ∈ P ( A ) and reals 0 &lt; δ &lt; 1 -ε 2 , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v ( σ A ) is the number of distinct eigenvectors of σ A . It also holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The first part is essentially that given in [31] (Proposition 13 and Lemma 12). For the second part, we note that the proof in [31] (Proposition 12, Equation 23 ) directly proceeds for this case as well: setting R def = D ε max ( ρ A ‖ σ A ) , it is shown that for any δ ′ &gt; 0 , it holds that Tr( ρ A { ρ A -2 R + δ ′ σ A } -) ≥ ( √ 1 -ε 2 -2 -δ ′ / 2 ) 2 . Setting δ ′ = log 1 δ proves the inequality.

We shall also need the well known Chernoff bounds.

Fact 15 (Chernoff bounds) . Let X 1 , . . . , X n be independent random variables, with each X i ∈ [0 , 1] always. Let X def = X 1 + · · · + X n and µ def = E X = E X 1 + · · · + E X n . Then for any 0 ≤ ε ≤ 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we proceed to the main results of this section. Using these results and Fact 9, we can easily conclude that for any ε &lt; 1 / 2 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorem 7. Let ρ AB ∈ D ( AB ) be a quantum state. Fix an integer n &gt; 1 and ε &lt; 1 / 2 such that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then it holds that

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The first inequality in the statement is trivial. So we consider the second inequality. In below, we will set δ = ε 576 . Our proof is divided into three main steps, as we elucidate below.

Typical projection onto subsystems A , B : For brevity, we set ρ A n B n def = ρ ⊗ n AB . Let Π A n be the projector onto the eigenvectors of ρ A n with eigenvalues in the range [(1 -δ )2 -n · S ( ρ A ) , (1 + δ )2 -n · S ( ρ A ) ] . Similarly, let Π B n be the projector onto the eigenvectors of ρ B n with eigenvalues in the range [(1 -δ )2 -n · S ( ρ B ) , (1+ δ )2 -n · S ( ρ B ) ] . Let µ A n , µ B n be uniform distributions in the support of Π A n and Π B n respectively. Following relations are easy to observe.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Chernoff bounds (Fact 15), we have that Tr(Π A n ρ A n ) ≥ 1 -2 · exp( -δ 2 · n · S ( ρ A ) log(1 /λ min ( ρ A )) ) ≥ 1 -δ for the choice of n . Similarly, Tr(Π B n ρ B n ) ≥ 1 -δ .

Now, define the state ρ ′ A n B n = (Π An ⊗ Π Bn ) ρ An B n (Π An ⊗ Π Bn ) Tr( ρ An B n (Π An ⊗ Π Bn )) . We will establish the following claims about ρ ′ A n B n

## Claim 1. It holds that

1. F 2 ( ρ ′ A n B n , ρ A n B n ) ≥ 1 -16 δ .
2. Tr( ρ A n B n (Π A n ⊗ Π B n )) ≥ 1 -10 δ .
3. ρ ′ A n B n ∈ supp(Π A n ⊗ Π B n ) .
4. ρ ′ A n ≤ 1 1 -10 δ ρ A n and ρ ′ B n ≤ 1 1 -10 δ ρ B n .

Proof. We prove each item in a sequence below.

1. This is a straightforward application of gentle measurement lemma (Fact 7). Define the intermediate state τ A n B n def = (I An ⊗ Π Bn ) ρ An B n (I An ⊗ Π Bn ) Tr( ρ An B n (I An ⊗ Π Bn )) . From gentle measurement lemma, F 2 ( τ A n B n , ρ A n ,B n ) ≥ Tr(Π B n ρ B n ) ≥ 1 -δ . Moreover, Tr(Π A n ρ A n ) ≥ 1 -δ . Thus, from Lemma 1, Tr((Π A n ⊗ I B n ) τ A n B n ) ≥ 1 -9 δ . Applying gentle measurement lemma again, this gives that F 2 ( ρ ′ A n B n , τ A n B n ) ≥ 1 -9 δ . By triangle inequality for purified distance (Fact 1), we conclude that F 2 ( ρ ′ A n B n , ρ A n B n ) ≥ 1 -16 δ .
2. As established above, Tr((Π A n ⊗ I B n ) τ A n B n ) ≥ 1 -9 δ . The item follows by substituting the definition of τ A n B n and using Tr( ρ B n Π B n ) ≥ 1 -δ .
3. This follows since (Π A n ⊗ Π B n ) ρ A n B n (Π A n ⊗ Π B n ) &lt; Π A n ⊗ Π B n .

4. We proceed as follows for ρ ′ B n .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Last inequality is due to item 2 above and the fact that Π B n is a projector onto certain eigenspace of ρ B n . Same argument holds for ρ ′ A n .

Switching to information spectrum relative entropy: Using above claim, we now proceed to second step of our proof. As a corollary from the Claim (Item 1 ), along with Fact 14, we conclude

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To further simplify this equation, we have the following claim.

Claim 2. For any R &gt; 0 , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The projector Π A n commutes with ρ A n and similarly Π B n commutes with ρ B n . For a given R &gt; 0 , consider the operator O def = ρ ′ A n B n -2 R ρ A n ⊗ ρ B n in the eigenbasis of ρ A n ⊗ ρ B n . Since ρ ′ A n B n ∈ supp(Π A n ⊗ Π B n ) , which follows from Claim 1, there is no eigenvector of O orthogonal to the projector Π A n ⊗ Π B n . Thus, the positive eigenspace of O is equal to the positive eigenspace of ρ ′ A n B n -2 R Π A n ρ A n Π A n ⊗ Π B n ρ B n Π B n . This proves the claim.

This claim implies, from the definition of information spectrum relative entropy, that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, we proceed in the following way, setting v def = v (Π A n ρ A n Π A n ⊗ Π B n ρ B n Π B n ) , which is the number of distinct eigenvalues of Π A n ρ A n Π A n ⊗ Π B n ρ B n Π B n :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( a ) follows from Fact 14, ( b ) follows from Fact 6 and Equation 14 and ( c ) follows from application of second part of Fact 14.

Combining this with Equation 15, we conclude that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Removing large eigenvalues: Now we are in a position to proceed through the final step. Let R ′ be the minimum achieved in ˜ D 400 δ s ( ρ ′ A n B n ‖ µ A n ⊗ µ B n ) . For brevity, set Π ′ def = { ρ ′ A n B n -2 R ′ µ A n ⊗ µ B n } -and define the state ρ ′′ A n B n def = Π ′ ρ ′ An B n Π ′ Tr(Π ′ ρ ′ An B n ) . It holds that

Tr(Π ′ ρ ′ A n B n ) ≥ 1 -400 δ . We prove the following properties for ρ ′′ A n B n .

## Claim 3. It holds that

1. P( ρ ′′ A n B n , ρ A n B n ) ≤ 24 √ δ .
2. ρ ′′ A n &lt; (1 + 1000 δ ) ρ A n , ρ ′′ B n &lt; (1 + 1000 δ ) ρ B n
3. D max ( ρ ′′ A n B n ‖ ρ A n ⊗ ρ B n ) ≤ D √ δ max ( ρ A n B n ‖ ρ A n ⊗ ρ B n ) + 9 log 1 δ +log v .

Proof. We prove the items in the respective sequence.

1. From gentle measurement lemma 7, we have that F 2 ( ρ ′′ A n B n , ρ ′ A n B n ) ≥ Tr(Π ′ ρ ′ A n B n ) ≥ 1 -400 δ . Using Claim 1 and triangle inequality for purified distance (Fact 1), we obtain that P( ρ ′′ A n B n , ρ A n B n ) ≤ 24 √ δ .
2. Since µ A n ⊗ µ B n is uniform in the support of ρ ′ A n B n , ρ ′ A n B n commutes with µ A n ⊗ µ B n . This immediately implies that Π ′ commutes with ρ ′ A n B n . Thus, we conclude that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the second last inequality follows from the relation Tr(Π ′ ρ ′ A n B n ) ≥ 1 -400 δ . Invoking Claim 1, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, we obtain ρ ′′ B n ≤ ρ Bn 1 -410 δ . The item now follows since 1 1 -410 δ &lt; 1 + 1000 δ for the choice of δ .

3. By definition of Π ′ , we have that Π ′ τ A n B n Π ′ ≤ 2 R ′ Π ′ µ A n ⊗ µ B n Π ′ ≤ 2 R ′ µ A n ⊗ µ B n , where last inequality holds since µ A n ⊗ µ B n is uniform. Thus, ρ ′′ A n B n &lt; 2 R ′ 1 -410 δ · µ A n ⊗ µ B n .

From Equation 14, this further implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This proves the item after using Equation 16 to upper bound R ′ .

This claim allows us to conclude that ρ ′′ A n B n forms a feasible solution for the optimization in ¯ I 24 √ δ, 1000 δ max ( A n : B n ) ρ . Now the value of v , which is the number of distinct eigenvalues of Π A n ρ A n Π A n ⊗ Π B n ρ B n Π B n , is upper bounded by the number of distinct eigenvalues of ρ A n ⊗ ρ B n . This is at most n 2 | A | +2 | B | . This proves the theorem.

## Conclusion

To summarize, our work exhibits that the techniques of convex split and position based decoding are sufficient to design protocols (similar in spirit to their classical counterparts) for noisy quantum networks. Moreover, these techniques allow us to obtain optimal bounds for communication over entanglement assisted point-to-point quantum channel.

In the classical asymptotic setting, the well known book on information theory by Thomas and Cover [47, Figure 2.1] highlights that there are two fundamental quantities in information theory max p X I( X : Y ) and min p Y | X I( X : Y ) , each relevant in the contexts of channel and source coding respectively. In the same spirit, our work highlights that there are two fundamental quantities in one-shot (classical and) quantum information theory, smooth hypothesis testing divergence and smooth max R´ enyi divergence (Figure 7, inspired from [47, Figure 2.1], captures this perspective). This is further strengthened by a series of recent works [48, 49, 50, 51, 52] which obtain bounds for several different quantum communication tasks in terms of either smooth hypothesis testing divergence or smooth max R´ enyi divergence or both, all using the techniques of convex split and position based decoding.

Figure 7: Two fundamental quantities of one-shot quantum information theory

<!-- image -->

## Acknowledgement

This work is supported by the Singapore Ministry of Education and the National Research Foundation, through the Tier 3 Grant 'Random numbers from quantum processes' MOE2012-T3-1-009 and NRF RF Award NRF-NRFF 2013-13.

## References

- [1] A. Anshu, V. K. Devabathini, and R. Jain, 'Quantum communication using coherent rejection sampling,' Phys. Rev. Lett. , vol. 119, p. 120506, Sep 2017.
- [2] R. Landauer, 'Irreversibility and heat generation in the computing process,' IBM Journal of Research and Development , vol. 5, pp. 183-191, July 1961.
- [3] C. E. Shannon, 'A mathematical theory of communication,' The Bell System Technical Journal , vol. 27, pp. 379423, July 1948.
- [4] A. M. Turing, 'On computable numbers, with an application to the entscheidungsproblem,' Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society , vol. s2-42, no. 1, pp. 230-265, 1937.
- [5] S. A. Cook, 'The complexity of theorem-proving procedures,' in Proceedings of the Third Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing , STOC '71, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 151-158, ACM, 1971.
- [6] J. S. Bell, 'On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox,' Physics , vol. 1, pp. 195-200, 1964.
- [7] P. W. Shor, 'Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete logarithms on a quantum computer,' SIAM Journal on Computing , vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1484-1509, 1997.
- [8] H.-K. Lo and H. F. Chau, 'Unconditional security of quantum key distribution over arbitrarily long distances,' Science , vol. 283, no. 5410, pp. 2050-2056, 1999.

- [9] A. S. Holevo, 'The capacity of the quantum channel with general signal states,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 44, pp. 269-273, Jan 1998.
- [10] B. Schumacher and M. D. Westmoreland, 'Sending classical information via noisy quantum channels,' Phys. Rev. A , vol. 56, pp. 131-138, Jul 1997.
- [11] P. W. Shor, 'Scheme for reducing decoherence in quantum computer memory,' Phys. Rev. A , vol. 52, pp. R2493R2496, Oct 1995.
- [12] C. H. Bennett, G. Brassard, C. Cr´ epeau, R. Jozsa, A. Peres, and W. K. Wootters, 'Teleporting an unknown quantum state via dual classical and einstein-podolsky-rosen channels,' Phys. Rev. Lett. , vol. 70, pp. 1895-1899, Mar 1993.
- [13] C. H. Bennett and S. J. Wiesner, 'Communication via one- and two-particle operators on einstein-podolsky-rosen states,' Phys. Rev. Lett. , vol. 69, no. 20, pp. 2881-2884, 1992.
- [14] C. H. Bennett, P. W. Shor, J. A. Smolin, and A. V. Thapliyal, 'Entanglement-assisted capacity of a quantum channel and the reverse shannon theorem,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 48, pp. 2637-2655, Oct 2002.
- [15] W. Matthews and S. Wehner, 'Finite blocklength converse bounds for quantum channels,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 60, pp. 7317-7329, Nov 2014.
- [16] S. Strelchuk, M. Horodecki, and J. Oppenheim, 'Generalized teleportation and entanglement recycling,' Phys. Rev. Lett. , vol. 110, p. 010505, Jan 2013.
- [17] S. I. Gelfand and M. S. Pinsker, 'Coding for channels with random parameters,' Problem of Control and Information Theory , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 19-31, 1980.
- [18] F. Dupuis, 'The decoupling approach to quantum information theory.' PhD Thesis, Universit´ e de Montr´ eal., http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.0664, 2010.
- [19] K. Marton, 'A coding theorem for the discrete memoryless broadcast channel,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 25, pp. 306-311, May 1979.
- [20] N. Datta, M. Tomamichel, and M. M. Wilde, 'On the second-order asymptotics for entanglement-assisted communication,' Quantum Information Processing , vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 2569-2591, 2016.
- [21] N. Datta and M. H. Hsieh, 'One-shot entanglement-assisted quantum and classical communication,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 59, pp. 1929-1939, March 2013.
- [22] L. Wang and R. Renner, 'One-shot classical-quantum capacity and hypothesis testing,' Phys. Rev. Lett. , vol. 108, p. 200501, May 2012.
- [23] J. Radhakrishnan, P. Sen, and N. Warsi, 'One-shot marton inner bound for classical-quantum broadcast channel,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 62, pp. 2836-2848, May 2016.
- [24] N. A. Warsi and J. P. Coon, 'Coding for classical-quantum channels with rate limited side information at the encoder: An information-spectrum approach,' in 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) , pp. 2054-2058, July 2016.
- [25] V. Y. F. Tan, 'A formula for the capacity of the general Gel'fand-Pinsker channel,' in 2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory , pp. 2458-2462, July 2013.
- [26] A. Anshu, R. Jain, and N. Warsi, 'A unified approach to source and message compression.' https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.03619, 2017.

- [27] R. Renner, 'Security of quantum key distribution.' PhD Thesis, ETH Zurich, Diss. ETH No. 16242, arXiv:quantph/0512258, 2005.
- [28] M. Tomamichel, R. Colbeck, and R. Renner, 'Duality between smooth min- and max-entropies,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 4674 - 4681, 2010.
- [29] M. Tomamichel, 'A framework for non-asymptotic quantum information theory.' PhD Thesis, ETH Zurich, http://arXiv,org/abs/1203.2142, 2012.
- [30] N. Datta, 'Min- and max- relative entropies and a new entanglement monotone,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 55, pp. 2816-2826, 2009.
- [31] M. Tomamichel and M. Hayashi, 'A hierarchy of information quantities for finite block length analysis of quantum tasks,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 59, pp. 7693-7710, Nov 2013.
- [32] H. Barnum, C. M. Cave, C. A. Fuch, R. Jozsa, and B. Schmacher, 'Noncommuting mixed states cannot be broadcast,' Phys. Rev. Lett. , vol. 76, no. 15, pp. 2818-2821, 1996.
- [33] G. Lindblad, 'Completely positive maps and entropy inequalities,' Commun. Math. Phys. , vol. 40, pp. 147-151, 1975.
- [34] A. Uhlmann, 'The 'transition probability' in the state space of a *-algebra,' Rep. Math. Phys. , vol. 9, pp. 273-279, 1976.
- [35] D. Dacunha-Castelle, H. Heyer, and B. Roynette, 'Ecole d'Et´ e de Probabilit´ es de Saint-Flour VII,' Lecture Notes in Mathematics, Springer-Verlag , vol. 678, 1978.
- [36] M. Fannes, 'A continuity property of the entropy density for spin lattice systems,' Communications in Mathematical Physics , vol. 31, pp. 291-294, 1973.
- [37] A. Winter, 'Coding theorem and strong converse for quantum channels.,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 2481-2485, 1999.
- [38] T. Ogawa and H. Nagaoka, 'A new proof of the channel coding theorem via hypothesis testing in quantum information theory,' in Information Theory, 2002. Proceedings. 2002 IEEE International Symposium on , pp. 73-, 2002.
- [39] M. Hayashi and H. Nagaoka, 'General formulas for capacity of classical-quantum channels,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 49, pp. 1753-1768, July 2003.
- [40] K. Li, 'Second-order asymptotics for quantum hypothesis testing,' Ann. Statist. , vol. 42, pp. 171-189, 02 2014.
- [41] A. Anshu, M.-H. Hsieh, and R. Jain, 'Quantifying resource in catalytic resource theory.' https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.00381, 2017.
- [42] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum computation and quantum information . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
- [43] S. Lovett, 'Pairwise independent hash functions and applications,' 2015. http://cseweb.ucsd.edu/ slovett/teaching/SP15-CSE190/.
- [44] W. Hoeffding, 'Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables,' Journal of the American Statistical Association , vol. 58, no. 301, pp. 13-30, 1963.
- [45] M. Berta, M. Christandl, and R. Renner, 'The Quantum Reverse Shannon Theorem based on one-shot information theory,' Commun. Math. Phys. , vol. 306, no. 3, pp. 579-615, 2011.

- [46] N. Ciganovi´ c, N. J. Beaudry, and R. Renner, 'Smooth max-information as one-shot generalization for mutual information,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 60, pp. 1573-1581, 2014.
- [47] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of information theory . Wiley Series in Telecommunications, New York, NY, USA: John Wiley &amp; Sons, 1991.
- [48] A. Anshu, R. Jain, and N. Warsi, 'Smooth min-max relative entropy based bounds for one-shot classical and quantum state redistribution.' https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.02396, 2017.
- [49] A. Anshu, R. Jain, and N. Warsi, 'Measurement compression with quantum side information using shared randomness.' https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.02342, 2017.
- [50] A. Anshu, R. Jain, and N. Warsi, 'A generalized quantum slepian-wolf.' https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.09961, 2017.
- [51] M. M. Wilde, 'Position-based coding and convex splitting for private communication over quantum channels.' https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.01733, 2017.
- [52] H. Qi, Q. Wang, and M. M. Wilde, 'Applications of position-based coding to classical communication over quantum channels.' https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.01361, 2017.

## A Proof of Lemma 4

Proof. The proof follows closely from [46]. We partially reproduce it here for completeness. We begin with the following claim.

Claim 4. For quantum states σ A , σ B , ψ AB , there exists a state ¯ ψ AB ∈ B ε ( ψ AB ) , such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The proof as given in [46] is as follows. Define the operator Γ A def = ψ -1 2 A σ A ψ -1 2 A and let Π A be the minimum rank projector such that Tr(Π A ψ A ) ≥ √ 1 -ε 2 . Then, it is shown that ‖ Π A Γ A Π A ‖ ∞ ≤ 1 1 - √ 1 -ε 2 ≤ 2 ε 2 .

Now, chosing ψ ABC as a purification of ψ AB , Π A is used to construct a projector Π BC , which is then used to define the operator ψ ′ ABC def = Π BC ψ ABC Π BC . It is shown that ψ ′ ABC ∈ B ε ( ψ ABC ) . Now,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now defining the operator ψ ′′ AB def = ψ ′ AB +( ψ A -ψ ′ A ) ⊗ σ B , which satisfies ψ ′′ AB ∈ B ε ( ψ AB ) , one computes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Choosing ψ ′′ AB Tr( ψ ′′ AB ) as the desired state, the claim follows.

Using this claim, we proceed as follows. Let ρ ′ AB ∈ B ε ( ρ AB ) be the quantum state that achieves the minimum in the definition of D ε max ( ρ AB ‖ σ A ⊗ ρ B ) . Using Claim 4, there exists a state ρ ′′ AB ∈ B ε ( ρ ′ AB ) ∈ B 2 ε ( ρ AB ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This proves the lemma.