## Channel Polarization on q -ary Discrete Memoryless Channels by Arbitrary Kernels

Ryuhei Mori Graduate School of Informatics Kyoto University Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan

Email: rmori@sys.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Abstract -A method of channel polarization, proposed by Arıkan, allows us to construct efficient capacity-achieving channel codes. In the original work, binary input discrete memoryless channels are considered. A special case of q -ary channel polarization is considered by S ¸ as ¸o˘ glu, Telatar, and Arıkan. In this paper, we consider more general channel polarization on q -ary channels. We further show explicit constructions using ReedSolomon codes, on which asymptotically fast channel polarization is induced.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Channel polarization, proposed by Arıkan, is a method of constructing capacity achieving codes with low encoding and decoding complexities [1]. Channel polarization can also be used to construct lossy source codes which achieve ratedistortion trade-off with low encoding and decoding complexities [2]. Arıkan and Telatar derived the rate of channel polarization [3]. In [4], a more detailed rate of channel polarization which includes coding rate is derived. In [1], channel polarization is based on a 2 × 2 matrix. Korada, S ¸ as ¸o˘ glu, and Urbanke considered generalized polarization phenomenon which is based on an ℓ × ℓ matrix and derived the rate of the generalized channel polarization [5]. In [6], a special case of channel polarization on q -ary channels is considered. In this paper, we consider channel polarization on q -ary channels which is based on arbitrary mappings.

## II. PRELIMINARIES

Let u ℓ -1 0 and u j i denote a row vector ( u 0 , . . . , u ℓ -1 ) and its subvector ( u i , . . . , u j ) . Let F c denote the complement of a set F , and |F| denotes cardinality of F . Let X and Y be an input alphabet and an output alphabet, respectively. In this paper, we assume that X is finite and that Y is at most countable. A discrete memoryless channel (DMC) W is defined as a conditional probability distribution W ( y | x ) over Y where x ∈ X and y ∈ Y . We write W : X → Y to mean a DMC W with an input alphabet X and an output alphabet Y . Let q be the cardinality of X . In this paper, the base of the logarithm is q unless otherwise stated.

Definition 1: The symmetric capacity of q -ary input channel W : X → Y is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Toshiyuki Tanaka Graduate School of Informatics Kyoto University

Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan

Email: tt@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Note that I ( W ) ∈ [0 , 1] .

̸

Definition 2: Let D x := { y ∈ Y | W ( y | x ) &gt; W ( y | x ′ ) , ∀ x ′ ∈ X , x ′ = x } . The error probability of the maximumlikelihood estimation of the input x on the basis of the output y of the channel W is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 3: The Bhattacharyya parameter of W is defined

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the Bhattacharyya parameter of W between x and x ′ is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The symmetric capacity I ( W ) , the error probability P e ( W ) , and the Bhattacharyya parameter Z ( W ) are interrelated as in the following lemmas.

Lemma 4:

Lemma 5: [6]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 6: The maximum and the minimum of the Bhattacharyya parameters between two symbols are defined as

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let σ : X → X be a permutation. Let σ i denote the i th power of σ . The average Bhattacharyya parameter of W between x and x ′ with respect to σ is defined as the average of

as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Z z,z ′ ( W ) over the subset { ( z, z ′ ) = ( σ i ( x ) , σ i ( x ′ )) ∈ X 2 | i = 0 , 1 , . . . , q ! -1 } as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## III. CHANNEL POLARIZATION ON q -ARY DMC INDUCED BY NON-LINEAR KERNEL

We consider a channel transform using a one-to-one onto mapping g : X ℓ → X ℓ , which is called a kernel. In the previous works [1], [5], it is assumed that q = 2 and that g is linear. In [6], X is arbitrary but g is restricted. In this paper, X and g are arbitrary.

Definition 7: Let W : X → Y be a DMC. Let W ℓ : X ℓ → Y ℓ , W ( i ) : X → Y ℓ ×X i -1 , and W ( i ) u i -1 0 : X → Y ℓ be defined as DMCs with transition probabilities

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 8: Let { B i } i =0 , 1 ,... be independent random variables such that B i = k with probability 1 ℓ , for each k = 0 , . . . , ℓ -1 .

In probabilistic channel transform W → W ( B i ) , expectation of the symmetric capacity is invariant due to the chain rule for mutual information. The following lemma is a consequence of the martingale convergence theorem.

Lemma 9: There exists a random variable I ∞ such that I ( W ( B 0 ) ··· ( B n ) ) converges to I ∞ almost surely as n →∞ .

When q = 2 and g ( u 1 0 ) = ( u 0 + u 1 , u 1 ) , Arıkan showed that P ( I ∞ ∈ { 0 , 1 } ) = 1 [1]. This result is called channel polarization phenomenon since subchannels polarize to noiseless channels and pure noise channels. Korada, S ¸ as ¸o˘ glu, and Urbanke consider channel polarization phenomenon when q = 2 and g is linear [5].

From Lemma 5, I ( W ) is close to 0 and 1 when Z ( W ) is close to 1 and 0, respectively. Hence, it would be sufficient to prove channel polarization if one can show that Z ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) converges to Z ∞ ∈ { 0 , 1 } almost surely. Here we instead show a weaker version of the above property in the following lemma and its corollary.

Lemma 10: Let {Y n } n ∈ N be a sequence of discrete sets. Let { W n : X → Y n } n ∈ N be a sequence of q -ary DMCs. Let σ and τ be permutations on X . Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where W n : X → Y n , W ′ n : X → Y 2 n . Assume lim n →∞ I ( W ′ n ) -I ( W n ) = 0 . Then, for any δ ∈ (0 , 1 / 2) , there exists m such that Z τσ -1 x,x ′ ( W n ) / ∈ ( δ, 1 -δ ) for any x ∈ X , x ′ ∈ X and n ≥ m .

Proof: Let Z , Y 1 and Y 2 be random variables which take values on X , Y n and Y n , respectively, and jointly obey the distribution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

tends to 0 by the assumption. Since the mutual information is lower bounded by the cut-off rate, one obtains

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The convergence of I ( Z ; Y 2 | Y 1 ) to 0 implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

converges to 0 for any ( z, x ) ∈ X 2 . It consequently implies that for any δ ∈ (0 , 1 / 2) , there exists m such that Z τσ -1 x,x ′ ( W n ) / ∈ ( δ, 1 -δ ) for any x ∈ X , x ′ ∈ X and n ≥ m .

Using Lemma 10, one can obtain a partial result of the channel polarization as follows.

̸

Corollary 11: Assume that there exists u ℓ -2 0 ∈ X ℓ -1 , ( i, j ) ∈ { 0 , 1 , . . . , ℓ -1 } 2 and permutations σ and τ on X such that i -th element of g ( u ℓ -1 0 ) and j -th element of g ( u ℓ -1 0 ) are σ ( u ℓ -1 ) and τ ( u ℓ -1 ) , respectively, and such that for any v ℓ -2 0 = u ℓ -2 0 ∈ X ℓ -1 there exists m ∈ { 0 , 1 , . . . , ℓ -1 } and a permutation µ on X such that m -th element of g ( v ℓ -1 0 ) is µ ( v ℓ -1 ) . Then, for almost every sequence b 1 , . . . , b n , . . . of 0 , . . . , ℓ -1 , and for any δ ∈ (0 , 1 / 2) , there exists m such that Z τσ -1 x,x ′ ( W ( b 1 ) ··· ( b n ) ) / ∈ ( δ, 1 -δ ) for any x ∈ X , x ′ ∈ X and n ≥ m .

Proof: Since I ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) converges to I ∞ almost surely, | I ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n )( ℓ -1) ) -I ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) | has to converge to 0 almost surely. Let U ℓ -1 0 and Y ℓ -1 0 denote random variables ranging over X ℓ and Y ℓ , and obeying the distribution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, it holds

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the assumption, I ( Y ℓ -1 0 ; U ℓ -1 | U ℓ -2 0 = u ℓ -2 0 ) ≥ I ( W ) for all u ℓ -2 0 ∈ X ℓ -1 . Hence, I ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ′ ) -I ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) has to converge to 0 almost surely. By applying Lemma 10, one obtains the result.

̸

When q = 2 , since Z ( W ) = Z 0 , 1 ( W ) , this corollary immediately implies the channel polarization phenomenon, although it is not sufficient for general q = 2 . Note that in this derivation one does not use extra conditions e.g., symmetricity of DMC, linearity of a kernel.

If a kernel is linear, a more detailed condition is obtained. Definition 12: Assume ( X , + , · ) be a commutative ring. A kernel g : X ℓ → X ℓ is said to be linear if g ( ax + bz ) = ag ( x ) + bg ( z ) for all a ∈ X , b ∈ X , x ∈ X ℓ , and z ∈ X ℓ .

If g is linear, g can be represented by a square matrix G such that g ( u ℓ -1 0 ) = u ℓ -1 0 G . Let U ℓ -1 0 , X ℓ -1 0 and Y ℓ -1 0 denote random variables taking values on X ℓ , X ℓ and Y ℓ , respectively, and obeying distribution

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where V denotes an ℓ × ℓ full-rank upper triangle matrix. There exists a one-to-one correspondence between X i 0 and U i 0 for all i ∈ { 0 , . . . , ℓ -1 } . Hence, statistical properties of W ( i ) are invariant under an operation G → V G . Further, a permutation of columns of G does not change statistical properties of W ( i ) either. Since any full-rank matrix can be decomposed to the form V LP where V , L , and P are upper triangle, lower triangle, and permutation matrices, without loss of generality we assume that G is a lower triangle matrix and that G kk = 1 where k ∈ { 0 , . . . , ℓ -1 } is the largest number such that the number of non-zero elements in k -th row of G is greater than 1, and where G ij denotes ( i, j ) element of G .

Theorem 13: Assume that X is a field of prime cardinality, and that linear kernel G is not diagonal. Then, P ( I ∞ ∈ { 0 , 1 } ) = 1 .

Proof: It holds

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where S 0 := { j ∈ { 0 , . . . , ℓ -1 } | G kj = 0 } , S 1 := { j ∈ { 0 , . . . , ℓ -1 } | G kj = 0 } , and x j is j -th element of ( u k -1 0 , 0 ℓ -1 k ) G where 0 ℓ -1 k is all-zero vector of length ℓ -k . Let m ∈ { 0 , . . . , k -1 } be such that G km = 0 . Since each u k -1 0 occurs with positive probability 1 /q k , we can apply Lemma 10 with σ ( x ) = x and τ ( x ) = G km x + z for arbitrary z ∈ X . Hence, for sufficiently large n , Z µ x,x ′ ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) is close to 0 or 1 almost surely where µ ( x ) = G i km x + z for all i ∈ { 0 , . . . , q -2 } and z ∈ X . Since q is a prime, when µ 0 ( z ) = z + x ′ -x for x = x ′ , Z µ 0 x,x ′ ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) is close to 0 or 1 if and only if Z ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) is close to 0 or 1, respectively.

̸

This result is a simple generalization of the special case considered by S ¸ as ¸o˘ glu, Telatar, and Arıkan [6]. For a prime power q and a finite field X , we show a sufficient condition for channel polarization in the following corollary.

Corollary 14: Assume that X is a field and that a linear kernel G is not diagonal. If there exists j ∈ { 0 , . . . , k -1 } such that G kj is a primitive element. Then, P ( I ∞ ∈ { 0 , 1 } ) = 1 .

̸

Proof: By applying Lemma 10, one sees that for almost every sequence b 1 , . . . , b n , . . . of 0 , . . . , ℓ -1 , and for any δ ∈ (0 , 1 / 2) , there exists m such that Z σ x,x ′ ( W ( b 1 ) ··· ( b n ) ) / ∈ ( δ, 1 -δ ) for any x ∈ X , x ′ ∈ X and n ≥ m where σ ( x ) = G kj x + z for arbitrary z ∈ X . It suffices to show that for any x ∈ X and x ′ ∈ X , x = x ′ Z x,x ′ ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) is close to 1 if and only if Z ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) is close to 1. When Z x,x ′ ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) is close to 1, Z 0 ,G kj ( x ′ -x ) ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) is close to 1. Hence, Z 0 ,G i kj ( x ′ -x ) ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) is close to 1 for any i ∈ { 0 , . . . , q -2 } . Since G kj is a primitive element, Z 0 ,x ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) is close to 1 for any x ∈ X . It completes the proof.

In [7], it is shown that the channel polarization phenomenon occurs by using a random kernel in which G kj is chosen uniformly from nonzero elements. Corollary 14 says that a deterministic primitive element G kj is sufficient for the channel polarization phenomenon.

## IV. SPEED OF POLARIZATION

Arıkan and Telatar showed the speed of polarization [3]. Korada, S ¸ as ¸o˘ glu, and Urbanke generalized it to any binary linear kernels [5].

̸

Proposition 15: Let { ˆ X n ∈ (0 , 1) } n ∈ N be a random process satisfying the following properties.

- 1) ˆ X n converges to ˆ X ∞ almost surely.
- 2) ˆ X n +1 ≤ ˆ c ˆ X ˆ D n n where { ˆ D n ≥ 1 } n ∈ N are independent and identically distributed random variables, and ˆ c is a constant.

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for β &lt; E [log 2 ˆ D 1 ] where E [ · ] denotes an expectation. Similarly, let { ˇ X n ∈ (0 , 1) } n ∈ N be a random process satisfying the following properties.

- 1) ˇ X n converges to ˇ X ∞ almost surely.
- 2) ˇ X n +1 ≥ ˇ c ˇ X ˇ D n n where { ˇ D n ≥ 1 } n ∈ N are independent and identically distributed random variables, and ˇ c is a constant.

Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the above proposition can straightforwardly be extended to include the rate dependence [4].

In order to apply Proposition 15 to Z max ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) and Z min ( W ( B 1 ) ··· ( B n ) ) as ˆ X n and ˇ X n , respectively, the second conditions have to be proven. In the argument of [5], partial distance of a kernel corresponds to the random variables ˆ D n and ˇ D n in Proposition 15.

Definition 16: Partial distance of a kernel g : X ℓ →X ℓ is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where d ( a, b ) denotes the Hamming distance between a ∈ X ℓ and b ∈ X ℓ .

We also use the following quantities.

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

When g is linear, D ( i ) x,x ′ ( u i -1 0 ) does not depend on x , x ′ or u i -1 0 , in which case we will use the notation D ( i ) instead of D ( i ) x,x ′ ( u i -1 0 ) .

From Lemma 21 in the appendix, the following lemma is obtained.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From Proposition 15 and Corollary 18, the following theorem is obtained.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for β &gt; (1 /ℓ ) ∑ i log ℓ D ( i ) max. When g is a linear kernel represented by a square matrix G , (1 /ℓ ) i log ℓ D ( i ) is called the exponent of G [5].

∑ Example 20: Assume that X is a field and that α ∈ X is a primitive element. For a non-zero element γ ∈ X , let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since G RS (2) = [ 1 0 1 1 ] , G RS ( q ) can be regarded as a generalization of Arıkan's original matrix. The relation between binary polar codes and binary Reed-Muller codes [1] also holds for q -ary polar codes using G RS ( q ) and q -ary ReedMuller codes. From Theorem 13, the channel polarization phenomenon occurs on G RS ( q ) for any γ = 0 when q is a prime. When γ is a primitive element, from Corollary 14, the channel polarization phenomenon occurs on G RS ( q ) for any prime power q . We call G RS ( q ) the Reed-Solomon kernel since the submatrix which consists of i -th row to ( q -1) -th row of G RS ( q ) is a generator matrix of a generalized Reed-Solomon code, which is a maximum distance separable code i.e., D ( i ) = i + 1 . Hence, the exponent of G RS ( q ) is 1 ℓ ∑ i log ℓ ( i +1) where ℓ = q . Since

the exponent of the Reed-Solomon kernel tends to 1 as ℓ = q tends to infinity. When q = 2 2 , the exponent of the ReedSolomon kernel is log e 24 / (4 log e 4) ≈ 0 . 57312 . In Arıkan's original work, the exponent of the 2 × 2 matrix is 0 . 5 [3]. In [5], Korada, S ¸as ¸o˘ glu, and Urbanke showed that by using large kernels, the exponent can be improved, and found a matrix of size 16 whose exponent is about 0.51828. The abovementioned Reed-Solomon kernel with q = 2 2 is reasonably small and simple but has a larger exponent than binary linear kernels of small size. This demonstrates the usefulness of considering q -ary rather than binary channels. For q -ary DMC where q is not a prime, it can be decomposed to subchannels of input sizes of prime numbers [7] by using the method of multilevel coding [8]. The above example shows that when q is a power of a prime, without the decomposition of q -ary DMC, asymptotically better coding scheme can be constructed by using q -ary polar codes with G RS ( q ) .

## V. CONCLUSION

The channel polarization phenomenon on q -ary channels has been considered. We give several sufficient conditions on kernels under which the channel polarization phenomenon occurs. We also show an explicit construction with a q -ary linear kernel G RS ( q ) for q being a power of a prime. The exponent of G RS ( q ) is log e ( q !) / ( q log e q ) which is larger than the exponent of binary matrices of small size even if q = 4 . Our discussion includes channel polarization on non-linear kernels as well. It is known that non-linear binary codes may have a larger minimum distance than linear binary codes, e.g. the Nordstrom-Robinson codes [9]. This implies possibility that there exists a non-linear kernel with a larger exponent than any linear kernel of the same size.

## APPENDIX

Lemma 21:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: For the second inequality, one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The first inequality is obtained as follows.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## ACKNOWLEDGMENT

TT acknowledges support of the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Priority Areas (No. 18079010), MEXT, Japan.

## REFERENCES

- [1] E. Arıkan, 'Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051-3073, July 2009.
- [2] S. Korada and R. Urbanke, 'Polar codes are optimal for lossy source coding,' 2009. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0903.0307
- [3] E. Arıkan and E. Telatar, 'On the rate of channel polarization,' in Proc. 2009 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory , June 28-July 3 2009, pp. 1493-1495.
- [4] T. Tanaka and R. Mori, 'Refined rate of channel polarization,' 2010. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1001.2067
- [5] S. Korada, E. S ¸ as ¸o˘ glu, and R. Urbanke, 'Polar codes: characterization of exponent, bounds, and constructions,' 2009. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0901.0536
- [6] E. S ¸ as ¸o˘ glu, E. Telatar, and E. Arıkan, 'Polarization for arbitrary discrete memoryless channels,' 2009. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0908.0302
- [7] E. Sasoglu, E. Telatar, and E. Arikan, 'Polarization for arbitrary discrete memoryless channels,' in Proc. 2009 IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Taormina, Italy , 11-16 Oct. 2009, pp. 144-148.
- [8] H. Imai and S. Hirakawa, 'A new multilevel coding method using errorcorrecting codes,' Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on , vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 371-377, may 1977.
- [9] F. MacWilliams and N. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes . North-Holland Amsterdam, 1977.