## Low-Complexity Channel Reconstruction Methods Based on SVD-ZF Precoding in Massive 3D-MIMO Systems

Yuwei Ren 1 , Yang Song 2 , Xin Su 2

1 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China

- 2 State Key Laboratory of Wireless Mobile Communications, China Academy of Telecommunications Technology, Beijing, China

Abstract : In this paper, we study the low-complexity channel reconstruction methods for downlink precoding  in  massive  multiple-Input  multiple-Output (MIMO)  systems.  When  the  user  is  allocated  less streams  than  the  number  of  its  antennas,  the  base station (BS) or user usually utilizes the singular value decomposition  (SVD)  to  get  the  effective  channels, whose dimension is  equal  to  the  number  of  streams. This process is called channel reconstruction and done in BS for time division duplex (TDD) mode. However, with the increasing of antennas in BS, the computation burden of SVD is getting incredible. Here, we propose a series of novel low-complexity channel reconstruction methods for downlink precoding in 3D spatial channel model. We consider different correlations between elevation and azimuth antennas, and divide the large dimensional matrix SVD into two kinds of small-size matrix SVD.  The  simulation results show that the proposed methods only produce less  than  10%  float  computation  than  the  traditional SVD zero-forcing (SVD-ZF) precoding method, while keeping nearly the same performance of 1Gbps.

Key words: Channel Reconstruction; SVD; 3D-MIMO; Massive MIMO;

## I. INTRODUCTION

Massive MIMO  is  one  of the most importantly investigated subjects in the literature of coming fifth-generation  (5G)  technologies  due  to  the  high potential it offers in improving not only the reliability but also the throughput of the system. In fact, Information  theory  has  shown  that  the  capacity  of Multi-User  MIMO  (MU-MIMO)  channels  could  be achieved  through  simple  zero-forcing  (ZF)  methods [1]. Meanwhile, plane antennas and 3D spatial channel  model  make  massive  MIMO  implemented possible.

In the past, the traditional arrays only consider the azimuth  domain,  widely  called  uniform  linear  array (ULA). Recently, uniform plane array (UPA) is proposed to cope with 3D  channel model.  And significant  interest  has  risen  on  exploring  the  new spatial character of the elevation / azimuth domain in UPA, in order to devise efficient MIMO transmission / reception schemes. In UPA, passive or active antennas are placed in the elevation domain to provide additional  degrees  of  freedom,  which  are  effectively generated by elevation spread of the channels and the elevation angle distribution of users.

The  elevation  domain  antennas  are  used  to  form multiple elevation domain beams, just as Fig.1 shown. For  example, these  beams  can  be  used  to  form subsectors in the elevation domain across the system bandwidth, where the subsectors adapt slowly depending on the user load and locations. In another example, these elevation domain beams are frequency-selective  and  can  adapt  quickly  to  cope with various user traffic and conditions, which allows fully  flexible  multi-user  MIMO  exploiting  the  full three dimensional (3D) channel. Some recent deployments  taking  advantage  of  elevation  domain beams (e.g., [2, 3]), have shown up to 30 percent gain in system capacity.

Despite such huge performance potential, the deployment  in  realistic  setup  is  hindered  by  several practical challenges that are not of concern in conventional MIMO  systems. The computational complexity  is  a  main  concern  when  the  numbers  of antennas  and  users  go  to  be  large  or  infinite.  For example, the computation burden of matrix decomposition  in  channel  reconstruction  would  be  a big challenge. The traditional singular value decomposition  (SVD)  usually  requires 2 ( ) O Nt float computations  [4],  where Nt is  the  number  of  BS antennas.  With Nt increasing,  this  is  an  inconceivable challenge for hardware implementation.

Some work has been completed in the face of such challenge.  For  example,  [5]  [6]  give  some  iterative convergence  algorithms  to  approximate  matrix  SVD, widely used in traditional MIMO systems. [5] adopts randomized  algorithms  to  construct  an  approximate SVD only  with  less  than  5  iterations,  especially  for approximating an input matrix with a low-rank element.  But  this  method  does  not  cut  the  affect  of Nt , and with the BS antennas increasing, the convergence  cannot  be  proved  in  limited  iteration, which  might  lead  to  larger  matrix  computation  than traditional SVD [4]. Besides, 3GPP is actively developing the  3D  channel model  to enable the evaluation of elevation beamforming. For this, [7][8] apply the 3D beamforming to massive MIMO, where the elevation and azimuth antennas make beamforming respectively,  and  the  two  beamforming vectors  are  transformed  into  precoding  matrix  by Kronecker  product.  Simply,  the  two  beamforming vectors could be the main singular-vectors of different two  dimensions,  and  the  corresponding  precoding matrix  is  maximum  ratio  transmission  (MRT).  Note that my paper takes similar idea partly.

This paper proposes a series of channel reconstruction methods based on the special structure of  3D  spatial  channel  model.  The  novelty  mainly includes three parts:

-  Firstly,  our  methods  are  fully  to  explore  the special  characters  of  3D-MIMO  system.  They consider the different correlations between elevation  and  azimuth  antennas,  as  well  as  the different  angle  resolution between elevation and azimuth directions, and divide the large dimensional  SVD  into  two  kinds  of  small-size SVD.
-  Secondly,  our  methods  cut  the  matrix  iterations and  remove  the  affect  of  the  number  of  BS antennas. Compared to those iterative methods in [5] [6], the huge burden introduced by the number  of  BS  antennas  is  greatly  reduced  by utilizing two small-size SVDs, which could greatly reduce the computation complexity.
-  Thirdly,  our  methods  cope  with  the  demands  of

different number of user's streams. These parameters  in  these  methods  could  be  freely changed  according  to  the  realistic  setting,  with the  constraints,  such  as  the  number  of  effective channel  rank  and  BS/user's  antennas,  capacity performance and complexity.

The  3D  channel  model  under  Urban  Micro  cell with  high  (outdoor/indoor)  UE  density  (3D-UMi) scenario calibrated by 3GPP  [9] is adopted. In MU-MIMO system, the link-level performance of the proposed  SVD-ZF  methods  and  the  complexity  are analyzed  and  compared.  The  rest  of  this  paper  is organized as follows. Section II describes the problem formulation.  The  proposed  low-complexity  channel reconstruction  methods  are  presented  in  Section  III. Meanwhile, it outlines complexity analysis. The simulation  is  performed  in  Section  IV.  And  the  last Section gives the conclusion.

Notation:  Bold  letters  are  utilized  to  denote  the matrix  or the vector. K I is the identity matrix  of K K  . ( , ) CN R m denotes the circular  symmetric complex Gaussian distribution with  mean m and covariance matrix R . The superscripts T, H denote the transpose  and  conjugate  transpose,  respectively.  The Kronecker product is denoted by  .

Fig.1. Illustration of Massive 3D-MIMO systems: The elevation beams are divided into 3 parts; Beam 1 serves the users in high building; Beam 2 is pointing to users in far-subsector. The other beams belong to near-subsector users.

<!-- image -->

## II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION

## 2.1 3D channel model

Relative  to  the  traditional  2D  spatial  channel  model (SCM) channel model, the 3D channel model considers the radio propagation in the vertical dimension. Here the 3D channel model calibrated by the 3GPP is recommended [9].

The generation of the large scale parameters can be referred to [9]. The small-scale channel coefficient is generated by summing the contribution of some rays.

Assume that one ray is composed of L M sub-paths. The coordinate system for 3D channel model can be seen from Fig.2. m,n ray means the m-th sub-path in the n-th  ray.  The  global  coordinate  system  defines  the zenith angle ZoD/ZoA  and the azimuth angle AoD/AoA  . 0 ZoD/ZoA 90   points to the horizontal For NLOS path, direction and ZoD 0    points to the zenith direction[9]. ˆ n is the given direction of m,n ray . ˆ  and ˆ  are the spherical basis vectors.

The channel coefficient from transmitter element s to receiver element u for the n-th ray is modeled as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For LOS path,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig.2. The coordinate system for 3D channel model

<!-- image -->

where , , rx u F  and , , rx u F  are the antenna radiation patterns for element u in the direction of the spherical basis  vectors, ˆ  and ˆ  respectively. t ,s, x F  and t , , x s F  are the  antenna  radiation  patterns  for  element  s  in  the direction of the spherical basis vectors, ˆ  and ˆ  respectively.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is the unit vector about the azimuth of arrival angle(AoA) ϕn,m,AOA and the zenith of arrival angle(ZoA) θn,m,ZOA . And also , , ˆ tx n m r is the counterpart at the transmit side; , rx u d and , tx s d are the location vectors of the transmit and receive elements, respectively;   , , , , , , , n m n m n m n m         are the random initial  phases  for  sub-path  m  of  ray  n; 0  is the wavelength of the carrier frequency; R K is  the  Ricean K-factor; , n m v is  the  Doppler  frequency  component. More detailed description about the generation of 3D channel model can be referred to [9].

## 2.2 3D-MIMO system model

The  BS  in  each  cell  is  equipped  with  2D  planar cross-polarized antenna array. The number of antenna elements in azimuth direction and elevation direction is A N and N E respectively.  And  the  total  number  of antennas  is 2 A E Nt N N    with  dual-polarized  style. The  configuration  of  antenna  array  is  presented  in Fig.3. Each user is equipped with M antennas.

Fig.3. The coordinate system for 3D channel model

<!-- image -->

The  received  signal 1 k S k C   x of  the  k-th  user  in MU-MIMO can be expressed as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where M , Nt , k S are the num of user antennas, the num of BS antennas and the allocated streams for k-th user, respectively. 1, K k k l l f l l k     E H W s represents the interferences from the other users. ( ) k M Nt  H is the k-th downlink channel matrix, K is the number of users, ( ) k k Nt S  W is the k-th precoding matrix. ( ) k k S M  E is the k-th estimating matrix. ( 1) k k S  s is transmitted signal for the k-th user. 2 ~ ( , ) k k k S S CN   v 0 I is the noise in the users.

## 2.3 Problem formulation

In  conventional  LTE  systems,  the  users  are  usually equipped  with M antennas  (e.g.,  2,  4  or  8),  and allocated S layers  (e.g.,  1  or  2),  which  means  that BS  has  to  extract * S Nt effective  channels  from * M Nt estimated user channels before downlink precoding. In fact, the number of effective data steams is  less  than  of  user's  antennas  ( M S  )  in  order  to maintain the high performance. The whole process is showed  in  Fig.4.  In  TDD-MIMO  systems,  the  users send sounding reference signals (SRS) to the BS in the uplink, and then, by these SRS, the BS estimates and gets the channels M Nt  H of different users. And how does  the  BS  get  the  effective  user  channels  from * M Nt channel matrix to S streams? The measure is to make channel reconstruction by the  SVD in M Nt H  , which is to get the main singular-vector S Nt H  . Next, BS gets downlink effective channel S Nt H  by TDD  reciprocity and makes the downlink precoding. And the user takes the SVD  to  get  the  effective  channels.  Therefore,  our focus challenge is the Step: 2 ( M Nt S Nt H H    ).

Fig.4.  The  illustration  of  the  downlink  precoding  process. For  TDD  systems,  step-1  completes  users'  SRS  in  uplink, and  BS  estimates  uplink  channel H M Nt  with  all  users' antennas, and extracts effective channel S Nt H  for downlink precoding in step-2. Next is to process precoding and to send data by S Nt H  .

<!-- image -->

## 2.4 Traditional channel reconstruction method

After  getting  the  realistic  user's  MIMO  channel  by estimating the SRS, BS makes channel reconstruction with  the  transform  from H M Nt  to S Nt H  ,  based  on per precoding unit (PU). One PU could be a resource block (RB), or many  RBs,  or  across the  whole bandwidth. If we define one PU includes RB N RBs, and  one  RB  is  with SC N subcarriers.  So  there  are RB SC N N subcarriers. Here, there is A E V V antennas at BS, and A V and E V are  the  number  of  column  and line respectively.

The  traditional  eigen-beamforming  (EBF)  method is  to  calculate the correlation matrix and to make the SVD, and here we call it Direct SVD .

## Direct SVD

S-1:  Calculate  the  average  correlation  matrix R based  on RB SC N N channels per PU.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

S-2:  Get  the  main  singular-vectors  and  reconstruct  the channel.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In S-2, the core part is the SVD manipulation, which would produce more computation with Nt increasing. So one potential solution is to reduce the dimension of the correlation matrix R .

## III. PROPOSED METHODS

## 3.1 The source inspiration

With  the  increasing  of  BS  antennas,  the  uniform planar arrays (UPAs) would replace traditional uniform linear arrays (ULAs) in future 5G. In UPAs, the  two-dimensional  antennas  could  be  divided  into elevation antennas and azimuth antennas, which hold different  correlations.  For  example,  there  is  much similar  information  between  the  adjacent  columns  or the  adjacent  lines  of  the  UPAs  in  3GPP  3D-MIMO model  [9].  That  is  to  say  that  we  can  extract  main partial  antenna  information  to  approximate  complete channel information. In math, the main singular-vector is considered. What's more, the spatial characteristics of  antennas  also  affect  the  correlation.  For  instance, the same polarized columns of antennas share similar spatial information.  Meanwhile,  we  note  that  the column includes more spatial information than the line antenna  in  UPAs,  e.g.,  spatial  extension  of  angle  in elevation / azimuth and the number of spatial sub-paths, which means that line antennas take more spatial information and should be approximated more accurately.

So, we consider the optimization with the correlation  of  line  /  column  antennas  and  different polarizations, and try to extract the main representative vectors. And utilize the limited information to replace the complete channel matrix.

## 3.2 Three different implementation methods

Here we can extract one column vector ( 1) E V  V and S line vectors ( 1) A V  V to approach all of the column and line  antennas  information.  And  then,  the  Kronecker '  ' makes ( 1) E V  V and ( 1) A V  V into ˆ ( ) k S Nt  H .

## Method I

S-1: Calculate the average elevation correlation matrix R based on VA column antennas vectors and RB SC N N effective channels per PU.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where , , ( ) E n k v M V  H is the channel matrix of the k-th user at the v-th subcarrier per PU, corresponding to the n-th column of the BS array.

S-2:  Calculate  the  main  column  singular-vector  based  on elevation antennas correlation matrix ( ) E E k V V  R

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

S-3: Calculate the equivalent azimuth channel

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

S-4 ： Calculate the average azimuth correlation matrix R

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

S-5:  Calculate  the  main  column  singular-vector  based  on azimuth antennas correlation matrix ( ) E E k V V  R

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

S-6 ： Reconstruct the channel by'  ' , , ( 1) A i A k V  v and , ( 1) E k E V  v .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Method  I  totally  averages  the  elevation  antennas information into one vector , ( 1) E k E V  v , which only requires one SVD with E V . But there is much loss of elevation antennas  information,  which  could  cause  bad  spatial resolution in elevation. Next, Method II avoids averaging  all  the  elevation  antennas  information,  but introduces A V SVD computation.

## Method II

S-1: Calculate the average elevation correlation matrix R based on each column antenna vectors and RB SC N N effective channels per PU.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

S-2: Calculate the main  column  singular-vector based  on elevation antennas correlation matrix , ( ) E E k v V V  R

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

S-3: Calculate the equivalent azimuth channel

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

S-4: The same with S-4 in Method I.

## S-5: The same with S-5 in Method I.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Method  II nearly saves each column  antennas information, but increases the complexity with additional SVD computation, compared to Method I. In  the  following,  Method  III  focuses  on  different antenna polar styles.

## Method III

S-1: Calculate the average elevation correlation matrix R based on  column  antenna  vectors  with  the  same  polarization,  and RB SC N N effective channels per PU.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where i P S is  the  set  of  column  antenna  vectors  with  same polar style i P .

S-2: Calculate  the  main  column  singular-vector  based  on elevation antennas correlation matrix , ( ) i E E k P V V  R

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

S-3: Calculate the equivalent azimuth channel

<!-- image -->

where P N is the number of polarizations.

S-4: The same with S-4 in Method I.

S-5: The same with S-5 in Method I.

S-6 ： Reconstruct the channel by'  ' , , ( 1) A i A k V  v and , , ( 1) E k j E V  v .

<!-- image -->

Note  that  the  sequence  of  the , , ( 1) E k j E V  v in  each  column  is depend on the realistic  layout  of  different  polarizations  in  the UPAs.

Method  I  II  III  shares  the  same  idea  that  the  one large  dimension  ( Nt )  SVD  computation  is  divided into  several  small-size  matrix  decomposition.  They require 2, 1 A V  and 3 SVD computation.

## 3.3 Complexity analysis

In this section, we analyze the computation complexity  of  the  proposed  methods  and  compare  it with  the  complexity  of  the  classical  SVD  (used  in Direct SVD). We express the computation complexity in  terms  of  the  number  of  floating  point  operations (FLOPs).  In  the  following,  each  scalar  /  complex addition or multiplication is counted as one FLOP. For the sake of simplicity, we do not distinguish between real-valued  and  complex-valued  multiplications  and neglect the computation complexity of common parts among  these  methods.  Note  that,  although  it  cannot characterize  the  true  computation  complexity,  FLOP counting captures the  order  of  the  computation  load, so suffices for the purpose of the complexity analysis. Note that the exact number of calculation depends on the difference between implementation methods. Here, we  take  some  popular  calculation  rules  in  [4]  [10], which  are  widely  used  in  methods  analysis.  The following table gives the necessary calculation conclusions  of  typical  processes.  Here, M N   A  , M N   C  , N L   B  are  arbitrary  matrices. U , Σ , V are  the  corresponding  decomposition  matrix  of   , , ( ) svd  U Σ V A . Q is the orthogonal matrix of A by QR decomposition.

Table I Float computation of traditional matrix model

| Matrix-Matrix Prod of  H  AA  :  2  (  )  2  2  M  M  M N  M N        Matrix-Matrix Prod of  AB  2  MNL  ML    Matrix Scaling of    A  MN  Matrix-Matrix Sum of    A  C  MN  QR  Matrix  decomposition  for  A  , required  Q  3  2  2  4(  )  3  N  M N  MN      SVD  Matrix  decomposition  for  A  ,required  ,    U  2  3  4  13  M N  N    SVD  Matrix  decomposition  for  A  ,required  ,    V  2  3  2  13  MN  N     |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

For the proposed methods, the matrix decomposition  holds  makes  up  the  most  of  the  float computations. Meanwhile, the complexity order mainly  depends  on  the  dimension  of  the  matrix,  the times  and  the  styles  of  decomposition  method.  The proposed  Method  I  requires  2  SVDs  respectively  in elevation  and  azimuth  dimensions.  The  Method  II provides more accurate channel information for downlink precoding, while requiring 1 A V  SVDs. If considering dual-polarized antennas, we could utilize the  proposed  Method  III,  which  requires  3  SVD computations.

Next we give an accurate float computation results, including matrix decomposition, addition and multiplication.  Note  that,  the  common  part  of  float computation among these methods, and the manipulation  beyond  the  methods'  description,  are ignored.  By  the  conclusions  in  Table  I,  asymptotic complexity  scaling  is 2 ( ) O Nt for  Direct  SVD  and   2 2 max ( ), ( ) A E O N O N for Method  I/II/III; thus, the asymptotic complexity gap between these methods is huge, especially for large Nt .

Fig.5. Complexity comparison between proposed Method I, II,  III  and Direct SVD, and the simulation parameters are based on the following Table II.

<!-- image -->

Fig.5  shows  that,  with  the  antennas  increasing, larger  dimension  of  matrix  decomposition  produces more  float  manipulations.  Compared  to  Direct  SVD, our proposed methods only require less than 10% float computations when the number of antennas is around 200 antennas, and a larger number of antennas could make the proposed methods more effective. Method II requires more float manipulations than other proposed methods.  And  the  difference  between  Method  II  and III  could  be  ignored.  Considering  the  throughput  in next section, the complexity is opposed to the performance,  but  there  are  some  reasonable  points, which  make  the  balance  between  complexity  and throughput.

## IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we provide some numerical results to evaluate our proposed low-complexity channel reconstruction methods (Method I, Method II, Method III). The system model considered is in Section II with a  BS  employing  a  8 16  UPA  with  7  users,  each having 8 antennas. The 3D-MIMO-UMi channels are modeled as [9].  Table  II  lists  the  detailed  simulation parameters.

Table II 3D-MIMO simulation parameters

| Parameters  Settings  Scenario  3D-UMi  user antenna configuration  8Rx, dual-polarized (0/+90)  BS  antenna  configuration (  )  H  V    Dual-polarized  8  8  H  V    Bandwidth  20MHz (100 RBs)  Antenna element interval  0.5  carrier  wave  length  both  in  horizontal and vertical direction  Carrier frequency  2GHz  Number of users  7  Number of streams per user  2   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

| MCS  Fixed, 64QAM  User distribution  Referred to [11]  User speed  3km/h  Traffic model  Full buffer  Channel estimation  Ideal  Receiver  MMSE-IRC   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Considering  the  link  simulation  with  MU-MIMO systems, Fig.6 exhibits the performance of the proposed methods with different normalization methods, which are based on entire precoding, per-user precoding and per-stream precoding respectively. Method II displays the best performance compared to other proposed methods. Besides, although Method  I gets  the  worst  performance,  it  is also around 1Gbps.

Whatever  the  normalization  method  is,  Method  II gets loss no more 10% than the ideal method (Direct SVD),  meanwhile  keeping  low  complexity.  On  the other hand, these methods make performance inversely to the computation complexity, just as showed  in  Fig.5  and  Fig.6.  So  the  final  realization method  should  depend  on  the  trade-off  between  the performance and complexity. Different normalization methods result in different performance, while all the throughputs are beyond 1Gbps. The normalization by per stream precoding provides more accurate interference information between different streams in zero-forcing precoding. Compared to the other normalization methods, it gets best performance.

Fig.6. Achievable throughput using the proposed 3 methods while  comparing  to  the  ideal  Direct  SVD,  with  different normalization methods in 1 RB PU granularity.

<!-- image -->

If we consider correlation between adjacent resource block (RB), reasonable computational resolution could reduce the corresponding complexity. Here, we consider the different RB resolution cases by setting the parameter PU granularity RB N , e.g. 1 RB, 2 RB and 4 RB in Fig.7. Similarly, we consider different PU granularities. Just as the analysis in Section III, PU

granularity greatly affects the complexity computation. With 2 RB or 4 RB PU granularity, except Method II, both Method I and Method III are below1Gbps. And the loss with Direct SVD  is enlarged with  PU granularity increasing.

Fig.7. Achievable throughput using the proposed 3 methods and the ideal Direct SVD, with different PU granularity {1, 2, 4} N RB  in entire precoding normalization.

<!-- image -->

Based  on  the  analysis  and  simulation  results,  we can conclude that the complexity and throughput are conflicted with each other. The larger PU granularity leads to less float computation, but the throughput gets less.  In  future  5G,  while  meeting  the  performance requirements,  a  reasonable  complexity  is  necessary. From the above two figures, the affect of the normalization  methods  and  the  PU  granularities  is evaluated, and their joint optimization is necessary to cope  with  the  demands  of  the  performance  and  the computation complexity. The simulation results match our traditional expectation: higher resolution  RB computation takes better performance; the higher complexity  method gets better performance. And the simulation is based on realistic parameters in 3D-MIMO, and the results  could  be  considered  as  a valuable performance target.

## V. CONCLUSIONS

This paper proposes a series of low-complexity channel  reconstruction  methods  for  TDD  massive 3D-MIMO systems. These methods fully explore the correlation  or  the  dependence  between  elevation  and azimuth  antennas,  and  divide  the  conventional  large dimensional SVD into two stages of small-size SVD computation.  Compared to  the  existing  method,  they could largely reduce the computation  complexity, especially  with  large-scale  antennas.  The  complexity analysis shows that the proposed methods only require less than 10% float computations, while the performance could be kept around 1Gbps by downlink ZF precoding.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This work  was  supported by the National High Technology  Research  and  Development  Program  of China  (863  Program)  (Grant  No.  2014AA01A705) and  National  Science  and  Technology  Major  Project of China (Grant No. 2015ZX03001034).

## References

- [1] T.  L.  Marzetta,  'Noncooperative  cellular  wireless  with unlimited  numbers  of  base  station  antennas,' Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on , vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 3590-3600, 2010.
- [2] Alcatel Lucent, Lightradio, http://www.alcatel-lucent.com/lightradio/.
- [3] Nokia Simense Networks, Liquid radio, http://www.nokiasiemensnetworks.com/portfolio/liquidnet /liquidradio/.
- [4] Gene H. Golub, C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations (3 rd ed.), Johns Hopkins University Press Baltimore, 1996.
- [5] Y. Saad, Iterative Methods for Sparse Linear Systems, Cambridge University Press. 2003.
- [6] A. K. Meraim, A. Chkeif, and Y. Hua, 'Fast Orthonormal PAST Algorithm,' Signal Processing Letters IEEE , vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 60-62, 2000.
- [7] X.  Li,  L.  Li  and  L.  Xie,  'Performance  Analysis  of  3D Massive MIMO Cellular Systems with Collaborative Base Station,' International Journal of Antennas &amp; Propagation , vol. 6, no. 13, pp. 1156-1159, 2014.
- [8] Y. Li, X. Ji, D. Liang and Y. Li, 'Dynamic Beamforming for Three-Dimension MIMO Technique in LTE-Advanced Networks,' International Journal of Antennas &amp; Propagation , vol. 2013, no. 3, pp. 1492-1519, 2013.
- [9] 3GPP, TR 36.873, v1.3.0, (2014-02), Study on 3D channel model for LTE (Release 12) .
- [10] R.  Hunger, Floating  Point  Operations  in  Matrix-Vector Calculus , Technische Universität München, Associate Institute for Signal Processing, Tech. Rep., 2007.
- [11] C. Lee, M. Lee and C. Huang, 'Sectorization with Beam Pattren Design Using  3D  Beamforming  Techniques,' Signal  and  Information  Processing  Association  Annual Summit  and Conference (APSIPA), 2013 Asia-Pacific IEEE , pp. 1-5, 2013.

## Biographies

Yuwei REN, received the B.S. degree in communication engineering in 2011 and is currently pursing Ph.D. degree in communication and  information  systems  from  Beijing  University of  Posts  and  Telecommunications.  His  research interests  include  Massive  MIMO,  mmWave  and Ad  hoc networks. Especially  he  pays  much attention into the design of practical implementation methods. Yang  SONG, received  his  Ph.D.  degree  from Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2006. He has worked with Alcatel-Lucent  Shanghai  Bell  since  2006  and DOCOMO Beijing Communications Laboratories since 2010. Now  he  is with the State  Key Laboratory  of  Wireless  Mobile  Communications, CATT, Beijing, China. His research interests are Massive MIMO system and its standardization in LTE/LTE-A. Xin  SU, received the  B.S.,  M.S.  and  Ph.D. degrees  from  Xidian  University,  Xi-an,  China  in 2000, 2003 and 2006 respectively. From 2006 to 2007, he was  with the  System  &amp;  Standard Department, Datang Mobile, CATT, Beijing, China. In 2007, he joined the System Lab, Telecommunication  System  Division,  Samsung Electronics,  Suwon,  Korea.  Since  2011,  he  has been with the State Key Laboratory of Wireless Mobile  Communications,  CATT,  Beijing,  China. His  research  interests  are  multi-antenna  system and its standardization in LTE/LTE-A &amp; IMT-2020(5G).