## Distibuted Massive MIMO Channel Estimation and Channel Database Assistance

Arkady Molev-Shteiman Radio Algorithm Research Huawei Technologies Bridgewater, NJ  USA arkady.molev.shteiman@huawei.com Laurence Mailaender Radio Algorithm Research Huawei Technologies Bridgewater, NJ  USA laurence.mailaender@huawei.com

Abstract -Due  to  the  low  per-antenna  SNR  and  high signaling overhead, channel estimation is a major bottleneck in Massive  MIMO  systems.  Spatial  constraints  can  improve estimation performance by exploiting sparsity.  Solutions exist for far field - beam domain channel estimation based on angle of arrival estimation. However, there is no equivalent solution for near field and distributed MIMO spatial channel estimation.    We  present  a  solution-  source  domain  channel estimation-  that  is  based  on  source  location  estimation.    We extend  this  to  employ  a  'Channel  Database'  incorporating information  about  the  physical  scattering  environment  into channel estimation. We  present methods for generation, storage and usage of the Channel Database to assist localization and communication.

## Keywords-Massive  MIMO,  Spatial  Channel  Estimation, Channel Database, Location Assisted communication

## I. INTRODUCTION

As the number of antennas increases in modern Massive MIMO communications, channel estimation becomes increasingly  burdensome.  In  fact,  channel  estimation  may dominate the receiver algorithmic complexity, impose large signaling overhead, and become the prime limiting factor in the overall system capacity [1].

Estimation error generally increases when more uncorrelated parameters have to be estimated from the same data record. This is a serious performance issue for Massive MIMO where N may be 100, 1000, or more.  It is commonly assumed that the narrowband channel between an M element array and  a  single  antenna  user  is  characterized  by M independent  parameters.  A  step  forward  is  achieved  if  the channel  can  instead  be  modeled  as  a  sum  of K directional beams ( K&lt;&lt;M ).  In  such cases the number of parameters to be  estimated  is  dramatically  reduced  to  4 K (assuming  an angle, delay, and complex amplitude for each beam).  Such beam-domain techniques have been shown to offer powerful performance gains [2] [3]. Previous works have assumed the far-field scenario for spatial channel estimation, which cannot be applied to near-field sources or distributed antennas where the beam concept doesn't work.  We generalize  this  by  introducing  a  spatial  channel  estimation algorithm for near-field that represents the channel as a sum of  sources  rather  than  beams,  therefore  we  estimate  source locations rather than angles of arrival. This near-field Xiao-Feng Qi Radio Algorithm Research Huawei Technologies Bridgewater NJ  USA xiao.feng.qi@huawei.com approach is a more general and convenient representation for distributed Massive MIMO systems.

Localization  by  Direct  Positioning  in  [4]  used  virtual transmitters  to  model  the  multipath  and  thereby  improve location  accuracy.  Recently,  this  was  extended  to  estimate the virtual positions simultaneously with the mobile's position  [5],  which  does  not  require  any  prior  database information, although at the cost of high complexity. Location assisted communication was proposed in [6], however they concentrated mainly on higher layer issues and not channel estimation. Authors in [7] [8] [9] present methods where location information reduces the search space to make channel estimation faster and less complex.

Taking the location concept even further, it is possible to claim that if the radio environment were known exactly, the channel becomes completely deterministic given the user and array locations, meaning there are in fact only 5 parameters to estimate (the user's x,y,z position and complex amplitude) regardless of the number of radio antennas. In other words, the user's position provides a strong 'ray tracing' constraint. This  concept  holds  the  potential  for  great  improvements  in capacity,  if  the  user  location  and  the  radio  environment (walls, buildings, etc.) can be known to sufficient precision.

Channel databases are used in channel change prediction, scheduling, and other algorithms for system robustness [10] [11].  A  popular  approach  to  these  goals  is  using  an  RF fingerprinting  database  [12].  Our  paper  takes  a  database approach, but our emphasis is on channel estimation taking the deterministic ray tracing model of the environment into account. This is a highly 'compressed' form of environmental  information  that  improves  both  location  and channel estimation.

## II. MULTISOURCE CHANNEL ESTIMATION

## A. Channel Representation

The  concept  of  modeling  multipath  as  originating  from an additional 'virtual source' is well known in the engineering  literature,  for  example,  to  model  the  ground bounce in mobile radio channels [13].

Figure 1: Reflection as Mirror Source

<!-- image -->

This  single  bounce  idea  is  easily  extended  to  more complex  propagation  scenarios  where  each  wall,  building, etc.  requires  an  additional  virtual  (or,  'mirror')  source  to model  its  contribution  to  the  received  signal.    Multiple bounces  can  also  be  handled  in  a  like  manner  by  adding more mirror sources. We will call a source that produces K reflections  a  source  of  order K .  In  Figure  2  we  see  an example of  ray  tracing  in  a  hallway  with  two  walls.  If  we neglect higher than second order sources, then this environment includes the following sources:

- -Original Main Source
- -Virtual  Mirror  Source  1  -  The  reflection  of  the  main source from wall 1. It is a first order reflection.
- -Virtual Mirror Source 2 - The reflection of main source from wall 2.  It is a first order reflection.
- -Virtual  Mirror  Source  2.1  -  The  reflection  of  mirror source 2 from wall 2. It is a second order reflection.

But  the  AP  sees  only  three  sources:  main  source,  mirror source  1  and  mirror  source  2.1.  Mirror  source  2  is  not included as the AP is outside the visibility sector of Mirror Source 2.

Figure 2: Multisource Ray Tracing

<!-- image -->

The multisource channel is represented as the superposition of K real and mirror sources [14] and may be expressed:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

$$Where: m is the AP antenna index M is the number of AP antennas location$$

  , , m m m m l x y z  is the AP antenna m

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The function   , k m Str l l represents the line of sight channel between  point  with  location m l and  point  with  location k l . Here we use the 'near-field' description in which angles do not appear. If the steering vector includes both the near-field phase response and the free-space path loss, is it written as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The notation k m l l  represents distance between two points:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The source  amplitude  g k is  a  product  of N gains , k n r of  its all reflections and transmitter complex amplitude TX g .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Channel estimation can be performed by estimating the K source spatial parameters   ˆ ˆ , k k g l , and applying:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## B. Channel Estimation Algorithm

There  are  many  ways  to  estimate  the  source  location (MUSIC,  correlation,  etc.)  Here  we  propose  a  correlationbased  method  due  to  its  low  complexity  (a  MUSIC-based approach is taken in our companion paper [15]).

The Channel Estimation has following steps:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- -Find list of correlation peak (virtual sources locations) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The notation   * represents the conjugate operation.

The search starts  with  a  coarse  resolution, 4  and then zooms in with more precise resolution. In our simulation we  did  a  few  iterations  of  zooming  until  we  got  to  a resolution of 64 

- -Given  the  estimated    source  locations    we  estimate  the source complex amplitude according to:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- -From the spatial parameters   ˆ ˆ , k k g l we reconstruct the channel according to (1.5).

## C. Simulation

We  simulate  the  signal  propagation  in  a  2D  room  with dimensions W = 6.4m by D = 6.4m. The carrier frequency is 1.5GHz  -  the  wavelength  is  0.2m.  We  assume  only  first order  reflections,  so  there  are  5  sources:  1  original  and  4 virtual.  We  assume  that  the  wall  reflection  coefficient  is equal to 1. The simulation setup is shown in figure below:

Figure 3: Simulation set up

<!-- image -->

The UE location is uniformly distributed over the room. The  number  of  AP  antennas  depends  on  spacing  between

them. We simulate following scenarios:

| Spacing between Antennas  0.5    2    8    Number of Antennas  256  64  4   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## Table 1: Simulation Scenario

In order to capture the original and all first-order reflections we search for peak over the interval from -W to 2W and from -D to 2D.

Simulation  results  for  different  numbers  of  antennas  are shown in Figure 4.

Because  we  use  antenna  domain  channel  estimation  as  an input, we present the Error Vector Magnitude (EVM) of the multisource  domain  channel  estimation  as  a  function  of antenna domain channel estimation EVM.

Figure 4:  Source domain channel estimation results

<!-- image -->

## III. MULTISINK CHANNEL ESTIMATION AND CHANNEL DATABASE ASSISTANCE

## A. Channel Representation

Previous authors have used the Virtual Source approach to model multipath. We believe we are the first to extend this to Virtual Sinks. Due  to channel reciprocity  we  may represent the channel as the superposition of virtual receivers and  as  well  as  a  superposition  of  virtual  transmitters.  An example of this duality is shown in

Figure 5 .

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: Multi Source/Sink Channel representation duality

In the same manner as the multisource channel was expressed by (1.1) we may express the multisink channel as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where:

TX l is the user transmitter location.

TX g is the user complex amplitude.

, m k l is the AP antenna m , virtual sink k location

, m k g is the AP antenna m , virtual sink k amplitude

The  virtual  sink  complex  amplitude  is  a  product  of  all reflections and is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where , , m k n r is the reflection coefficient number n of sink k of received antenna m .

In reality, due to blockage and limited size of the reflection surface of each virtual sink, there is a 'visibility sector' that defines its reception zone. The nature of the visibility sector is  shown  in  Figure  1.    The  multisink  channel  model  that takes account of the sink's visibility sectors is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where   , , m k Cvs l s is  the  indicator  function  that  checks whether location l belongs to visibility sector , m k s .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Expression (1.9) uses the vector of M K  sink locations, sectors  and  amplitudes   , , , , , m k m k m k g s l which  encodes  the local wall positions, and is independent of UE location so the same vector applies to any user. Once the AP is installed this vector can be pre-computed and stored in a database, as the surrounding  environment  will  be  quite  stable.  We  call  it  a Channel Database because the vector of virtual sinks has all the  necessary  information  about  the  environment  to  enable ray-tracing constrained channel estimation.

This channel estimation is based on the user spatial parameters estimation   ˆ ˆ , TX TX g l and reconstructs the channel as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Because we have to estimate only 5 real parameters, user complex amplitude and location, much less than the 4K

parameters required for multisource, the quality of such estimation will be higher.

- -The antenna domain channel estimation has no constraints.
- -The multibeam or multisource channel estimation reduces the channel estimation space to a subspace that satisfies the spatial constraints (final number of spatial beams/sources) and thereby improves estimation quality
- -The multisink channel estimation reduces this subspace even more, to satisfy the spatial constraints and blockages of the specific environment described in the Channel Database and thereby improves estimation quality even more.

## B. Channel Estimation Algorithm

Our channel estimation approach for multisink is as follows: Antenna domain channel estimation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- -Find correlation peak (user location):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

At the beginning we  produce  a search with rough resolution, 4  and  then  zoom  in  with  more  precise resolution.  In  our  simulation  we  did  a  few  iterations  of zooming until we got resolution 64 

- -Given  list  of  user  location  estimation  we  may  estimate user complex amplitude according to:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- -From spatial parameters list   ˆ ˆ , k k g l we reconstruct the channel according to (1.11):

## C. Simulation

For multisink channel estimation simulation we use same simulation set up (see Figure 3) and same assumptions used for  multisource  channel  estimation.  We  also  assume  the Channel Database that has full information about all mirror sinks of all AP antennas.

Because  we  know  that  the  user  is  located  within  the room, we narrow our search space to from 0 to W and from 0 to D.

The simulation results for different numbers of antennas are shown in Figure 6, Figure 7 and Figure 8. It presents both multisource  channel  estimation  EVM  and  multisink  with data base assistance channel estimation EVM as function of antenna domain channel estimation EVM.

<!-- image -->

Figure 6: Channel Estimation EVM for 16 AP antennas.

Figure 7 Channel Estimation EVM for 64 AP antennas.

<!-- image -->

Figure 8 Channel Estimation EVM for 64 AP antennas.

<!-- image -->

## IV. CHANNEL DATABASE CONCEPT

## A. Channel Database generation

To  generate  the  channel  database  we  have  to  know  the configuration of all surfaces in our environment. This information  may  be  measured  from  visual  data,  from  laser range-finders,  or  more  interestingly,  the  AP  can  gradually build its Channel Database from our previous communication experience. Initially,  the  APs  have  no  prior information, and may  use  the multisource approach  to estimate the channel. The byproduct of this process is the list of virtual sources. By taking the symmetric line between the main and mirror sources we can deduce the location of the reflection surface, as is shown in figure below:

Figure 9: The Reflection Surface location determination

<!-- image -->

Comparing the gain of the main and virtual sources and accounting for the difference in distances, we can obtain the wall reflection coefficients.

The  AP  will  gradually  build  up  a  3D  map  of  the environment,  and  may  start  to  use  the  Channel  Database approach.  In  real  life,  because  there  is  no  totally  static environment, the location of  virtual sinks  will change  with time, some new sinks will appear, others will disappear, etc. Moving  objects  will  generate moving  sinks  and  block known  sinks.    Therefore  the  multisink  channel  database approach has to be combined with the multisource approach. The  channel  database  will  provide  information  about  the static  part  of  the  channel,  while  the  multisource  be  will responsible  for  the  dynamic  part.  It  can  discover  new, unpredictable sources, track environment changes, and update the channel database.

## B. How practical is the Channel Database?

We  envision  the  channel  database  supporting  a  variety  of communications and location algorithms that take advantage of site-specific information to increase capacity and improve location  accuracy.    However,  its  utility  depends  on  how many channels  may  be  accurately  described  with  a  limited number of virtual sinks (reflective surfaces).  We believe that there are many spaces that may be described with relatively small  number  of  flat  surfaces.  We  call  these  'low  entropy' spaces. We may find such spaces in indoor or urban canyon scenarios. Other spaces will require an unrealistic number of reflective surfaces (virtual sinks). We call these spaces 'high entropy'  spaces.    An  example  of  these  spaces  is  shown  in figure below:

Low Entropy Space

Figure 10: Low and high entropy spaces

<!-- image -->

The channel database assistance is an opportunistic approach that will work for low entropy spaces (indoor, urban canyon, etc.) The percentages of low vs. high entropy spaces that we will encounter in practice is a subject for future research.

## V. CONCLUSIONS

Applying geometric constraints from the local scattering environment leads to methods to improve channel estimation,  based  on  an  estimated  position.  We  propose  a channel  estimation  method  that  makes  use  of  both  'virtual transmitters' (multisource) as well as 'virtual receivers' (multisink) to model multipath in low entropy environments. We  plot  the  EVM  of  antenna  domain  channel  estimation versus  several  forms  of  improved  estimation.  From  our simulation results we draw the following conclusions:

Multisource turns out to  have  similar performance to  beam domain channel estimation, however beam domain assumes a far-field description that does not apply to our scenario.

- -When antenna domain channel estimation is very accurate,  the  multisource  approach  does  not  provide performance  improvement  and  may  even  cause  some degradation.
- -However,  when  antenna  domain  channel  estimation  is poor,  as typically happens  with Massive MIMO in the low SNR  region, multisource provides significant performance improvement,
- -The larger the number  of antennas, the larger the performance gain that multisource domain channel estimation provides, as large as 10 dB with 256 antennas

We also found that the channel database assistance provides significant  performance  gain,  with  typically  a  4-5  dB  gain using the multisink database over multisource. The larger the number of antennas, the larger the performance gain is.

This was only an initial performance evaluation to illustrate the potential, and can be applied to near-field as well as farfield. We envision the channel database supporting a variety of communications and location algorithms that take advantage  of  site-specific information  to  increase  capacity and improve location accuracy.

## VI. REFERENCES

- [1]  T. Marzetta, "Noncooperative Cellular Wireless with Unlimited Numbers of Base Station Antennas," IEEE Trans. on Wireless, vol. 9, no. 11, 2010.
- [2]  X. Xiong, X. Wang, X. Gao and X. You, "BeamDomain Channel Estimation for FDD Massive MIMO with Optimal Thresholds," IEEE Trans on Comm, July 2017.
- [3]  Y. Zhang, L. Huang and J. Song, "Phased array Radar based Angular Domain Channel estimation scheme for Integrated Radar-Communications system," in MILCOM , 2016.
- [4]  A. Amar and A. Weiss, "Direct Position Determination of Multiple Radio Signals," EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, 2005.
- [5]  C. Gentner, T. Jost, W. Wang, S. Zhang, A. Dammann and U.-C. Feibig, "Multipath Assisted Positioning and Simultaneous Localization and Mapping," IEEE Trans on Wireless Comm., Sept 2016.
- [6]  R. DiTaranto, S. Muppirisetty, R. Raulefs, D. Slock and T. Svensson, "Location-Aware Communications for 5G Networks," IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, Nov. 2014.
- [7]  N. Garcia, H. Wymeersch, E. Strom and D. Slock, "Location-aided mm-wave channel estimation for vehicular communications," in Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC) , 2016.
- [8]  S. Sand, R. Tanbourgi, C. Mensing and R. Raulefs, "Position awarer adaptve communicaitons," in Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers , 2009.
- [9]  R. Daniels and R. Heath, "Link Adaptation with Position/Motion Information in Vehicle-to-Vehyicle Communications," IEEE Trans in Wireless Communications, 2012.
- [10]   M. Cai and N. Laneman, "Database-Aided Distributed Channel Assignment in spectrum Sensing," in Allerton Conference , 2015.
- [11]   H. Nakao, K. Tsukamoto, M. Tsuru and Y. Oie, "A Datbase Driven Data Channel Selection Scheme for V2V Communication over TV White Space," in New Technologies, Mobility ansd Security , 2015.
- [12]   V. Savic and E. Larsson, "Fingerprinting-Based Positioning in Distributed Massive MIMO Systems," IEEE VTC, Fall 2015.
- [13]   T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice, Prentice-Hall, 1996.
- [14]   A. Molev-Shteiman and X.-F. Qi, "System and Method for Multi-Source Channel Estimation". USA Patent US20-17/0141935A1, 18 May 2017.
- [15]   L. Mailaender, A. Molev-Shteiman and X.-F. Qi, "Direct Positioning with Channel Database Assistance," in submitted to ICC , 2018.