## Modular Arithmetic Erasure Channels and Their Multilevel Channel Polarization

Yuta Sakai, Member, IEEE, Ken-ichi Iwata, Member, IEEE, and Hiroshi Fujisaki, Member, IEEE,

## Abstract

This study proposes modular arithmetic erasure channels (MAECs), a novel class of erasure-like channels with an input alphabet that need not be binary. This class contains the binary erasure channel (BEC) and some other known erasure-like channels as special cases. For MAECs, we provide recursive formulas of Arıkan-like polar transform to simulate channel polarization. In other words, we show that the synthetic channels of MAECs are equivalent to other MAECs. This is a generalization of well-known recursive formulas of the polar transform for BECs. Using our recursive formulas, we also show that a recursive application of the polar transform for MAECs results in multilevel channel polarization, which is an asymptotic phenomenon that is characteristic of non-binary polar codes. Specifically, we establish a method to calculate the limiting proportions of the partially noiseless and noisy channels that are generated as a result of multilevel channel polarization for MAECs. In the particular case of MAECs, this calculation method solves an open problem posed by Nasser (2017) in the study of non-binary polar codes.

## Index Terms

Non-binary polar codes, multilevel channel polarization, partially noiseless channels, asymptotic distribution, generalized erasure channels.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Arıkan [3] proposed binary polar codes as a class of channel codes that provably achieves the symmetric capacity of a binary-input discrete memoryless channel (DMC), admits a deterministic construction, and has low encoding/decoding complexities. A key operation employed in polar codes is the polar transform. This transform results in almost noiseless and useless synthetic channels as the number of polarization steps increases. This phenomenon is called channel polarization, and the limiting proportions of noiseless and useless synthetic channels coincide with I ' W ' and 1 I ' W ' , respectively, where I ' W ' stands for the symmetric capacity of the given binary-input DMC W .

In the study of non-binary polar codes, there are two types of channel polarization: two-level channel polarization [4], [5] and multilevel channel polarization [6]-[15]. In the context of two-level channel polarization, the synthetic channels converge to either noiseless or useless channels. In contrast, in the context of multilevel channel polarization, the synthetic channels converge to several types of partially noiseless channels. It was independently shown in [4]-[13] that two-level and multilevel channel polarization can achieve the symmetric capacity I ' W ' of the DMC W . However, it is difficult to characterize the limiting proportions of the partially noiseless synthetic channels in the context of multilevel channel polarization (see [13, Section 9.2.1]). In this study, we term these limiting proportions as the asymptotic distribution of multilevel channel polarization.

To construct and analyze polar codes, we have to calculate channel parameters, e.g., the symmetric capacity, the Bhattacharyya parameter, etc., of the synthetic channels induced by the polar transform. However, the computational complexities of these channel parameters grow doubly-exponentially in the number of polar transforms. In the binary-input case, Tal and Vardy [16] solved this issue by applying approximation algorithms for the synthetic channels at each polar transform. Such an approximation method was recently extended from the binary to non-binary settings by Gulch, Ye, and Barg [17]. On the other hand, it is well-known that for binary erasure channels (BECs), one can avoid the use of any approximation arguments. Obviously, the asymptotic distribution of a BEC can be simply characterized by its erasure probability. Therefore, BECs are excellent toy problems in the study of binary polar codes. In non-binary polar codes, similar easily-analyzable channel models have been proposed by Park and Barg [7, Section III] and Sahebi and Pradhan [8, Figs. 3 and 4], and the recursive formulas of the polar transform were given therein. 1

## A. Main Contributions

The main contributions of this study can be broadly divided into the following two parts: Firstly, we propose a novel channel model called modular arithmetic erasure channels (MAECs), which can be naturally specialized to the following

This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers 26420352, 17K06422, 17J11247, and 18K11465. This article was presented in part at the 2016 IEEE Information Theory Workshop [1] (Corresponding author: Yuta Sakai) and at the 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory [2] (Corresponding author: Yuta Sakai) .

Y. Sakai was with Graduate School of Engineering, University of Fukui, Japan. He is currently with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Email: eleyuta@nus.edu.sg.

K. Iwata is with Graduate School of Engineering, University of Fukui, Japan, Email: k-iwata@u-fukui.ac.jp.

H. Fujisaki is with Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Kanazawa University, Japan, Email: fujisaki@ec.t.kanazawa-u.ac.jp.

1 Note that the recursive formula [8, Equation (4)] for the minus transform is valid, but the recursive formula [8, Equation (3)] for the plus transform is incorrect. Theorem 1 of Section III corrects this error (see Example 4 of Section III-A).

<!-- image -->

"

Fig. 1. Plot of the symmetric capacities f I ' V s " ' j s 2 f ; + g n g under n = 28 -steps of the polar transform. The initial MAEC V " is given in Example 8 of Section V-B (see also Table I of Section V-B). Note that the logarithm is taken to be the natural logarithm so the units of the symmetric capacity is nats. The proportion of synthetic channels V s " satisfying I ' V s " ' log d and I ' V s " » ker ' d …' log d is roughly equal to '1' d for each d j q (cf. Corollary 3 of Section V-B), where '1' d is defined in (54) of Section V. For example, the proportion of synthetic channels V s " satisfying I ' V s " ' log 30 and I ' V s " » ker ' 30 …' log 30 is roughly equal to '1' 30 = 0 : 18 .

erasure-like channels: BECs, a naïve definition of q -ary erasure channels ( q -ECs) (see, e.g., [18, p. 589]), q -ary input ordered erasure channels (OECs) proposed by Park and Barg [19, p. 2285], and Sahebi and Pradhan's senary-input channels [8, Fig. 4: Channel 2]. Then, we show that analyzing the polarization properties for MAECs is a straightforward endeavor under our framework. Similar to the polar transform for BECs, we show that the synthetic channels generated from an MAEC are again equivalent to other MAECs with certain transition probabilities. Secondly, we characterize the asymptotic distribution of multilevel channel polarization for MAECs. Specifically, we establish an algorithm for calculating the asymptotic distribution for a given MAEC. Figure 1 illustrates the symmetric capacities of the synthetic channels induced by the polar transform for an MAEC with input alphabet size q = 4500 ; this channel results in multilevel channel polarization. This figure is plotted using our proposed recursive formulas of the polar transform for MAECs and its asymptotic distribution is calculated by our proposed algorithm. This result solves an open problem in the study of multilevel channel polarization (cf. [13, Section 9.2.1]) in the particular case of MAECs.

## B. Paper Organization

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II introduces basic notations and definitions for this study. Specifically, modular arithmetic is introduced in Section II-A, DMCs and their channel parameters are defined in Section II-B, the Arıkan-like polar transform is defined in Section II-C, and a notion of the channel equivalence is given in Section II-D. Section III introduces MAECs, and characterizes the ease of analyzing polar transform for MAECs. The definition of MAECs is given in Definition 2, and the recursive formulas of the polar transform for MAECs are stated in Theorem 1. In Section III-A, some reductions of MAECs to known erasure-like channels are introduced. Section IV briefly compares the notions of two-level and multilevel channel polarization, these are revisited in Sections IV-A and IV-B, respectively. An open problem in the study of multilevel channel polarization is described in Section IV-B. Some numerical simulations for MAECs are provided in Section IV-C. Section V discusses our solution to the asymptotic distribution of multilevel channel polarization for MAECs.

The main statement is given in Corollary 3. In Section V-A, we characterize the asymptotic distribution in the simplest case when the input alphabet size is a prime power. In Section V-B, we consider the general case when the input alphabet size is not necessarily a prime power. We then give Algorithm 1 for calculating the asymptotic distribution. A formal statement of the asymptotic distribution is given in Section V-C. Finally, Section VI concludes this study.

## II. PRELIMINARIES AND PROBLEM PRESENTATIONS

## A. Basic Notations in Elementary Number Theory

Firstly, we introduce standard notations in elementary number theory. Let Z be the set of integers, and N the set of positive integers. Given two positive integers a ; b 2 N , define the following three sets:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For two positive integers a ; b 2 N , let a j b be a shorthand for ' a divides b ,' which means that there exists a positive integer c 2 N satisfying ac = b . If we define the sum set 2 S + T B f s + t j s 2 S and t 2 T g for given two subsets S ; T Z , then it is clear that a Z + b Z = a Z whenever a j b . These definitions naturally introduce the congruence relation on the integers modulo q (see (126) of Appendix C for details). Given q 2 N , the multiplication on Z q Z is defined as ' a + q Z '   ' b + q Z ' = ab + q Z .

## B. DMCs and Channel Parameters

We now define DMCs as follows: The input alphabet is given by Z q Z for some integer q 2 . The output alphabet Y is a nonempty and countable set. The transition probability from an input symbol x 2 Z q Z to an output symbol y 2 Y is denoted by W ' y j x ' . Let W : Z q Z !Y , or simply W , be a shorthand for such a DMC. The -symmetric capacity of W , which is the -mutual information [21], [22] between the input and output of W under a uniform input distribution on Z q Z , is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each order 2 » 0 ; 1… , where the symmetric capacity I ' W ' is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Unless stated otherwise, assume throughout this paper that the base of logarithms is q . Several relations between the -symmetric capacity I ' W ' and other channel parameters are summarized in the following remark.

Remark 1 (connections between the -symmetric capacity and the other channel parameters) . The following identities hold:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

2 The term sum set or sumset is used in additive combinatorics [20].

for 2 ' 0 ; 1 ' [ ' 1 ; 1' and denotes the average probability of maximum likelihood decoding error of uncoded communication via a channel W,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

denotes the average Bhattacharyya distance of a channel W [23], and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

denotes Gallager's reliability function E 0 of a channel W under a uniform input distribution for 2 ' 1 ; 1' [24, Equation (5.6.14)].

## C. Arıkan-like Polar Transform over Modular Arithmetic

Let 2 Z q Z be a unit of the ring, i.e., it has a multiplicative inverse element 1 2 Z q Z satisfying 1 = 1 = 1 + q Z . Given two DMCs W 1 : Z q Z !Y 1 and W 2 : Z q Z !Y 2 , the polar transform creates two synthetic channels: the worse channel W 1 i W 2 : Z q Z !Y 1 Y 2 defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the better channel W 1 W 2 : Z q Z !Y 1 Y 2 Z q Z defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These polar transforms with a unit 2 Z q Z are inspired by the study of entropy weighted sums (see [25]). Since this polar transform is an analogue of the polar transform with a 2 2 kernel, in this paper, we call these polar transforms Arıkan-like polar transform. Note that when = 1 + q Z , one can think of our polar transform as being defined over a cyclic group ' Z q Z ; + ' .

Arıkan-like polar transforms with distinct initial channels W 1 , W 2 have been studied in the study of polar codes for non-stationary memoryless channels [26], [27]. When both W 1 and W 2 are identical to a given channel W : Z q Z !Y , the polar transform stated in (12) and (13) can be specialized to standard polar transform for a stationary DMC W . We then simply write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

After applying the polar transform n times, the synthetic channel W s : Z q Z !Y 2 n ' Z q Z ' w ' s ' is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each s = s 1 s 2 s n 2 f ; + g n , where the function 3 w : f ; + g   ! N 0 is recursively defined by 4

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and f ; + g B f ; ; + ; ; + ; + ; ++ ; : : : g denotes the set of f ; + g -valued finite-length sequences containing the empty sequence . Note that the output alphabet size jY 2 n ' Z q Z ' w ' s ' j of the synthetic channel W s grows doubly-exponentially in n . The difficulties in analyzing the performance of polar codes are mainly due to this issue as the computational complexities for calculating the channel parameters depends on the size of the output alphabet jY 2 n ' Z q Z ' w ' s ' j ; see Section II-B.

:

3 The set N 0 B N [ f 0 g consists of all nonnegative integers.

4 For example, we observe that w ' + ; ; + ' = 2 w ' + ; ' + 1 = 2 2 w ' + ' + 1 = 2 2 1 + 1 = 5 . As w ' ' seems binary expansions by replacing ' ; + ' with ' 0 ; 1 ' , it is clear that w : f ; + g n ! f 0 ; 1 ; : : : ; 2 n 1 g is bijective.

## D. Output Degradedness and Equivalence of Channels

We now introduce an equivalence relation between two channels having the same input alphabet X as follows:

Definition 1 (stochastic degradedness and equivalence) . A channel W : X ! Y is said to be degraded with respect to another channel ˜ W : X ! Z if there exists an intermediate channel Q : Z ! Y satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every ' x ; y ' 2 X   Y . We denote this degradedness relation as W ˜ W. In particular, we say that W and ˜ W are equivalent if W ˜ W and ˜ W W. We denote this equivalence as W ˜ W.

Remark 2. To rigorously deal with the convergence of synthetic channels, Nasser [15] introduced an equivalent class of DMCs via this equivalence relation. A different notion of an equivalence relation has been discussed by Mori and Tanaka [5, Section IV] and Gulcu, Ye, and Barg [17, Definition 3] in the context of non-binary polar source and channel coding, respectively.

The following lemma implies that the above equivalence relation preserves the -symmetric capacity.

Lemma 1. For any 2 » 0 ; 1… , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, for any 2 » 0 ; 1… , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Lemma 1: Equation (19) is a direct consequence of the data-processing lemma 5 for the -mutual information (see [28, Theorem 5]).

Lemma 1 is a minor extension of [16, Lemma 3] because the -symmetric capacity I ' W ' can be specialized to the symmetric capacity I ' W ' , the average Bhattacharyya distance Z ' W ' , and the probability of error P e ' W ' ; see Remark 1. The following lemma shows that channel degradedness is preserved under the polar transform.

Lemma 2.

Given four channels W

1

:

Z

q

Z

!Y

1

,

˜

W

1

:

Z

q

Z

!Z

1

, W

2

:

Z

q

Z

!Y

2

, and

˜

W

2

:

Z

q

Z

!Z

2

, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Lemma 2: See Appendix A.

Note that Lemma 2 is a straightforward extension of [29, Lemma 4.7] and [16, Lemma 5].

## III. MODULAR ARITHMETIC ERASURE CHANNELS AND THEIR POLAR TRANSFORM

In the following, we propose a general type of erasure-like channels with input alphabet Z q Z .

Definition 2 (Modular arithmetic erasure channels (MAECs)) . Given a probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q , 6 the MAEC V " : Z q Z ! Y is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each ' x ; y ' 2 X   Y , where the output alphabet is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote this channel model as MAEC q ' " ' .

The MAEC can be thought of as being similar to a channel with additive noise. To wit, the input symbol is modeled by a random variable (r.v.) X taking values in Z q Z , and the noise symbol is modeled by a r.v. Z taking values in f d Z j d divides q g with the probability law P f Z = d Z g = " d for each d j q . Then, the output symbol is modeled by the r.v. Y = X + Z . In this for each 2 » 0 ; 1… .

5 Note that the data-processing lemma [28, Theorem 5] is usually stated in terms of the conditional independence between two random variables given a third one; such a notion is stronger than the stochastic degradedness assumed in Definition 1.

6 A nonnegative real vector is called a probability vector if the sum of elements is unity.

Proof of Proposition 1: See Appendix B.

Remark 3. By Remark 1 and Proposition 1, after some algebra, we observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following theorem is our main result establishing recursive formulas of the polar transform for MAECs.

Theorem 1. Let q 2 be an integer, 2 Z q Z a unit of the ring, and " = ' " d ' d j q and " 0 = ' " 0 d ' d j q two probability vectors. Then, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where two probability vectors " i " 0 B ' " i d ' d j q and " " 0 B ' " d ' d j q are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively, for each d j q.

Proof of Theorem 1: See Appendix C.

Fig. 2. An interpretation of MAEC q ' " ' defined in Definition 2. The noise symbol Z follows the probability law P f Z = d Z g = " d for each d j q , where Z takes values in the set f d Z j d runs over all positive divisors of q g .

<!-- image -->

case, it can be verified that the conditional probability distribution P Y j X of Y given X is equal to the transition probability distribution V " given in (23). This observation implies that the input symbol X is erased according to the modular arithmetic rule. See Fig. 2 for this interpretation.

It can be easily verified that every MAEC is Gallager-symmetric [24, p. 94] (see also [30, Definition 4]), i.e., its channel capacity coincides with the symmetric capacity I ' V " ' (cf. [24, Theorem 4.5.2]). In addition, note that MAEC q ' " ' is determined by the pair of an input alphabet size q and a probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q , so is its -symmetric capacity I ' V " ' . The following proposition provides formulas for the -symmetric capacity of an MAEC.

Proposition 1. For any probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is worth mentioning that while the polar transform of a DMC depends on the unit 2 Z q Z in general (see [25]), the statement of Theorem 1 is independent of the choice of the unit 2 Z q Z .

Remark 4. An interesting observation from Theorem 1 is that the recursive formulas stated in (30) and (31) are derived from the Chinese remainder theorem (see Appendix C for details). Namely, Theorem 1 characterizes an algebraic structure of the polar transform over the ring Z q Z . More specifically, one of the key technical tools used in the proof of Theorem 1 is the second isomorphism theorem of a group when the polar transform is defined by the group operation (see [31]).

Combining Lemma 2 and Theorem 1, we readily obtain the following corollary.

Corollary 1. Let q 2 be an integer, 2 Z q Z a unit of the ring, and " = ' " d ' d j q a probability vector. Then, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every s 2 f ; + g , where the probability vector " s = ' " s d ' d j q is recursively given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

for each d j q.

## A. Specializations to Binary Erasure Channels and Other Erasure-Like Channels

This subsection considers the reduction of MAECs to known erasure-like channels. Given an erasure probability 0 " 1 , the BEC W BEC ' " ' : Z 2 Z !Y can be defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

for each ' x ; y ' 2 Z 2 Z Y , where the output alphabet is given as Y = ' Z 2 Z ' [ ' Z Z ' = f Z ; 2 Z ; 1 + 2 Z g . This BEC is indeed equivalent to MAEC q ' " ' with q = 2 and " = ' " 1 ; " 2 ' = ' "; 1 " ' . Note that the erasure symbol of this BEC corresponds to Z . For the sake of brevity, we denote this channel model as BEC ' " ' .

Now, consider the polar transform as stated in (12) and (13) with = 1 + 2 Z . As summarized in the following proposition, it is well-known that both synthetic channels BEC ' " ' i BEC ' " 0 ' and BEC ' " ' BEC ' " 0 ' are equivalent to BECs with modified erasure probabilities.

Proposition 2 ([3, Proposition 6]; see also [32, Corollary 1]) . For any 0 "; " 0 1 , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is clear that Theorem 1 can be specialized to Proposition 2. Analogously, Corollary 1 can be specialized to the following corollary.

Corollary 2. For each s 2 f ; + g and each 0 " 1 , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the erasure probability 0 " s 1 can be recursively calculated by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Corollary 2, to analyze the polar transform of a stationary BEC, it suffices to propagate its erasure probability by using the recursive formulas in (38) and to analyze the propagated erasure probabilities. This is a well-known fact in the study of binary polar codes. Moreover, we can verify from Corollary 2 that for any fixed 0 &lt;   &lt; 1 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These relations imply that the asymptotic distribution of two-level channel polarization for a BEC can be simply characterized by the initial erasure probability " .

The following three examples introduce reductions of MAECs to other erasure-like channels.

Example 1 ( q -ary erasure channels ( q -ECs), see, e.g., [18, p. 589]) . Let q 2 be an arbitrary integer. Suppose that the probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q satisfies " 1 + " q = 1 , i.e., " d = 0 for every d j q in which 1 &lt; d &lt; q. Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each ' x ; y ' 2 Z q Z Y . In this case, the output alphabet Y and the probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q can be simplified as Y 0 = ' Z q Z ' [ ' Z Z ' and " 0 = ' " 1 ; " q ' , respectively. The erasure symbol corresponds to Z as in the BEC.

:

Example 2 (ordered erasure channels (OECs) [19, p. 2285]) . Let q = p r be a prime power. Note that each divisor d j q can be written by d = p t for some 0 t r. Given a probability vector " = ' " 1 ; " p ; " p 2 ; : : : ; " p r 1 ; " p r ' , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each ' x ; y ' 2 Z q Z Y . Note that if q = 4 , then this channel model is also equivalent to Sahebi and Pradhan's quaternary-input erasure-like channel [8, Fig. 3: Channel 1].

:

Example 3 (Sahebi and Pradhan's senary-input erasure-like channel [8, Fig. 4: Channel 2]) . Consider the case in which q = 6 . Then, the output alphabet is given by Y = ' Z Z ' [ ' Z 2 Z ' [ ' Z 3 Z ' [ ' Z 6 Z ' = f Z ; 2 Z ; 1 + 2 Z ; 3 Z ; 1 + 3 Z ; 2 + 3 Z ; 6 Z ; 1 + 6 Z ; 2 + 6 Z ; 3 + 6 Z ; 4 + 6 Z ; 5 + 6 Z g , and the transition probability is given by

for each ' x ; y ' 2 Z 6 Z Y .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following example gives a special case of Theorem 1 for the channel model given in Example 3.

Example 4. The minus channel MAEC6 ' " 1 ; " 2 ; " 3 ; " 6 ' is equivalent to MAEC6 ' " 1 ; " 2 ; " 3 ; " 6 ' , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the plus channel MAEC6 ' " 1 ; " 2 ; " 3 ; " 6 ' + is equivalent to MAEC6 ' " + 1 ; " + 2 ; " + 3 ; " + 6 ' , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that (44) coincides with Sahebi and Pradhan's recursive formula [8, Equation (4)] for the minus transform.

## IV. TWO TYPES OF CHANNEL POLARIZATION

We review two-level and multilevel channel polarization in the context of non-binary polar coding in Sections IV-A and IV-B, respectively. These subsections can be omitted if readers are aware of these differences. Some numerical simulations of multilevel channel polarization for MAECs are given in Section IV-C.

## A. Two-level Channel Polarization

When the input alphabet size q is a prime number, ¸ Sa¸ so˘ glu, Telatar, and Arıkan [23] showed that for any q -ary input DMC W : Z q Z !Y and any fixed 0 &lt;   &lt; 1 , both identities

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

hold under the polar transform stated in (16) with = 1 + q Z . The left-hand sides of (46) and (47) are the limiting proportions of almost noiseless and almost useless synthetic channels, respectively. Moreover, Equations (46) and (47) imply that the limiting proportion of mediocre synthetic channels is zero, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every fixed 0 &lt;   &lt; 1 . In this paper, we call the phenomenon exhibited in (48) as two-level channel polarization . When the input alphabet size q 2 is not necessarily a prime number, two-level polarization was investigated by ¸ Sa¸ so˘ glu [4] and Mori and Tanaka [5].

## B. Multilevel Channel Polarization

In contrast to Section IV-A, when the input alphabet size q is a composite number, there are polar transforms in which the two-level channel polarization stated in (48) does not hold in general (cf. [4, Example 1]). In this case, another polarization phenomenon called multilevel channel polarization occurs. Following [9, Section VI], we now introduce a more precise notion of multilevel channel polarization as follows: Let G be a finite group, and N C G a shorthand for a normal subgroup N of a group G . Given a DMC W : G !Y and a normal subgroup N C G , the homomorphism channel W » N … : G N !Y is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the quotient group of G by N C G is denoted by G N . Then, Nasser and Telatar [9, Theorem 6] showed that 7

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for fixed &gt; 0 small enough, 8 where the synthetic channel W s is generated by a certain polar transform defined on a group G , and » G : N … = j G N j denotes the index of a normal subgroup N in a group G . Thus, the limiting proportions of mediocre (partially noiseless) synthetic channels are allowed to be positive in the context of multilevel channel polarization.

Remark 5. Notions of multilevel channel polarization have been independently introduced by several researchers [6]-[15] in different forms. In particular, formulations of multilevel channel polarization are more complicated if the polar transform is defined on a quasigroup [9] or a weaker algebraic structure [10], [11], [13].

We now consider each term in the sum of (50). It is clear that the left-hand sides of (46) and (47) coincide with the terms in the sum with the trivial subgroup N = f e g and with the whole group N = G , respectively, where e stands for the identity element of G . Thus, two-level channel polarization (48) is a special case of (50). Other terms in the sum refer to the limiting proportions of partially noiseless synthetic channels W s . Roughly speaking, the first condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

implies that the homomorphism channel W s » N … is almost noiseless, and the second condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

implies that the original synthetic channel W s has almost the same symmetric capacity as W s » N … . These observations give us intuition as to why polar codes can achieve the symmetric capacity with multilevel channel polarization.

While the limiting proportions stated in the left-hand sides of (46) and (47) are fully and simply characterized by the symmetric capacity I ' W ' , the exact characterization of each term in the sum of (50) remains an open problem (see [13, Section 9.2.1]). Recently, Nasser [14] showed that a term in the sum of (50) is positive only if N is a characteristic subgroup, provided that G is abelian and W is automorphic-symmetric. While every DMC W : Z q Z !Y is automorphic-symmetric (see [14, Example 3]), since every subgroup of the cyclic group ' Z q Z ; + ' is characteristic, the results in [14] are insufficient to characterize the polarization levels induced by the polar transform stated in (12) and (13).

7 In [9, Theorem 6], the rate of polarization for Bhattacharyya parameters is also shown.

8 For example, it suffices to take small so that &lt; log j G j log 'j G j 1 ' .

Fig. 3. Plots of the symmetric capacities f I ' V s " ' j s 2 f ; + g n g under n = 28 -steps of the polar transform for several MAECs defined in Definition 2. Each initial probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q is given as follows: (a) " = ' " 1 ; " 2 ; " 3 ; " 6 ' = ' 0 ; 3 10 ; 3 5 ; 1 10 ' , (b) " = ' " 1 ; " 2 ; " 3 ; " 6 ' = ' 1 4 ; 1 4 ; 1 4 ; 1 4 ' , (c) " = ' " 1 ; " 3 ; " 5 ; " 9 ; " 15 ; " 45 ' = ' 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 1 3 ; 2 3 ; 0 ' , and (d) " = ' " 1 ; " 2 ; " 4 ; " 8 ; " 16 ; " 32 ; " 64 ; " 128 ; " 256 ; " 512 ' = ' 1 10 ; 1 10 ; : : : ; 1 10 ' . Note that Fig. 3d is analogous to that of [7, Fig. 2] with different n (see also Example 2).

<!-- image -->

## C. Simulations of Multilevel Channel Polarization for Modular Arithmetic Erasure Channels

Consider the synthetic channels V s " induced by the polar transform for an MAEC V " . It follows from Lemma 1, Proposition 1, and Corollary 1 that it suffices to propagate the probability vector " s by the recursive formulas given in (33) for calculating the -symmetric capacity I ' V s " ' . Some numerical examples are plotted in Fig. 3, which illustrates the symmetric capacities I ' V s " ' of the synthetic channels V s " . From Fig. 3, we may naturally conjecture that the polar transform for MAECs induce multilevel channel polarization. On the other hand, whereas Fig. 3a appears to depict the multilevel channel polarization phenomenon with q = 6 , Figure 3b seems to imply that two-level channel polarization occurs with q = 6 . Moreover, in Fig. 3c, we may conjecture that the limiting proportion of almost useless synthetic channels V s " (i.e., I ' V s " ' 0 ) approaches zero as n !1 , while the limiting proportion of almost noiseless synthetic channels V s " (i.e., I ' V s " ' 1 ) does not approach one as n !1 . These questions are completely solved in the next section.

## V. ASYMPTOTIC DISTRIBUTIONS OF MULTILEVEL CHANNEL POLARIZATION

Let q be an integer, and " = ' " d ' d j q an arbitrary probability vector. In this section, we characterize the asymptotic distribution of multilevel channel polarization for MAEC q ' " ' defined in Definition 2. Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each d j q and n 2 N , where " s d can be calculated by (33). Note that " s = ' " s d ' d j q is a probability vector for every s 2 f ; + g , and so is the vector ' ' n ' d ' d j q for every n 2 N . In addition, we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each d j q , provided that the limit exists. As will be shown later, the limit '1' d exists for every d j q , and the probability vector ' '1' d ' d j q coincides with the desired asymptotic distribution. We summarize this fact in the following corollary.

Corollary 3. Let q 2 be an integer, and " = ' " d ' d j q a probability vector. For any fixed 0 &lt;   &lt; log ' q ' q 1 '' , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as n ! 1 for every d j q, where V s " » ker ' d … denotes the homomorphism channel of V s " defined as in (49) , the function ' d : x 7!' x + d Z ' denotes the natural projection, and ker ' d B f x 2 Z q Z j ' d ' x ' = d Z g denotes the kernel of ' d .

Corollary 3 is a direct consequence of Theorem 4 that will be stated in Section V-C. A formal proof of Corollary 3 is given in Appendix D. It follows from Corollary 3 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is an analogue of (50). Therefore, Corollary 3 characterizes each term in the sum of (50) for every MAEC. Based on Corollary 3, we regard the probability vector ' '1' d ' d j q as the asymptotic distribution of multilevel channel polarization for MAEC q ' " ' . An algorithm of calculating the asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q will be described in Theorem 3 of Section V-B.

A. Special Case: The Input Alphabet Size q = p r is a Prime Power

Let q = p r be a prime power for some prime number p and some positive integer r . Note that in this case, an MAEC is equivalent to an OEC (see Example 2), and the probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q can be written as " = ' " p i ' r i = 0 .

Proposition 3. Let q be a prime power. For any probability vectors " = ' " d ' d j q and " 0 = ' " 0 d ' d j q , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every d j q, where " i d and " d are defined in (30) and (31) , respectively.

Proof of Proposition 3: See Appendix E.

If " and " 0 are the same, then Proposition 3 can be readily specialized to the identity

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every d j q and every s 2 f ; + g , which can be thought of as a martingale-like property 9 of the recursive formulas stated in (33) with respect to the polarization process. Indeed, we observe from (58) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every d j q and every n 2 N , where ' n ' d is defined in (53). Equation (59) implies the following theorem.

Theorem 2. If q is a prime power, then '1' d = " d for every d j q.

Therefore, the asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q coincides with an initial probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q , provided that q = p r is a prime power. Hence, we can verify that the asymptotic distribution of Fig. 3d is given by '1' d = 1 10 for every d j q .

In the following, we give another proof of Theorem 2. This alternative proof can be considered as a digression of our discussion. It gives us, however, some ideas to solve for the asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q when q is not a prime power.

For each integer a 1 and each sequence s 2 f ; + g , we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

9 Strictly speaking, when we consider the pass of polar transform s 2 f ; + g n as a sequence of independent and uniformly distributed Bernoulli r.v.'s B 1 ; : : : ; B n , we may think of (58) as a martingale property. See [3, Section IV] for details of the polarization process.

where " s = ' " s d ' d j q = ' " p i ' r i = 0 is recursively defined in (33). If the sequence s = is empty, then we omit the superscripts s in T s ' a ' and B s ' a ' and denote these quantities respectively as T ' a ' and B ' a ' . Clearly, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each a 1 and each s 2 f ; + g .

Lemma 3. For each integer a 1 and each sequence s 2 f ; + g , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Lemma 3: See Appendix F.

One can see from Lemma 3 that the pair of partial sums T s ' a ' and B s ' a ' behave similarly to the polar transform for BECs (see Section III-A). The following lemma is a straightforward consequence of Lemma 3.

Lemma 4. For each integer a 1 and each sequence s 2 f ; + g , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, it holds that

for every integers n 1 and a 1 .

Lemma 4 presents a martingale-like property for two partial sums T s ' a ' and B s ' a ' with respect to the polarization process. Employing this martingale-like property, we can give an alternative proof of Theorem 2 by induction.

Alternative Proof of Theorem 2: As a counterpart of (59), it suffices to verify that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every n 2 N and every i = 0 ; 1 ; : : : ; r . We prove (71) by induction. We observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every n 2 N , where (a) follows from Lemma 4. This implies (71) with i = 0 . Let 0 k &lt; r be an integer. Suppose that (71) holds for every n 2 N and every i = 0 ; 1 ; : : : ; k . Then, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every n 2 N , where (a) follows from Lemma 4. This completes the proof of Theorem 2.

Even if q is not a prime factor, we can deduce some martingale-like properties in the probability vector ' " s d ' d j q by considering four partial sums of ' " s d ' d j q , instead of T s ' ' and B s ' ' . Such martingale-like properties as well as the above alternative proof are useful to solve the asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q . In the next subsection, we define four such partial sums and explore these properties.

## B. General Case: The Input Alphabet Size q = p r 1 1 p r 2 2 p r m m is a Composite Number

Henceforth, assume that the input alphabet size q can be factorized as 10 q = p r 1 1 p r 2 2 p r m m with m distinct prime factors p r 1 1 , p r 2 2 , : : : , and p r m m . If a positive integer d of q can be factorized by d = p t 1 1 p t 2 2 p t m m , then we write it as d = h t i for the sake of brevity, where t = ' t 1 ; t 2 ; : : : ; t m ' . Namely, defining a partial order t u between two m -tuples t and u by t i u i for every i = 1 ; 2 ; : : : ; m , we observe that d divides q if and only if 0 t r with d = h t i and q = h r i , where 0 = ' 0 ; : : : ; 0 ' denotes the all zeros vector. As in (60) and (61), the key idea of our analyses is that for each pair of integers i and j satisfying 1 i &lt; j m , we combine the probability masses ' " s h t i ' 0 t r into the following four quantities: 11

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a ; b 1 are integers, s 2 f ; + g a sequence, and " s = ' " s d ' d j q = ' " s h t i ' 0 t r is recursively defined in (33) with an initial probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q . If the sequence s = is empty, then we omit the superscripts s in the notations in (74)-(77) and write them as i ; j ' a ; b ' , i ; j ' a ; b ' , i ; j ' a ; b ' , and i ; j ' a ; b ' . Note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each 1 i &lt; j m , each a ; b 1 , and each s 2 f ; + g . Some examples of (74)-(77) are given as follows:

10 Even if q has only one prime factor q = p r 1 1 , in this subsection, we write q = p r 1 1 p r 2 2 p rm m for some m 2 by setting r 2 = = r m = 0 . Doing so, the analyses in Section V-B can specialize to the case where q is a prime power.

11 Note that (74)-(77) are well-defined even if 0 j &lt; i r , and it holds that i ; j ' a ; b ' = j ; i ' b ; a ' .

Fig. 4. Hasse diagram of the positive divisors of q = p 3 1 p 2 2 (see Example 6).

<!-- image -->

Example 5. Consider the case where q = 6 (see Examples 3 and 4). Set m = 2 , ' p 1 ; p 2 ' = ' 2 ; 3 ' , and ' r 1 ; r 2 ' = ' 1 ; 1 ' . Let ' " d ' d j q = ' " 1 ; " 2 ; " 3 ; " 6 ' be an initial four-dimensional probability vector. Since m = 2 , it suffices to consider the case where ' i ; j ' = ' 1 ; 2 ' . For every a ; b 2 and every s 2 f ; + g , we observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Example 6. Let q = p 3 1 p 2 2 , where p 1 and p 2 are distinct prime numbers (e.g., q = 72 = 2 3 3 2 ). Then, we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Graphical interpretations of these partial sums via Hasse diagrams are plotted in Fig. 4.

In the following, to characterize the asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q , we state some technical lemmas concerning these four partial sums s i ; j , s i ; j , s i ; j , and s i ; j . Firstly, we provide recursive formulas of these partial sums under the polar transform as follows:

Lemma 5. For any s 2 f ; + g , 1 i &lt; j m, and a ; b 1 , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Lemma 5: See Appendix G.

Similar to Lemma 4, as shown in the following lemma, Lemma 5 characterizes the average value of (74)-(77) when the polar transform is applied once.

Lemma 6. For any s 2 f ; + g , 1 i &lt; j m, and a ; b 1 , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Lemma 6: Lemma 6 follows in a straightforward manner from Lemma 5.

The idea of Lemma 6 comes from the conservation property » I ' W ' + I ' W + '… 2 = I ' W ' . Note that in general, these quantities are not conserved by the polar transform. In fact, Lemma 6 can be thought of as being equivalent to the following sub- and super-martingale-like properties with respect to the polarization process:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following lemma states a property between s i ; j ' a ; b ' and s i ; j ' a ; b ' ; it shows that the inequality between s i ; j ' a ; b ' and s i ; j ' a ; b ' is invariant under one pass of the polar transform s 2 f ; + g .

Lemma 7. For each 1 i &lt; j m and a ; b 1 , it holds that s i ; j ' a ; b ' s i ; j ' a ; b ' for every s 2 f ; + g if and only if i ; j ' a ; b ' i ; j ' a ; b ' .

Proof of Lemma 7: See Appendix H.

We now define the average value of (74)-(77) as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For convenience, when n = 0 , we write ' 0 ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' B i ; j ' a ; b ' , ' 0 ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' B i ; j ' a ; b ' , ' 0 ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' B i ; j ' a ; b ' , and ' 0 ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' B i ; j ' a ; b ' . Unlike the case when q is a prime power (see Lemma 4), these quantities are not preserved under the polar transform. However, as shown in the following lemma, the difference between ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' and ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' , and several addition between two quantities are preserved under the polar transform.

Lemma 8. For any n 0 , 1 i &lt; j m, and a ; b 1 , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Lemma 8: See Appendix I.

Lemma 8 implies that the left-hand sides of (99)-(103) has martingale-like properties. It is worth mentioning that Lemma 8 is useful to prove the limits of (95)-(98) as n !1 .

Lemma 9. For each 1 i &lt; j m and a ; b 1 , the four sequences ' ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b '' 1 n = 1 , ' ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b '' 1 n = 1 , ' ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b '' 1 n = 1 , and ' ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b '' 1 n = 1 are convergent.

Proof of Lemma 9: See Appendix J.

By Lemma 9, we can define the following limits:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The following theorem shows that these limits can be evaluated easily in terms of the initial probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q .

Lemma 10. For any 1 i &lt; j m and a ; b 1 , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where j c j + B max f 0 ; c g for c 2 R .

Proof of Lemma 10: See Appendix K.

If q is a semiprime, i.e., if q = p 1 p 2 for some distinct prime numbers p 1 and p 2 , then Lemma 10 immediately yields the asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q defined in (54), as shown in the following example.

```
Data: An initial probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q Result: The asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q 1 Initialize ' '1' d ' d j q by the zero vector ' 0 ; : : : ; 0 ' 2 0 3 t = ' t 1 ; : : : ; t m '    ' 0 ; : : : ; 0 ' 4 while 0 < 1 do 5 ' i ; j '    ' 1 ; 2 ' 6 while j m do 7 if i ; j ' t i + 1 ; t j + 1 ' i ; j ' t i + 1 ; t j + 1 ' then 8 ' k ; l '    ' j ; i ' 9 ' i ; j '    ' k ; j + 1 ' 10 else 11 ' k ; l '    ' i ; i ' 12 j j + 1 13 '1' h t i l ; m ' t l + 1 ; t m + 1 ' + min f l ; m ' t l + 1 ; t m + 1 ' ; l ; m ' t l + 1 ; t m + 1 'g 14 + '1' h t i 15 t k t k + 1
```

Algorithm 1: Solving asymptotic distribution

Example 7. Let q = 6 = 2 3 (see Examples 3-5). It follows from (79) of Example 5 and Lemma 10 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

for every initial probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q = ' " 1 ; " 2 ; " 3 ; " 6 ' . Therefore, the asymptotic distribution of Fig. 3a is given by ' '1' 1 ; '1' 2 ; '1' 3 ; '1' 6 ' = ' 3 10 ; 0 ; 3 10 ; 2 5 ' , and Fig. 3b by ' '1' 1 ; '1' 2 ; '1' 3 ; '1' 6 ' = ' 1 2 ; 0 ; 0 ; 1 2 ' .

The following theorem shows that the limit '1' d defined in (54) always exists for each d j q , and the asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q can be calculated algorithmically and exactly for every composite number q having two or more distinct prime factors.

Theorem 3. The asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q can be calculated by Algorithm 1 in 12 time O ' ! NT ' q ' NT ' q ' ' q '' , where ! NT ' q ' = m denotes the number of distinct prime factors of q, NT ' q ' B ˝ m i = 1 r i denotes the number of prime factors of q with multiplicity, and ' q ' B ˛ m i = 1 ' r i + 1 ' denotes the number of positive divisors of q.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Theorem 3, we can immediately observe the following corollary.

Corollary 4. For any initial probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q , there exists a sequence ' t ' h ' = ' t ' h ' 1 ; : : : ; t ' h ' m '' m h = 0 satisfying (i) 0 = t ' 0 ' t ' 1 ' t ' m ' = r and (ii) '1' h t i &gt; 0 only if t = t ' h ' for some 0 h m. Consequently, the asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q has at most NT ' q ' + 1 positive probability masses.

By Algorithm 1, we can solve for the asymptotic distribution of Fig. 3c as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A more complicated example of Algorithm 1 is given as follows:

Example 8. Consider an MAEC V " defined in Definition 2 with an initial probability vector " = ' " d ' d j q as follows: The input alphabet size is q = 4500 = 2 2 3 2 5 3 , where note that the set of positive divisors d of q is f 1 ; 2 ; 3 ; 4 ; 5 ; 6 ; 9 ; 10 ; 12 ; 15 ; 18 ; 20 ; 25 ; 30 ; 36 ; 45 ; 50 ; 60 ; 75 ; 90 ; 100 ; 125 ; 150 ; 180 ; 225 ; 250 ; 300 ; 375 ; 450 ; 500 ; 750 ; 900 ; 1125 ; 1500 ; 2250 ; 4500 g . The initial probability vector ' " d ' d j q is given by 13 ' " d ' d j q = ' 1 150 '   ' 0 ; 1 ; 2 ; 3 ; 4 ; 5 ; 6 ; 7 ; 8 ; 9 ; 0 ; 1 ; 2 ; 3 ; 4 ; 5 ; 6 ; 7 ; 8 ; 9 ; 0 ; 1 ; 2 ; 3 ; 4 ; 5 ; 6 ; 7 ; 8 ; 9 ; 0 ;

12 While O ' ' stands for the Big-O notation used to denote the computational complexity of a certain procedure, note that ! NT ' ' and NT ' ' are number theoretic notations, i.e., these notations do not stand for the little-omega and Big-Omega notations, respectively, of the computational complexity.

13 The elements " d of ' " d ' d j q are sorted in increasing order of divisors d .

TABLE I EXAMPLE OF ALGORITHM 1 WITH THE SETTING OF EXAMPLE 8 (SEE ALSO FIG. 1). THE INPUT ALPHABET SIZE IS q = 4500 = 2 2 3 2 5 3 . AN INITIAL PROBABILITY VECTOR ' " d ' d j q AND ITS RESULTANT ASYMPTOTIC DISTRIBUTION ' '1' d ' d j q ARE SUMMARIZED IN THE TABLE.

| divisor  d  1  2  3  4  5  6  9  10  12  15  18  20  '  "  d  '  d  j  q  0  1  150  2  150  3  150  4  150  5  150  6  150  7  150  8  150  9  150  0  1  150  '  '1'  d  '  d  j  q  29  150  0  0  0  1  15  0  0  0  0  11  150  0  0  divisor  d  25  30  36  45  50  60  75  90  100  125  150  180  '  "  d  '  d  j  q  2  150  3  150  4  150  5  150  6  150  7  150  8  150  9  150  0  1  150  2  150  3  150  '  '1'  d  '  d  j  q  0  9  50  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  11  75  0  divisor  d  225  250  300  375  450  500  750  900  1125  1500  2250  4500  '  "  d  '  d  j  q  4  150  5  150  6  150  7  150  8  150  9  150  0  1  150  2  150  3  150  4  150  5  150  '  '1'  d  '  d  j  q  0  0  0  0  1  150  0  0  7  75  0  0  0  6  25   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

1 ; 2 ; 3 ; 4 ; 5 ' . Then, Algorithm 1 solves the asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q = ' 29 150 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 1 15 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 11 150 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 9 50 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 11 75 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 1 150 ; 0 ; 0 ; 7 75 ; 0 ; 0 ; 0 ; 6 25 ' . We summarize this result in Table I.

Figure 1 in Section I-A shows an example of multilevel channel polarization for the MAEC given in Example 8 (see also Table I), where note that Fig. 1 is calculated and plotted by employing Proposition 1 and the recursive formulas stated in (33) of Corollary 1.

In this subsection, we have given an algorithm for calculating the asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q . In the next subsection, we will show that ' '1' d ' d j q is, in a rigorous sense, the asymptotic distribution of multilevel channel polarization for MAEC q ' " ' .

## C. Formal Statement of Asymptotic Distribution

The following theorem states that ' " s d ' d j q uniformly tends to a unit vector ' 0 ; : : : ; 0 ; 1 ; 0 ; : : : ; 0 ' as n goes to infinity for each sequence of polarization process ' s = s 1 s 2 s n ' 1 n = 1 , and the limiting proportions are exactly characterized by the asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q .

## Theorem 4. For any fixed 2 ' 0 ; 1 ' , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every d j q, where ' '1' d ' d j q can be calculated by Algorithm 1 (cf. Theorem 3).

Proof of Theorem 4: See Appendix M.

Theorem 4 immediately proves Corollary 3 of Section V; this corollary formally characterizes the asymptotic distribution of multilevel channel polarization for MAECs. See Appendix D for the proof of Corollary 3.

## VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS

We have proposed a general type of erasure-like channels called modular arithmetic erasure channels (MAECs). Similar to the well-known recursive formulas of the polar transform for a BEC, in Theorem 1 and Corollary 1, we derived the recursive formulas for an MAEC. Hence, the MAEC is a simple toy model to study the phenomenon of multilevel channel polarization. In Section V, we exactly characterized the asymptotic distribution of multilevel channel polarization for an MAEC. In particular, we also established an algorithm to calculate the asymptotic distribution in Algorithm 1. This partially solves an open problem in the study of non-binary polar coding (cf. [13, Section 9.2.1]).

An interesting future work is to generalize the results in Section V from MAECs to general DMCs. On the other hand, it is also interesting to generalize the requirement of working over a ring Z q Z to weaker algebraic structures. Recently, the present authors [31] generalized the results of this study to the case in which the polar transform is defined on a group with infinite order and where the polar coding is used in the context of source coding. In short, this follow-up work [31] generalizes the results in Section V from a cyclic group ' Z q Z ; + ' to a locally cyclic group. It is worth pointing out that generalizing the algebraic structure is important to deal with the multiple access channel polarization. Abbe and Telatar [6] considered the polar transform for m -user multiple-access channels over an elementary abelian group F m 2 = F 2 F 2 F 2 . Nasser and Telatar [9, Section VII] and Nasser [12] also considered polar transforms defined on an arbitrary finite abelian group. Specifically, Nasser and Telatar [9, Section VIII] studied another erasure-like channel called a combination of l linear channels in which the input alphabet is given as an elementary abelian group. On the other hand, it is difficult to exactly characterize the asymptotic distribution of such an erasure-like channel (cf. [9, Section VIII-B]). Generalizing our results to an abelian, or a non-abelian, group is of interests to gain deeper understanding of multilevel channel polarization or polarization in network information theory problems (such as the multiple-access channel).

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors would like to thank Prof. Vincent Y. F. Tan for greatly improving the presentation of this paper. The authors are also grateful to Prof. Krishna Narayanan and anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments. Particularly, one of the anonymous reviewers corrected issues in the proof of Corollary 3 (Appendix D) and simplified the proof of Lemma 5 (Appendix G).

## APPENDIX A

PROOF OF LEMMA 2

By Definition 1, there exist two channels Q 1 : Z 1 !Y 1 and Q 2 : Z 2 !Y 2 satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For each ' u 1 ; y 1 ; y 2 ' 2 Z q Z Y 1 Y 2 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that W 1 i W 2 ˜ W 1 i ˜ W 2 , where the product channel Q 1 ; 2 : Z 1 Z 2 !Y 1 Y 2 is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, for each ' u 1 ; u 2 ; y 1 ; y 2 ' 2 ' Z q Z ' 2 Y 1 Y 2 , we see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that W 1 W 2 ˜ W 1 ˜ W 2 , where the channel ˆ Q 1 ; 2 : Z 1 Z 2 Z q Z !Y 1 Y 2 Z q Z is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This completes the proof of Lemma 2.

A direct calculation shows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each 2 ' 0 ; 1 ' [ ' 1 ; 1' . The rest of formulas can be verified as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## APPENDIX B

PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1

has a solution z if and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This completes the proof of Proposition 1.

## APPENDIX C

## PROOF OF THEOREM 1

Given a ; b 2 Z q Z and d j q , define the congruence between a and b modulo d as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To prove Theorem 1, we employ the following well-known result in elementary number theory.

Lemma 11 (A variant of Chinese Remainder Theorem) . Let d 1 ; d 2 2 N . For every a and b, the system of two congruences

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, when the solution z exists, it is unique modulo lcm ' d 1 ; d 2 ' .

We now introduce two useful notations. Let P be a probability distribution on X and W : X ! Y a channel. Then, the output distribution PW on Y is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each y 2 Y . In addition, the backward channel W P : Y ! X is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each ' x ; y ' 2 X   Y . Throughout this proof, assume that every input distribution P is uniform, and we drop the subscript, writing W P as W for brevity.

Recall that MAECs are defined in Definition 2. Let q 2 be an integer. Consider two probability vectors " = ' " d ' d j q and " 0 = ' " 0 d ' d j q . By the construction of the output alphabet Y (see (24)), note that each output symbol y 2 Y can be written by y = z + d Z for some z 2 Z q Z and some divisor d j q . It follows from (23) and (130) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each z 2 Z q Z and d j q . In addition, it follows from (23), (132), and (131) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

provided that " d &gt; 0 , for each x ; z 2 Z q Z and d j q . Similarly, one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

provided that " 0 d &gt; 0 , for each z 2 Z q Z and d j q .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Given a unit 2 Z q Z , consider the worse channel V " i V " 0 and the better channel V " V " 0 defined in (12) and (13), respectively. We first prove the assertion of Theorem 1 for the worse channel.

## A. Proof for the Worse Channel V " i V " 0

It follows from (12) and (130) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each y 1 ; y 2 2 Y , where the third equality follows from the fact that the map a 7! a + b is a bijection on Z q Z for each b 2 Z q Z . Moreover, it follows from (12), (131), and (136) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

provided that PV " ' y 1 ' PV " 0 ' y 2 ' &gt; 0 , for each ' u 1 ; y 1 ; y 2 ' 2 X   Y 2 . Furthermore, it follows from (133) and (135) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

provided that " d 1 " 0 d 2 &gt; 0 , for each u 1 ; u 0 2 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q . Note that in (138), the system of two congruences

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and thus, it follows from Lemma 11 that this system has a unique solution u 0 2 2 Z lcm ' d 1 ; d 2 ' Z if and only if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, for every u 1 ; u 0 2 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q satisfying " d 1 " 0 d 2 &gt; 0 , there exists a representative

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

can be rewritten as

which is equivalent to such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, we have from (137) and (146) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

provided that " d 1 " 0 d 2 &gt; 0 , for each u 1 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q . Therefore, it follows from (131), (133), (135), (136), and (147) that

:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each u 1 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q .

:

Finally, to prove the equivalence between V " i V " 0 and V " i " 0 with underlying probability vector " i " 0 = ' " i d ' d j q given in (30), it suffices to show the existence of two intermediate channels Q 1 : Y 2 !Y and Q 2 : Y ! Y 2 ensuring that V " i " 0 V " i V " 0 and V " i V " 0 V " i " 0 , respectively. Define the channel Q 1 : Y 2 !Y by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

for each z ; z ; z 2 Z q Z and d ; d ; d j q . Then, a direct calculation shows that

:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

for every u 1 ; z 2 Z q Z and d j q , where

- (a) follows from (149),
- (b) follows from (148),
- (c) follows from (30), and
- (d) follows from (23).

Similarly, define the DMC Q 2 : Y ! Y 2 by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each z ; z ; z 2 Z q Z and d ; d ; d j q . Then a simple calculation yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every u 1 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q , where

- (a) follows from (151),
- (b) follows from (23), and
- (c) follows from (148).

Therefore, we observe from (150) and (152) that V " i V " 0 is equivalent to V " i " 0 . This completes the proof of (28) in Theorem 1.

## B. Proof for the Better Channel V " V " 0

After some algebra, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

provided that PV " ' y 1 ' PV " 0 ' y 2 ' &gt; 0 , for each u 1 2 Z q Z and y 1 ; y 2 2 Y , where

- (a) follows from (130),
- (b) follows from (13),
- (c) follows from (131), and
- (d) follows from (137).

Moreover, noting that

we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

provided that PV " ' y 1 ' PV " 0 ' y 2 ' ' V " i V " 0 '' u 1 j y 1 ; y 2 ' &gt; 0 , for each ' u 1 ; u 2 ; y 1 ; y 2 ' 2 X 2 Y 2 , where

- (a) follows from (131),
- (b) follows from (153),
- (c) follows from (13), and
- (d) follows from (131).

Referring to the conditions in (154)-(155), for every u 1 ; u 2 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q satisfying " d 1 " 0 d 2 &gt; 0 and z 1 z 2 u 1 ' mod gcd ' d 1 ; d 2 '' , we observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

- (a) follows from (157),
- (b) follows from (147),
- (c) follows from (146), and
- (d) follows from Lemma 11 with some solution r 2 ' 1 ' z 1 u 1 ' + d 1 Z ' \ ' z 2 + d 2 Z ' of the system of two congruences

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with respect to u 2 2 Z q Z for given u 1 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q .

Therefore, we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

for every u 1 ; u 2 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q satisfying the right sides of the conditions (154)-(156), where

- (a) follows from (131),
- (b) follows from (153),
- (c) follows from (132) and (134),
- (d) follows from (147), and
- (e) follows from (158).

Note that by the definition stated in (23), we readily see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every u 1 ; u 2 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q satisfying " d 1 " 0 d 2 = 0 . Moreover, it follows from Lemma 11 that (162) also holds for every u 1 ; u 2 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q in which

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

does not hold. Hence, we conclude that (161) holds for every u 1 ; u 2 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q .

Finally, to prove the equivalence between V " V " 0 and V " " 0 with underlying probability vector " " 0 = ' " d ' d j q given in (31), it suffices to show the existence of two intermediate channels Q 3 : Y 2 Z q Z !Y and Q 4 : Y ! Y 2 Z q Z ensuring that V " " 0 V " V " 0 and V " V " 0 V " " 0 , respectively. Define the channel Q 3 : Y 2 Z q Z !Y by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each u 1 ; z ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d ; d 1 ; d 2 j q . Then, a direct calculation shows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every u 2 ; z 2 Z q Z and d j q , where

- (a) follows from (164) and defining the indicator function of a condition A as
- (b) follows from (161),
- (c) follows from (31), and
- (d) follows from (23).

Similarly, define the channel Q 4 : Y ! Y 2 Z q Z by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

for each u 1 ; z ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d ; d 1 ; d 2 j q . Then, a simple calculation yields that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every u 1 ; u 2 ; z 1 ; z 2 2 Z q Z and d 1 ; d 2 j q , where

- (a) follows from (167),
- (b) follows from (23), and
- (c) follows from (161).

Therefore, we observe from (165) and (168) that V " V " 0 is equivalent to V " " 0 . This completes the proof of (28) written in Theorem 1; and all assertions of Theorem 1 are proved.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## APPENDIX D

## PROOF OF COROLLARY 3

Consider an MAEC V " : Z q Z !Y q defined in Definition 2, where recall from (24) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from (49) that for each d j q , the homomorphism channel V " » ker ' d … : ' Z q Z ' ' ker ' d ' ! Y q is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every x 2 Z q Z , d 0 j q , and y 2 Z d 0 Z , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the last equality follows from Lemma 11.

Now, we shall verify that, after relabelling the input symbols in ' Z q Z ' ' ker ' d ' appropriately, the homomorphism channel V " » ker ' d … is equivalent to another MAEC V ¯ " : Z d Z !Y d with probability vector ¯ " = ' ¯ " d 0 ' d 0 j d given as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each d 1 j d . Since the first isomorphism theorem states that the quotient group ' Z q Z ' ' ker ' d ' is isomorphic to Z d Z , instead of V " » ker ' d … : ' Z q Z ' ' ker ' d ' ! Y q , it suffices to consider the equivalent channel U "; d : Z d Z !Y q given as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each x 2 Z d Z , d 0 j q , and y 2 Z d 0 Z , where ' 1 d stands for the preimage of ' d . Defining the channel Q 5 : Y q !Y d as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we observe that for all x 2 Z d Z , d 1 j d , and y 1 2 Z d 1 Z ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

where

- (a) follows by the definition of Q 5 : Y q !Y d in (174),
- (b) follows from the fact that d Z + d 2 Z = gcd ' d ; d 2 ' Z ,
- (c) follows by the definition of U " ; d : Z d Z !Y q in (170) and (173), and
- (d) follows from Lemma 11.

On the other hand, defining the channel Q 6 : Y d !Y q as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

for each d 1 j d , d 2 j q , y 1 2 Z d 1 Z , and y 2 2 Z d 2 Z , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every x 2 Z d Z , d 2 j q , and y 2 2 Z d 2 Z , where

- (a) follows by the definition of V ¯ " : Z d Z !Y d in Definition 2, and
- (b) follows by the definition of Q : Y d !Y q in (176).

Combining (175) and (177), we conclude that V " » ker ' d … : ' Z q Z ' ' ker ' d ' ! Y q is equivalent to V ¯ " : Z d Z !Y d . Therefore, it follows from Proposition 1 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every d j q , where

- (a) follows from Theorem 4, and
- (b) follows from Proposition 1, (178), and the fact that " d &gt; 1 implies that ¯ " d &gt; 1 (see (172)).

This completes the proof of Corollary 3.

For each i = 0 ; 1 ; : : : ; r , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

Finally, we observe that

## APPENDIX E

## PROOF OF PROPOSITION 3

Hence, for each i = 0 ; 1 ; : : : ; r , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This completes the proof of Proposition 3.

## APPENDIX F

## PROOF OF LEMMA 3

We now prove the assertion for the minus transform. A straightforward calculation yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each i = 0 ; 1 ; : : : ; r , where the first equality follows from (33). Then, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the third equality follows from the fact that ✶ » a i r … ✶ » i &lt; k r … = ✶ » a i &lt; k r … = ✶ » a k r … ✶ » a i &lt; k … . This is indeed (63). Moreover, it follows from (62) and (63) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is indeed (64). The assertion for the plus transform can be dually proved; and this completes the proof of Lemma 3.

where

- (a) follows by the definition of s i ; j ' a ; b ' in (74),
- (b) follows from (186), and
- (c) follows from the fact that c t = u ^ v imply that c u and c v .

On the other hand, we have

where

- (a) and (c) follow by the definition of s i ; j ' a ; b ' in (75), and
- (b) follows from (189).

Since s i ; j ' a ; b ' = s j ; i ' b ; a ' , we readily see from (190) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## APPENDIX G

## PROOF OF LEMMA 5

By symmetry, it suffices to prove the required statement for the minus transform. Fix a sequence s 2 f ; + g , indices 1 i &lt; j m , and integers a ; b 1 arbitrarily. It follows from (33) that

for every 0 t r , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Defining an m -tuple c = ' c 1 ; : : : ; c m ' by

for each k = 1 ; 2 ; : : : ; m , we observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, as s i ; j ' a ; b ' + s i ; j ' a ; b ' + s i ; j ' a ; b ' + s i ; j ' a ; b ' = 1 (see (78)), it follows from (189)-(191) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This completes the proof of Lemma 5.

This completes the proof of Lemma 7.

## APPENDIX H

## PROOF OF LEMMA 7

Let 1 i &lt; j m and a ; b 1 be given. By the symmetry s i ; j ' a ; b ' = s j ; i ' b ; a ' , it suffices to prove the 'if' part. We prove the lemma by induction. If the sequence s is empty, then the lemma is obvious. Hence, it suffices to show that if s i ; j ' a ; b ' s i ; j ' a ; b ' , then both s i ; j ' a ; b ' s i ; j ' a ; b ' and s + i ; j ' a ; b ' s + i ; j ' a ; b ' hold. It follows from Lemma 5 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where (a) follows by the hypothesis s i ; j ' a ; b ' s i ; j ' a ; b ' . Similar to (193), we also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## APPENDIX I

## PROOF OF LEMMA 8

Let 1 i &lt; j m and a ; b 1 be given. For each n 2 N 0 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where (a) follows by Lemma 6. This proves (99) by induction. The rest of equalities (100)-(103) can be similarly proved by Lemma 6, as in (195). This completes the proof of Lemma 8.

## APPENDIX J

## PROOF OF LEMMA 9

Let 1 i &lt; j m and a ; b 1 be given. It follows from (91)-(94) that

- the number ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' is nondecreasing as n increases,
- the number ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' is nonincreasing as n increases,
- the number ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' is nonincreasing as n increases, and
- the number ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' is nondecreasing as n increases.

Therefore, since these numbers are bounded as

where

- (a) follows by Lemma 6,
- (b) follows by Lemma 7, and
- (c) follows by the definition of the second moment:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the squeeze theorem shows that ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' ! 0 as n !1 , because ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' ' n + 1 ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' ! 0 as n !1 (cf. Lemma 9). On the other hand, we observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that

It follows from (200) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every n 2 N 0 , we obtain the claim of Lemma 9.

## APPENDIX K PROOF OF LEMMA 10

Let 1 i &lt; j m and a ; b 1 be given. Since s i ; j ' a ; b ' = s j ; i ' b ; a ' , we may assume without loss of generality that i ; j ' a ; b ' i ; j ' a ; b ' . A simple calculation yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the second inequality of (204) can be seen as a version of Hölder's inequality. Then, it also follows by the squeeze theorem that '1' i ; j » …' a ; b ' = 0 , because ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' ! 0 as n !1 (cf. (202)). Hence, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where (a)-(c) follow by Lemma 8. Considering the counterpart hypothesis i ; j ' a ; b ' i ; j ' a ; b ' , we have (108)-(111). This completes the proof of Lemma 10.

## APPENDIX L

## PROOF OF THEOREM 3

We will show in this proof that the while loop in Lines 4-15 of Algorithm 1 is accomplished by the NT ' q ' -th round. For each 1 h NT ' q ' , denote by t ' h ' = ' t ' h ' 1 ; : : : ; t ' h ' m ' the vector t at the beginning of the h -th round of this while loop, where note from the initialization in Line 3 of Algorithm 1 that t ' 1 ' = ' 0 ; : : : ; 0 ' . Given a number 1 h NT ' q ' , suppose that we have completed the while loop in Lines 4-15 of Algorithm 1 until the ' h 1 ' -th round. That is, we now consider the beginning of the h -th round of this while loop. In this proof, suppose that the variable k appearing from Line 8 of Algorithm 1 is initialized as 1 at Line 5 of Algorithm 1.

Firstly, we shall verify the following claim.

Claim 1. The while loop in Lines 6-12 of Algorithm 1 finds the number k such that for each 1 c m satisfying c , k, it holds that '1' h t i = 0 for every 0 t r satisfying 0 t k t ' h ' k and t ' h ' c &lt; t c r c .

Since the ' 1 ' is added to the variable j at the end of each round of the while loop in Lines 6 and 12 of Algorithm 1 (see Lines 9 and 12 of Algorithm 1), the total number of rounds of this while loop is just m 1 (see Line 6 of Algorithm 1). Consider the beginning of the | -th round of this while loop for some 1 | m 1 . To prove Claim 1, we shall shall verify the following claim.

Claim 2. For each 1 c | satisfying c , k, it holds that '1' h t i = 0 for every 0 t r satisfying 0 t k t ' h ' k and t ' h ' c &lt; t c r c .

Note that Claim 2 coincides with Claim 1 if | = m . We prove Claim 2 by induction. It is clear from the initialization k = 1 that Claim 2 holds with | = 1 . Now, suppose that 2 | m 1 and Claim 2 holds at the previous round before the | -th round. Consider the conditional branch in Lines 7 and 10 of Algorithm 1 at the | -th round. Note that ' i ; j ' = ' k ; | + 1 ' at the beginning of this conditional branch (see Lines 8, 9, 11, and 12 of Algorithm 1). If i ; j ' t ' h ' i + 1 ; t ' h ' j + 1 ' i ; j ' t ' h ' i + 1 ; t ' h ' j + 1 ' , then it follows from (109) of Lemma 10 that '1' h t i = 0 for every 0 t r satisfying t ' h ' i &lt; t i r i and 0 t j t ' h ' j . Similarly, if i ; j ' t ' h ' i + 1 ; t ' h ' j + 1 ' &lt; i ; j ' t ' h ' i + 1 ; t ' h ' j + 1 ' , then it follows from (110) of Lemma 10 that '1' h t i = 0 for every 0 t r satisfying 0 t i t ' h ' i and t ' h ' j &lt; t j r j . Thus, Claim 2 holds by replacing the variable k as in Line 8 or 11 of Algorithm 1 according to this conditional branch. Therefore, Claim 1 is also proven by induction.

For each 1 h NT ' q ' , denote by ' h ' the variable at the beginning of the h -th round of the while loop in Lines 4-15 of Algorithm 1. Secondly, we shall verify the following claim.

Claim 3. After executing the operation in Line 15 of Algorithm 1, the desired value '1' h t i is given as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every 0 t r satisfying 0 t c &lt; t ' h + 1 ' c for some 1 c m, and the next variable ' h + 1 ' is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We prove Claim 3 by induction. Suppose that h = 1 . It follows from the initialization in Line 2 of Algorithm 1 that ' 1 ' = 0 . Moreover, it follows from (53), (77), and (98) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the pair ' k ; l ' satisfies that l = k if k &lt; m (see Line 11 of Algorithm 1), and l &lt; k if k = m (see Line 9 of Algorithm 1), we observe from (211) and Claim 1 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, it follows from (111) of Lemma 10 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The right-hand sides of (212) and (213) correspond to the operation in Line 13 of Algorithm 1, and it follows from Claim 1 that the desired value '1' h t i is obtained for every 0 t r satisfying 0 t k t ' 1 ' k . On the other hand, since k = m if and only if l ; m ' t ' 1 ' l + 1 ; t ' 1 ' m + 1 ' l ; m ' t ' 1 ' l + 1 ; t ' 1 ' m + 1 ' (see the while loop in Lines 6-12 of Algorithm 1), it follows from (75)-(77) that (213) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Line 14 of Algorithm 1, the right-hand side of (214) corresponds to the next value ' 2 ' ; therefore, we observe from Line 15 of Algorithm 1 that Claim 3 holds with h = 1 . Now, suppose that 2 h NT ' q ' and Claim 3 holds at the previous round before the h -th round. Since the pair ' k ; l ' satisfies that l = k if k &lt; m (see Line 11 of Algorithm 1), and l &lt; k if k = m (see Line 9 of Algorithm 1), it follows from (211), Claim 1, and the induction hypothesis that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is indeed the operation in Line 13 of Algorithm 1. Thus, the desired value '1' h t i is determined as either (208) or (209) for every 0 t r satisfying 0 t c &lt; t ' h + 1 ' c for some 1 c m . On the other hand, similar to (214), one has (210). Therefore, Claim 3 is proved by induction.

If ' h ' &lt; ' h + 1 ' = 1 , then it follows from Claim 3 that the desired asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q has been evaluated at the end of the h -th round of the while loop in Lines 4-15 of Algorithm 1. Note from (210) that ' h + 1 ' = 1 if there exists a 1 c m satisfying t ' h + 1 ' c &gt; r c . Therefore, the total number of rounds of the while loop in Line 4-15 of Algorithm 1 is at most NT ' q ' ; and the output of Algorithm 1 yields the desired asymptotic distribution ' '1' d ' d j q within a finite number of steps. Finally, we shall verify the computational complexity of Algorithm 1. As said in this proof, the while loop in Lines 4-15 of Algorithm 1 is repeated at most NT ' q ' times, and the while loop in Lines 6-12 of Algorithm 1 is repeated just m 1 times. In the conditional branch of Lines 7 and 10 of Algorithm 1, both i ; j ' t i + 1 ; t j + 1 ' and i ; j ' t i + 1 ; t j + 1 ' can be calculated by a given initial probability vector ' " d ' d j q with at most ' q ' additions (see (75) and (76)). Similarly, in Line 13 of Algorithm 1, the three values l ; m ' t l + 1 ; t m + 1 ' , l ; m ' t l + 1 ; t m + 1 ' , and l ; m ' t l + 1 ; t m + 1 ' can also be calculated by a given initial probability vector ' " d ' d j q with at most ' q ' additions (see (75)-(77)). Therefore, we conclude that Algorithm 1 runs in time O ' ! NT ' q ' NT ' q ' ' q '' . Note that all calculations in Algorithm 1 are addition and subtraction, i.e., there is neither multiplication nor division. This completes the proof of Theorem 3.

## APPENDIX M

## PROOF OF THEOREM 4

Theorem 4 can be simply proven by using a similar argument to Appendix D together with Nasser and Telatar's result [9, Section VI] summarized in (50). In the following, we provide an alternative proof of Theorem 4 to make this paper self-contained.

To prove Theorem 4, we use the following technical lemma.

Lemma 12. For each n 2 N , let a nonempty collection F n of subsets of a set be a field, 14 and let f n : F n ! » 0 ; 1 … be an additive set function. For each i 2 N , let ' S i ; n ' n be a sequence of sets such that S i ; n 2 F n for every n 2 N and f n ' S i ; n ' ! 1 as n !1 . Then, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Lemma 12: See Appendix N.

The proof of Theorem 4 is inspired by Alsan and Telatar's simple proof of polarization [26, Theorem 1]. Let 1 i &lt; j m and a ; b 1 be given. Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for each n 2 N . Then, we have that for a fixed 2 ' 0 ; 1 ' ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

- (a) follows from the identity

and

- (b) follows by Lemma 5.

This implies that the sequence ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' 1 n = 1 is nondecreasing. As ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' 1 for every n 2 N , the sequence ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' 1 n = 1 is convergent; thus, it holds that ' n + 1 ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' ' n ' i ; j » …' a ; b ' ! 0 as n !1 . We get from (218) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As 2 ' 0 ; 1 ' is a fixed number that does not depend on n 2 N , this implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

14 Note that this field F n is a measure theoretic notion satisfying A { 2 F n if A 2 F n , and A [ B 2 F n if A ; B 2 F n , where A { denotes the complement of a set A .

Therefore, we observe that

for every fixed 2 ' 0 ; 1 ' and d j q .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now prove (114). It follows from Corollary 4 that there exist an integer 0 ˜ m m and a sequence ' t ' h ' ' ˜ m h = 0 such that (i) 0 = t ' 0 ' t ' 1 ' t ' ˜ m ' = r , (ii) t ' h ' , t ' h 0 ' whenever h , h 0 , and (iii) h t i &gt; 0 if and only if t = t ' h ' for some 0 h ˜ m . If '1' d = 0 , then we observe that for a fixed 2 ' 0 ; 1 ' ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

- (a) follows by the definition of '1' d and the hypothesis that '1' d = 0 , and
- (b) follows from the fact that

This implies that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

provided that '1' d = 0 . Therefore, it suffices to verify that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every h = 0 ; 1 ; : : : ; ˜ m . We prove (227) by induction. Firstly, consider the case where h = ˜ m , where note that t ' ˜ m ' = r and h t ' ˜ m ' i = h r i = q . Since t ' ˜ m 1 ' t ' ˜ m ' and t ' ˜ m 1 ' , t ' ˜ m ' , there exists an index 1 i m satisfying t ' ˜ m 1 ' i &lt; t ' ˜ m ' i , which implies that '1' h t i = 0 for every 0 t r satisfying t , r and ' t i ; t j ' = ' r i ; r j ' for some j , i . For such an appropriate choice of ' i ; j ' , we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

- (a) follows from (221), i.e.,

m

with ' q ' B ˛ i = 1 ' r i + 1 ' ,

- (b) follows from the identities

and the inclusions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (c) follows by the inclusion-exclusion principle,
- (d) follows from the fact that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (e) follows from the fact that

for two sequences ' a n ' n and ' b n ' n , and

- (f) follows from Lemma 12 and (226).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, it follows from (228) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now suppose that for some integer 0 h &lt; ˜ m , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every h &lt; h 0 ˜ m . Note that '1' h t ' h 0 ' i &gt; 0 for every h h 0 ˜ m , and '1' h t i = 0 for every t ' h ' t r satisfying t , t ' h 0 ' for all h h 0 ˜ m . If h &gt; 0 , then since t ' h 1 ' t ' h ' and t ' h 1 ' , t ' h ' , there exists an index 1 i m satisfying t ' h 1 ' i &lt; t ' h ' i , which implies that '1' h t i = 0 for every 0 t r satisfying t , t ' h 0 ' for all h h 0 ˜ m and ' t i ; t j '   ' t ' h ' i ; t ' h ' j ' for some j , i . If h = 0 , then it is obvious that '1' h t i = 0 for every 0 t r satisfying t , t ' h 0 ' for all 0 h 0 ˜ m . For such an appropriate choice of ' i ; j ' , similar to (228), we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

- (a) follows from (221),
- (b) follows from the the identities

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which arises from (74), and the inclusions as in (231),

- (c) follows by the inclusion-exclusion principle and the fact that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (d) follows from (233), and
- (e) follows from Lemma 12 and (226).

Hence, it follows from (236) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, we observe that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

- (a) follows from (239),
- (b) follows by the inclusions as in (231) and (237),
- (c) follows by the inclusion-exclusion principle and the fact that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (d) follows from (233), and
- (e) follows from Lemma 12 and the hypothesis (235).

Therefore, it follows from (240) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies by induction of (227) together with (226) that (114) of Theorem 4 holds, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every fixed 2 ' 0 ; 1 ' and every d j q .

Finally, we prove (115) of Theorem 4. It follows by the definition (53) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies together with (114) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which also implies together with (114) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since &gt; 0 can be chosen arbitrarily small, as in Alsan and Telatar's proof of [26, Theorem 1], it follows from (244) and (246) that (115) holds. This completes the proof of Theorem 4.

## APPENDIX N

PROOF OF LEMMA 12

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, we also get

We prove Lemma 12 by induction. Define

for each k ; n 2 N . By hypothesis, it is clear that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Suppose that

for a fixed integer k 2 N . Then, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that

This completes the proof of Lemma 12.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## REFERENCES

- [1] Y. Sakai and K. Iwata, 'A generalized erasure channel in the sense of polarization for binary erasure channels,' in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop , Cambridge, UK, Sept. 2016, An extended version is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1604.04413.
- [2] Y. Sakai, K. Iwata, and H. Fujisaki, 'Asymptotic distribution of multilevel channel polarization for a certain class of erasure channels,' in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory , Vail, CO, USA, Jun. 2018, pp. 856-860, An extended version is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.04422.
- [3] E. Arıkan, 'Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacity-achieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051-3073, Jul. 2009.
- [4] E. ¸ Sa¸ so˘ glu, 'Polar codes for discrete alphabets,' in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory , Cambridge, MA, USA, Jul. 2012, pp. 2137-2141.
- [5] R. Mori and T. Tanaka, 'Source and channel polarization over finite fields and Reed-Solomon matrices,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 2720-2736, May 2014.
- [6] E. Abbe and E. Telatar, 'Polar codes for the m -user multiple access channel,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 5473-5448, Aug. 2012.
- [7] W. Park and A. Barg, 'Polar codes for q -ary channels, q = 2 r ,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 955-969, Feb. 2013.
- [8] A. G. Sahebi and S. S. Pradhan, 'Multilevel channel polarization for arbitrary discrete memoryless channels,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7839-7857, Dec. 2013.
- [9] R. Nasser and E. Telatar, 'Polarization theorems for arbitrary DMCs and arbitrary MACs,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 2917-2936, Jun. 2016.
- [10] R. Nasser, 'An ergodic theory of binary operations-Part I: Key properties,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6931-6952, Dec. 2016.
- [11] --, 'An ergodic theory of binary operations-Part II: Applications to polarization,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 1063-1083, Feb. 2017.
- [12] --, 'Fourier analysis of MAC polarization,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 3600-3620, Jun. 2017.
- [13] --, 'Polarization and channel ordering: Characterization and topological structures,' Ph.D. dissertation, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, 2017.
- [14] --, 'On the polarization levels of automorphic-symmetric channels,' in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory , Paris, France, Jul. 2019, pp. 1937-1941.
- [15] --, 'On the convergence of the polarization process in the noisiness/weaktopology,' in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory , Paris, France, Jul. 2019, pp. 2099-2103.
- [16] I. Tal and A. Vardy, 'How to construct polar codes,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 6562-6582, Oct. 2013.
- [17] T. C. Gulcu, M. Ye, and A. Barg, 'Construction of polar codes for arbitrary discrete memoryless channels,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 309-321, Jan. 2018.
- [18] D. J. C. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
- [19] W. Park and A. Barg, 'The ordered Hamming metric and ordered symmetric channels,' in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory , St. Peterburg, Russia, Aug. 2011, pp. 2283-2287.
- [20] T. Tao and V. H. Vu, Additive Combinatorics . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
- [21] S.-W. Ho and S. Verdú, 'Convexity/concavity of Rényi entropy and -mutual information,' in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory , Hong Kong, Jun. 2015, pp. 745-749.
- [22] S. Verdú, ' -mutual information,' in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop , San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2015, pp. 1-6.
- [23] E. ¸ Sa¸ so˘ glu, E. Telatar, and E. Arıkan, 'Polarization for arbitrary discrete memoryless channels,' in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop , Sicily, Italy, Oct. 2009, pp. 144-148.
- [24] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication . New York: Wiley, 1968.
- [25] E. Abbe, J. Li, and M. Madiman, 'Entropies of weighted sums in cyclic groups and an application to polar codes,' Entropy , vol. 19, no. 9, Sept. 2017.
- [26] M. Alsan and E. Telatar, 'A simple proof of polarization and polarization for non-stationary memoryless channels,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 4873-4878, Sept. 2016.
- [27] H. Mahdavifar, 'Fast polarization for non-stationary channels,' in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory , Aachen, Germany, Jun. 2017, pp. 849-853.
- [28] Y. Polyanskiy and S. Verdú, 'Arimoto channel coding converse and Rényi divergence,' in Proc. 48th Annual Allerton Conf. Commum. Control Comput. , Oct. 2010, pp. 1327-1333.
- [29] S. B. Korada, 'Polar codes for channel and source coding,' Ph.D. dissertation, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, 2009.
- [30] Y. Sakai and K. Iwata, 'Extremality between symmetric capacity and Gallager's reliability function E 0 for ternary-input discrete memoryless channels,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 163-191, Jan. 2018.
- [31] Y. Sakai, K. Iwata, and H. Fujisaki, 'Countably infinite multilevel source polarization for non-stationary erasure distributions,' in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory , Paris, France, Jul. 2019, pp. 2109-2113, An extended version is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.11721.
- [32] M. B. Parizi and E. Telatar, 'On the correlation between polarized BECs,' in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory , Istanbul, Turkey, Jul. 2013, pp. 784-788.

Yuta Sakai (Member, IEEE) was born in Japan in 1992. He is currently a Research Fellow in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the National University of Singapore (NUS). He received the B.E. and M.E. degrees in the Department of Information Science from the University of Fukui in 2014 and 2016, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in the Advanced Interdisciplinary Science and Technology from the University of Fukui in 2018. His research interests include information theory and coding theory.

Ken-ichi Iwata (Member, IEEE) received the B.Ed. degree from Wakayama University in 1993, the M.Sc. degree from Information Science from Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology in 1995, and the D.E. degree from the University of Electro-Communications in 2006. Since 2008 he has been with University of Fukui, where he is an Associate Professor.

Hiroshi Fujisaki (Member, IEEE) is an Associate Professor of Kanazawa University from 2011. He received the B.E. and M.E. degrees in Electronic Engineering from Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, in 1989 and 1991 respectively. He received the D.E. degree in Communication Engineering from the Department of Computer Science and Communication Engineering, Kyushu University, Japan in 2001. From 1991 to 1996, he worked as a Research Staff member in Hitachi, Ltd., Ibaraki, Japan. From 1998 to 2001, he worked as a Research Associate in the Department of Computer Science and Communication engineering, Kyushu University. From 2001 to 2010, he worked as a Lecturer in Graduate School of Natural Science and Technology, Kanazawa University, Japan. His research interests are in random number generations based on one-dimensional ergodic transformations and their applications to digital communication systems.