## Improved Blind Channel Estimation Performance by Nearby Channel Estimation

Jia-Chyi Wu and Zhen-Wei Kao

Department of Communications, Control and Navigation Engineering,

National Taiwan Ocean University

Email: jcwu@ntou.edu.tw

## Abstract

We have investigated the impact of adjacent channel estimation information on blind channel estimation  performances.  To  obtain  channel  information  for  further  data  transmission,  the Blind  channel  estimation  needs  no  pilot  signal  in  advance  is  a  considerable  algorithm.  To improve  performance  of  the  blind  channel  estimation  schemes,  we  have  employed  the channel  estimation  with  pilot  signals  by  adjacent  users;  the  acquired  estimation  channel information  of  the  adjacent  channel  is  applied  as  an  initial  state  to  the  blind  channel estimation  of  the  target  user.  We  have  considered  the  subspace  blind  channel  estimation scheme in this study. The estimated adjacent channel information is supported as an initial state  of  the  autocorrelation  matrix  in  the  subspace  estimation  method,  thereby  providing information  to  reduce  the  channel  estimation  error.  From  our  simulation  study,  we  have found that, when the correlation between two nearby channels is high, the forgetting factor in the subspace estimation method can be increased, so that the weight of the initial state of the matrix  is  increased,  and  a  more  accurate  channel  state  is  estimated.  If  the  correlation coefficient  is  lowered  in  two  adjacent  channels,  the  forgetting  factor  can  be  appropriately adjusted to rise the weight of the direct received signal from the objective channel to avoid errors increased.

Keywords: Pilot Signal, Subspace Blind Channel Estimation, Nearby Channel Estimation.

## Introduction

Signal transmitting over the wireless communication channel is effected by the physical characteristics of the electromagnetic wave propagation and the obstacles of the communication  paths  where,  diffraction,  refraction,  and  reflection  multipath  propagation interference  happened  at  the  receiver  to  destroy  the  signal  quality.  Most  of  the  signal interferences can be eliminated accordingly by applicable equalization process, but depends on a good channel estimation algorithm to get more real and accurate channel information.

T first  is estimate received data  fra efficacy make  t informa estimati transmi combin channel with the perform autocor reduce t he channel the index e e the chann d known si ame  apart  f y. The secon the  channel ation  at  rec ion  method ission rates, ning  the  adv l  estimation e index esti mance. The rrelation ma the channel estimation estimation m nel informat ignals after from  the  d nd type of l  estimation ceiver  to  s d.  This  kin ,  but the sy vantages  fr n  scheme.  I imation resu estimated n atrix in the l estimation n technology method by tion from th passing thr demanded  d estimation m n.  The  rec serve  as  an d  of  schem ystem is mo rom  the  ab In  this  pape ults of the n nearby chan subspace e error. y can be ro transmitting the received rough the c data  streams method reli ceived  sign n  estimatio mes  may  sa ore complica bove  two  es er,  we  have nearby chan nnel informa estimation m oughly divid g the pilot d pilots by channel. Sin s,  there  is ies on the d nal  streams on  reference ave  bandwi ated. The th stimation  c e  combined nnel to imp ation is supp method, the ded into thr signal first. observing t nce the pilo a  disadvan demand data are  not  w es,  this  is dth  request hird kind of ategories  to d  the  blind prove blind ported as an reby provid ree categor .  The receiv the variatio ot signal is ntage  of  ba a signal rec well  known so  called ts  to  increa f methods a o  develop estimation channel est n initial stat ding inform ries.  The ver may n of the an extra andwidth ceived to n  signal a  blind ase  data attempts a  better method timation te of the mation to

## CH HANNEL E ESTIMATI ION SYSTE EM

Si physica commu interfer can  be channel ignal  trans al  character unication  pa ence happen reduced  by l estimation mission  ov ristics  of  th aths  where, ned at the r y  the  recei n algorithm ver  the  wir he  electroma ,  diffraction eceiver to d iver  design to get more reless  com agnetic  wa n,  refractio destroy the s and  applic e real and ac mmunication ve  propaga on,  and  refl signal quali cable  equal ccurate chan n  channel  i ation  and  th lection  mul ity. Most of lizer,  but  d nnel inform is  effected he  obstacle ltipath  prop f these inter depends  on mation (Figur by  the s  of  the pagation ferences a  good re 1).

Figure 1. D Data transmiss sion channel

<!-- image -->

Conventionally, transmitting training sequences or pilots signal known at the receiver as a reference for estimation may reach the prerequisite. By observing the changes and variation of these known signals after passing through the transmitted channel leads to a better estimated channel information. However, transmission of these known pilot signals consumes bandwidth resources yet inefficient for a fast varying channel conditions. Blind channel estimation techniques need no further known signals in advance been proposed to improve the bandwidth requirement.

## A. Blind Channel Estimation

The blind channel estimation algorithm estimates the channel impulse response H , from the received signal y (which contains noise).

Figure 2. Channel estimation algorithm concept

<!-- image -->

There are two categories of the blind estimation algorithms: one needs the probability statistical characteristics of the transmitted signals, which is called statistical methods; the other one is classified as deterministic methods if the probability features of the transmitted signals are not required. In real states, the receiver does not make statistical assumptions about the transmitted signals, therefore the deterministic methods is more realistic.

## B. Estimation System and Channel Model

We have considered the subspace method as the estimation method which is combined with Single-Input Multi-Output (SIMO) technology and over-sampling. The autocorrelation matrix of the received signal can be decomposed into signal subspace and noise subspace [3, 4]. Then, B. Muquet and M. de Courville [5, 6] applied to CP-OFDM systems with the cyclic prefix (CP) scheme, but no need of the SIMO and oversampling techniques. Considering the OFDM system, the received signal r P ( k ) is segmented with its CP length G = 1 / 4 M, M is the number of subcarriers:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The transmission signal s P ( k ) and noise n P ( k ) have been divided into 5 segments:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The received signal r P ( k ) can be obtained from s P ( k ) by the following equation ( H i is the channel vector coefficient):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The first column vector is ሾ ݄ ଴ , … , ݄ ௉ିଵ ሿ ் and the first row vector is ሾ ݄ ଴ , 0, … , 0ሿ of the P×P Toeplitz matrix H 0 . The first column vector is ሾ0, … ,0ሿ ் and the first row vector is ሾ0	, ݄ ௉ିଵ , … , ݄ ଵ ሿ of the P×P Toeplitz matrix H 0 . We have assumed that the channel vector length is L + 1 for h = ሾ ݄ ଴ , ݄ ଵ , … , ݄ ௅ ሿ ் , where L &lt; G &lt; P ), when j &gt; L then hj = 0, i.e.:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We may rewrite Eq. (4) to be:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The matrices C 0 and C 1 are G × G Toeplitz matrices. The received signal ࢘ ത ሺ ݇ ሻ of size (2 M + G )×1 is formed by two consecutive received signals r P ( k ) and r P ( k -1):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The similar format for ࢙ തሺ ݇ ሻ and ࢔ ഥሺ ݇ ሻ can be found. Threfore, the relationship between ࢙ തሺ ݇ ሻ and ࢘ ത ሺ ݇ ሻ can be joined by (2 M + G )×2 M matrix ࡴሺࢎሻ :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We are able to calculate the autocorrelation matrix from ࢘ ത ሺ ݇ ሻ by ࡾ࢘ ത࢘ ത ൌ ܧ ൣ	࢘ തሺ ݇ ሻ࢘ തሺ ݇ ሻ ு ൧ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A relation autocor After applyin nship of the rrelation ma ng singular channel ma atrix: value decom atrix ࡴሺࢎሻ a mposition ( and matrix SVD), we c ࡳ௝ formed b can find the by eigenvec orthogonal ctor ࢛௝ of th l he

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

After w we find the m matrix G j , th he channel c coefficient v vector h can n be estimat ted by Eq. ( (11).

Fr which i phase a coeffici rom Eq. (11 s orthogona ambiguity be ient h : 1), we may al to the mat etween ࢎ ෡ , th obtain the c trix G j . In fa he estimated channel  inf fact, there ex d channel c formation by xist an unce oefficient v y channel co ertainty abou vector and th oefficient v ut magnitud he actual ch vector h , de and hannel

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  signals  is a compl should be in lex scalar. I nserted at th In order to r he time of tr reduce the im ransmission mpact of th n. his uncertain nty, some pi ilot

## C. Blin nd Channe l Estimatio on - subspa ce method with deter ministic co ondition

B ࢟ ሬ ሬ Ԧ ௤ ሺ ݇ ሻ ( By the subsp (with q sym pace approac mbols) can b ch, we first e obtained b assume a S by, SIMO chann nel with P o outputs, the output

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

T calculat herefore, w ted by ࢅ q , we may rewr rite (13) as ࢅ ࢅ௤ = ࡴ௤ࡿ௤ + + ࡺ௤ , the au utocorrelatio on matrix, ࡾ ࡾࢅ is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

T is zero m ( ݉݅݀ .( ܮ he autocorr mean, varia ݍܮ )×( ݍܮ )) ex relation mat ance ߪ 2 addi xpressed as trix of the tr itive white G ߪ 2 ࡵ . ࡾࢅ can ransmitted s Gaussian no n be eigen-d signal is ࡾࡿ oise, where decomposit ( ݉݅݀ .( ܮ + ݍ its autocorr e, i.e. ݍ )×( ܮ + ݍ )), a relation mat and ࡺ௤ trix ࡾࡺ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where   i are the eig genvalues, a and ࢜௜ are t the correspo onding eigen nvectors.

R are fullfollowin Re-arrange th -column ran ng characte he eigenval nk, the rank eristics: ues from la k of H q R S ࡴ௤ ு arge to smal ௤ ு is L+q . Th l,  0 &gt;  1 &gt; herefore, th … &gt;  P ( q-L ) he eigenvalu )-1 , since H q ues possess q and R S the

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

W When  i =  2  2 the corresp ponding eig genvectors, ࢜௜ may yie ld ( ࡭࢞ ሬ ሬ റ ൌ ߣ ሬ ࢞ ሬ ሬ റ ࢞ ):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefo system There a one is th 1, …, L corresp ore, H q R S ࡴ௤ ு matrix ࡴ௤ ு are Pq eigenv he signal su L + q -1, corre onding eige ௤ ு = 0 where are orthogo vectors of th ubspace, and esponding ei envectors ar e, H q and R S onal to the e he autocorre d the other o igenvectors re g i , we ma S are full-co eigenvectors elation matr one is noise s are s i , and ay define th olumn rank, s for the cor rix RY , can e subspace. for  i =  2 , he two subsp the unknow rresponding be divided For eigenva i = L + q , L + paces: wn multi-ch g eigenvalue into two sp alues  i &gt;  + q +1, …, P hannel es  2 . pans,  2 , i = 0, Pq -1,

Si ignal subsp ace: ࡿ = ሾ ࢙ ଴ … ࢙௅ା௤ ିଵሿ

N Noice subspa ace: ࡳ = ሾ ࢍ ଴ … ࢍࡼࢗି ିࡸିࢗି૚ሿ

Su means t generat the estim uppose the that the sign ed by the le mation meth rank of Y q i nal subspace eft Pq -( L + q hod applica is Pq and Pq e is generat ) eigenvecto able to find q &gt; L + q , sin ted by L + q e ors. The ran out two sub nce the rank eigenvector nk of H q RS ࡴ bspaces sepa of H q RS ࡴ௤ ு s, so the no ࡴ௤ ு must be arately. ௤ ு is L + q , wh oise subspac e less than Y hich ce is Y q for

T subspac can be g he noise eig ce generated generated b genvectors i d by these e by the colum is orthogona eigenvectors mn vector of al to the cha s is also orth f H q , the ort annel matrix hogonal to H thogonal aff x H q , where H q . Since th filiation betw e the noise he signal su tween the no ubspace oise subspac the equa ࡾࢅ ௉ can scalar  ce and the s ation ࡴ௤ ு ࢍ ௜ be effective  . ignal subsp ௜ = 0 in conj ely reduced ace can be a junction wit d by the inde achieved. T th the least ex estimatio Therefore, th squares sen on to effecti he channel c nse. The acc ively reduce can be solve curate initia e the compl ed by l state ex

## N NEARBY C CHANNEL L CONCEP PT

W the idle nearby channel the mai We first defi e unused ch channel ca l condition n channel. ine the near annel as a n an be access information rby channel nearby chan sed to help n is utilized concept fo nnel (Figure the  data  tr to improve or transmissi e 3). Chann ransmission e the blind s ion with the nel condition n in the mai subspace ch e main chan n informati in  channel. hannel estim nnel and ion from Nearby mation in

Figure 3. N Nearby chann nel concept

<!-- image -->

## A. Sim mulation Se tup

W than the Figure constan blind ch We have lea e blind estim 4,  channel ntly  perform hannel estim arned that c mation algo B  is  idle  t med on this mation. channel esti orithm. Assu transmitting channel,  w imation wit ume two ch g;  we  may where chann h pilot sequ hannels A a apply  chan nel  A  is  in uence achie nd B are ad nnel  estimat data  transm eve better a djacent as s tion  pilot  s mission  mo accuracy hown in equence ode  with

E channel initial s xperimenta l condition tates for bli al  analysis likeness; co ind channel is  perform onsequently estimation med  at  nearb y, the estim at channel by  distance mation result A. e  (3  to  5  m ts of chann meters)  to nel B are ap test  the pplied as

C excess b Channel esti bandwidth w mation accu waste. uracy is im mproved for data transm mission on channel A without

Figur re 4. Nearby c channel concep pt simulation setup.

<!-- image -->

## B. Nea arby Chann nel Conditi ion Measur rements

R distance likeness Real-time  re e around 3 s are measu eceived  sign to 5 meters ured as show nal  power s are experi wn in Figure profile  me imental test es 5-7. easurements ted, the cha s  for  nearb annel power by  channels r profile co s  [7],  at onditions B adjacen simulat Based  on  th nt  channels ions for nea he  received s by  real-t arby channe d  power  pr ime  measu el condition rofile  corre urements  re n by mathem elation  coef esults,  we matical mode fficients  be can  perfo els, as show etween  two orm  the  nu wn in Figure nearby umerical es 8-10.

Figure e 5. 3-meters a apart (correlat tion coefficien nt 0.98)

<!-- image -->

Figure e 6. 4-meters a apart (correlat tion coefficien nt 0.68)

<!-- image -->

Figure e 7. 5-meters a apart (correlat tion coefficien nt 0.11)

<!-- image -->

Fig gure 8. Expect ted correlation n coefficient 0 0.98

<!-- image -->

Fig gure 9. Expect ted correlation n coefficient 0 0.68

<!-- image -->

Fig ure 10. Expec cted correlatio on coefficient 0.11

<!-- image -->

## SIM MULATION N RESULT TS ANALY YSIS

W based o shown i We are able on the previ in Figure 11 to apply ne ous channe 1. earby chann l measurem nel condition ment results. n informati .  The syste on to blind m simulatio channel est on setup dia timation agram is Fo process which m informa channel factor is and the orgetting fa s  of  updatin means the p ation is prov ls being sim s with smal weight of e actor repres ng  the  auto present chan vided by th milar or not ll value, the each receive sents the we ocorrelation nnel state is he estimatio t  will greatl e influence ed symbol p eight of the matrix.  If s more effec on result fro ly affect the of the adjac pair estimat e  previous the  forgett ct by previo om the near e final estim cent channe ion will be state  and  th ting  factor ous state. Si rby channel mation resu el informatio increased. he next stat with  highe ince the init l,  these two ult. If the fo on will be r te  in  the er  value, tial state o nearby orgetting reduced, Si technol transmi imulations ogy. Chann itting antenn are  based  o nel estimatio nas in 3~5 m on  Cyclic  P on perform meters. Syst Prefix  OFD mances are v tem simulat DM (CP-OF varied by th tion parame FDM) with he nearby d eters setting QPSK mo distances of are as follo dulation the two ows, W subspac transmi received the pilo We first con ce (SS) ch itting pilot d data signa ot signals as sider only t hannel esti signals assi als, we can sisted subsp the main ch imation  m isted. Since see a notabl pace estima hannel syste method  com e the subspa le shortage ation method em case, sy mpare with ace estimati in the BER d. In Figure stem perfor channel ion method R (bit error r e 12. rmance of t estimation d based only rate) compa he blind add-on y on the red with Simulation  results  are  mainly  based  on  the  information  of  nearby  channels,  the forgetting  factor  is  set  to  0.98.  The  BER  decreases  with  the  increase  of  the  correlation coefficient of the two channels.

Figure 11. S Systematic Blo ock Diagram

<!-- image -->

Table 1. Simulation pa arameters

F Figure 12. Mai in channel sys stem estimatio on

<!-- image -->

When the correlation coefficient is 0.98, system performance is quite satisfactory. The channel information-assisted subspace estimation method of the nearby channel is applicable. When  the  nearby  channel  correlation  coefficients  are  0.68  and  0.11  with  0.98  forgetting value, the effect form nearby channel information is reduced as shown in Figure 13. We then drop the forgetting factor value to 0.7 to decrease the impact of unreliable information from the  nearby  channel.  Shown  in  Figure  14,  the  appropriate  adjustment  actually  improve  the estimation  error  caused  by  the  not  so  related  initial  nearby  channel  information.  In  the process of adjusting the forgetting factor, it should be noticed that when the forgetting factor is  less  than  a  certain  value,  the  rank  of  the  received  signal  autocorrelation  matrix  will  be reduced. When the rank is less than the number of symbols received, the subspace estimation method will no longer be valid.

Figure 13. System with Nearby Channel Estimation

<!-- image -->

Figure 14. System with reduced Forgetting Factor

<!-- image -->

## CONCLUSIONS

This  study  aims  to  explore  the  impact  of  nearby  channel  estimation  information  on blind channel estimation. Since the blind estimation method need no pilot signals transmitting to  save  bandwidth  requirement,  we  can  obtain  reliable  initial  channel  information  from nearby channel with pilot signals channel estimation. Simulation results show that the high correlation coefficient of the two nearby channels, the forgetting factor can be increased, so that  the  weight  of  the  initial  state  of  the  matrix  is  increased,  and  a  more  accurate  channel result  is  estimated.  If  the  correlation  coefficient  is  lowered,  the  forgetting  factor  can  be appropriately adjusted to rely on the receive data signal more in the main channel to avoid high BER.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work has been partially supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology, the Republic of China under grant number MOST 107-2119-M-019-004.

## References

1. Su, B. and P. P. Vaidyanathan, "Subspace-based blind channel identification for cyclic prefix  systems  using  few  received  blocks."  IEEE  Transactions  on  Signal  Processing Vol. 55(10), pp. 4979-4993, Nov. 2007.
2. Necker, M. C. and G. L. Stuber, "Totally blind channel estimation for OFDM on fast varying  mobile  radio  channels,"  in  IEEE  Transactions  on  Wireless  Communications, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 1514-1525, Sept. 2004.
3. Moulines, E., P. Duhamel, J. F. Cardoso and S. Mayrargue, "Subspace methods for the blind  identification  of  multichannel  FIR  filters,"  in  IEEE  Transactions  on  Signal Processing, vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 516-525, Feb 1995.
4. Tong,  L.,    G.  Xu,  and  T.  Kailath,  "Blind  identification  and  equalization  based  on second-order statistics: a time domain approach," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 340-349, Mar 1994.
5. Muquet, B., M. De Courville, and P. Duhamel, "Subspace-based blind and semi-blind channel estimation for OFDM systems." IEEE transactions on signal processing 50.7 (2002): 1699-1712.
6. Muquet, B., M. De Courville, P. Duhamel and V. Buzenac, "A subspace based blind and  semi-blind  channel  identification  method  for  OFDM  systems,"  1999  2nd  IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (Cat. No.99EX304), Annapolis, MD, 1999, pp. 170-173.
7. Wu, J.-C.  and  T.-F.  Huang,  'Nearby  Channel  Estimation  System',  MATEC  Web  of Conferences, Vol. 95, 14010, Feb. 2017.
8. Doukopoulos,  X.  G.  and  G.  V.  Moustakides,  "Blind  adaptive  channel  estimation  in OFDM systems." IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications Vol. 5(7), pp. 17161725, July 2006.
9. Ho,  C.-K.  B.  Farhang-Boroujeny,  and  F.  Chin.  "A  comparison  of  blind  channel estimation  schemes  for  OFDM  in  fading  channels."  Proc.  Intl.  Conf.  on  Commun. Systems, 2000.
10. Zeng,  Y.  and  T.  S.  Ng,  "A      proof  of  the  identifiability  of  a  subspace-based  blind channel estimation for OFDM systems," in IEEE Signal Processing Letters, vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 756-759, Sept. 2004.
11. Abed-Meraim, K., P. Loubaton, and E. Moulines. "A subspace algorithm for certain blind identification problems." IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 43(2), pp. 499-511, Mar. 1997.