## The Averaging Principle for Non-autonomous Slow-fast Stochastic Differential Equations and an Application to a Local Stochastic Volatility Model

Filippo de Feo filippo.defeo@polimi.it

Department of Mathematics, Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy

January 12, 2021

## Abstract

In this work we study the averaging principle for non-autonomous slow-fast systems of stochastic differential equations. In particular in the first part we prove the averaging principle assuming the sublinearity, the Lipschitzianity and the Holder's continuity in time of the coefficients, an ergodic hypothesis and an ℒ 2 -bound of the fast component. In this setting we prove the weak convergence of the slow component to the solution of the averaged equation. Moreover we provide a suitable dissipativity condition under which the ergodic hypothesis and the ℒ 2 -bound of the fast component, which are implicit conditions, are satisfied.

In the second part we propose a financial application of this result: we apply the theory developed to a slow-fast local stochastic volatility model. First we prove the weak convergence of the model to a local volatility one. Then under a risk neutral measure we show that the prices of the derivatives, possibly path-dependent, converge to the ones calculated using the limit model.

Keywords: averaging principle, slow fast stochastic differential equations, non autonomous, Khasminskii, local stochastic volatility

## 1 Introduction

In this work we are concerned with the study of the averaging principle for slow-fast systems of stochastic differential equations of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

  where t ∈ [ 0, T ] , W, ˜ W are Brownian motions, b , σ , B , C are some regular functions and ǫ ∈ ( 0, 1 ] is a small parameter representing the ratio of time-scales between the slow component X ǫ and the fast component Y ǫ .

The idea of the averaging principle is to show the convergence of X ǫ as ǫ → 0 to the solution X of the so called averaged equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which doesn't depend anymore on the fast component and the coefficients b , σ are opportune averages of the original ones b, σ .

In this sense from a mathematical point of view it is possible to model systems with different time-scales and then operate a rigorous dimensionality reduction, approximating the behavior of the slow component X ǫ with X and controlling the error of such approximation. For this reason multi-scale stochastic systems are widely used in many areas of physics, chemistry, biology, financial mathematics and many other applications areas (e.g. [9], [11], [18], [23]).

The averaging principle was initially proposed for the classical equations of celestial mechanics by Clairaut, Laplace and Lagrange in the eighteenth century. Later on in the twentieth century rigorous result were proved by Bogoliubov, Krylov and Mitropolsky. In [19, Appendices] it can be found an entire section devoted to the history of the averaging principle for differential equations.

For what concerns stochastic differential equations the first results on the averaging principle were due to Khasminskii, Vrkoč and Gikhman in the '60s.

In [15] Khasminskii considered the following autonomous system of stochastic differential equations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

  and proved that the averaging principle holds under Lipschitz coefficients and b , σ uniformly bounded in y . Moreover a bound of the fast component and the following ergodic condition are assumed: there exist a d-dimensional vector b ( x ) and a square d-dimensional matrix a ( x ) such that for every t 0 ≤ T , τ ≥ 0, x ∈ ℝ d , y ∈ ℝ l

barex barex where lim τ →∞ K ( τ ) = 0 and { y ( x , y ) s } s ≥ 0 satisfies the so called frozen equation

In particular Khasminskii showed that the process X ǫ converges weakly in u1D49E [ 0, T ] d to the solution X of the averaged equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The coefficients b , σ satisfying the ergodic condition are usually averages of the initial ones b , σ with respect to the invariant measure of the frozen equation which must be shown to exist. Typically a dissipativity condition implies the implicit hypotheses. The proof of Khasminskii based on a time-discretization technique was very influential and it inspired many researches conducted by mathematicians like Freidlin, Wentzell, Veretennikov, Cerrai, Röckner and many others. We need to remark that when σ is independent of the fast variable Y ǫ we usually have the stronger convergence in probability of the slow variable X ǫ (e.g. [4], [12], [21]).

Recently non-autonomous slow-fast systems are being investigated: In 2016 in [5] Cerrai and Lunardi studied a non-autonomous slow-fast system of reaction diffusion equations where the coefficients of the fast equation depend on time and satisfy the almost periodic in time condition. They proved the convergence in probability of X ǫ when σ is independent of Y ǫ .

More recently in 2020 in [22] the authors considered the non-autonomous system (1) with σ independent of Y ǫ and proved the ℒ p -convergence of X ǫ under local Lipschitz coefficients. Here the coefficients of the slow equation are assumed to depend also on ω .

In [24] jumps were considered for slow-fast system of reaction diffusion equations. Also here the diffusion term of the fast equation is independent on the fast component.

In this work, motivated by the study of a local stochastic volatility model, we consider the nonautonomous slow-fast system (1), where σ depends on Y ǫ , and we prove the validity of the averaging principle. We assume the Lipschitzianity, an Holder's continuity in time and a sublinearity of the coefficients. Moreover in spirit of Khasminskii's work we assume an ergodic hypothesis and an ℒ 2 -bound of the fast component. In this setting we show the weak convergence of X ǫ in u1D49E [ 0, T ] d to the solution of the averaged equation by means of a time discretization argument inspired by Khasminskii. The ergodic hypothesis and the ℒ 2 -bound of the fast component assumed here are implicit hypotheses, so they need to be proved valid for a given slow-fast system. For this reason we also provide an explicit condition under which the implicit hypotheses are verified: this is the following dissipativity of the coefficients of the fast component

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also treat the case of a perturbation of the drift of the fast equation by a slower term of the form ǫ -η D ( t , X ǫ t , Y ǫ t ) for 0 ≤ η &lt; 1 by considering

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 In fact this case will be necessary in the next part of the article.

At this point we propose a financial application of this result. In [9] under the objective measure the authors consider a slow-fast stochastic volatility model of the form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 where S ǫ is the stock price, ℱ( y ) is the stochastic volatility driven by an ergodic, mean-reverting process Y ǫ .

Then, after the change of measure to a risk neutral one, they perform a perturbational analysis of the prices of the financial derivatives. This analysis is performed through an asymptotic expansion as ǫ → 0 of the pricing partial differential equation. An exhaustive presentation would be impossible here, we refer to [9] for all the details. The literature on these models and their generalizations is very rich, e.g. see [6], [9], [10], [11], [16] and references therein.

Inspired by these works under the objective measure we consider a slow-fast local stochastic volatility model of the form

  where S ǫ is the stock price, ℋ( t , s , y ) , ℱ( t , s , y ) are the local stochastic drift and local stochastic volatility respectively and they are driven by the fast process Y ǫ . For local stochastic volatility models refer to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

[17] and [16]. See also [2] for a general overview. Applying the theory just developed, we show the weak convergence of S ǫ in u1D49E [ 0, T ] to the solution S of the averaged equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which turns out to be a local volatility model.

At this point we proceed with the construction of a family of risk neutral measures, under which pricing can be done, and we consider a financial derivative possibly path-dependent. Then, under a risk neutral measure, we show the weak convergence of S ǫ in u1D49E [ 0, T ] to S . Moreover we prove that the price of the derivative, calculated using the slow-fast model ( S ǫ , Y ǫ ) , converge to the price of the derivative calculated using the limit model S .

The work is organized as follows:

in section 2 we introduce a class of non-autonomous slow-fast stochastic differential equations and we prove that the averaging principle holds for such class.

In section 3 we prove that the implicit hypotheses assumed in section 2 are verified under an explicit dissipativity condition.

In section 4 we apply the result shown in the previous chapters to a financial local stochastic volatility model.

## 2 The Averaging Principle for a Class of non Autonomous Stochastic Differential Equations

## 2.1 Framework and main Theorem

Let ( Ω , ℱ , ℱ t , ( W t , Z t ) , ℙ ) t ≥ 0 be a continuous standard ℝ d + l -Brownian motion. As in [1, section 6] we construct an ℝ l -Brownian motion { ˜ W t } t ≥ 0 correlated to { W t } t ≥ 0 by defining

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ρ ij ∈ (-1, 1 ) , ∑ d i = 1 ρ 2 ij ≤ 1 for every j ≤ l and ∑ d i = 1 ρ ij ρ ik = 0 for every j ≠ k . In this way we have the following correlation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let's now consider the following system of stochastic differential equations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 where ǫ ∈ ( 0, 1 ] , t ∈ [ 0, T ] , T is the time horizon , x 0 ∈ ℝ d , y 0 ∈ ℝ l , b , σ , B , C are Borel functions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we list the following hypothesis under which we will show the main theorem of this work:

Hypothesis 1. There exist L &gt; 0 , γ &gt; 0 such that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every 0 ≤ t , s ≤ T , x 1 , x 2 ∈ ℝ d , y 1 , y 2 ∈ ℝ l .

Hypothesis 2. There exists M&gt; 0 such that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every 0 ≤ t ≤ T , x ∈ ℝ d , y ∈ ℝ l .

Remark 2.1.1. Analogously to what happens in [15] we can't assume the full sublinearity of b and σ because the behaviour Y ǫ is too fast.

Proposition 1. Under hypothesis 1, 2 equation (3) has a unique strong solution {( X ǫ t , Y ǫ t )} t ∈[ 0, T ] for every ǫ &gt; 0 .

Proof. It follows by the classic theorem of existence and uniqueness of strong solutions after noticing that we can write system (3) with respect to the independent Brownian motions W t , Z t by means of a linear transformation. □

Now we define the square d-dimensional matrix a ( t , x , y ) = σ ( t , x , y ) σ T ( t , x , y )/ 2 and we state the ergodic hypothesis.

Hypothesis 3. There exist a continuous d-dimensional vector b ( t , x ) and a continuous square d-dimensional matrix σ ( t , x ) such that for every 0 ≤ t ≤ T , t 0 ≥ 0 , τ ≥ 0 , x ∈ ℝ d , y ∈ ℝ l

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and { y t , x , y s } s ≥ 0 is the unique strong solution to the frozen equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover we assume that b ( t , x ) , σ ( t , x ) are locally Lipschitz in x uniformly with respect to t ≤ T .

Now we define the matrix a ( t , x ) = σ ( t , x ) σ T ( t , x )/ 2.

Remark 2.1.2. Hypothesis 3 is the generalization to the non autonomous case of Khasminskii's ergodic hypothesis in [15].

Remark 2.1.3. It is not necessary to assume that b and σ are continuous in ( t , x ) since it is possible to prove it by using (4) and (5) . On the other hand in order to have a unique strong solution of the averaged equation we must assume that they are locally Lipschitz as it doesn't follow from (4) and (5) .

Remark 2.1.4. { y t , x , y s } s ≥ 0 is the time changed process s → ǫs with the time t -component and the x -component frozen. Moreover the frozen equation has a unique strong solution thanks to hypothesis 1, 2.

Remark 2.1.5. Letting τ →+∞ in (4) , (5) we obtain the following characterizations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.1.6. For what concerns σ ( t , x ) usually one calculates first the matrix a ( t , x ) as the ergodic limit (8) and proves that (5) holds. Then the matrix σ ( t , x ) can be chosen in the following way: since a ( t , x , y ) is symmetric and positive semidefinite this implies that a ( t , x ) is also symmetric and positive semidefinite and so it has a unique symmetric positive semidefinite square root σ ( t , x ) = √ 2 a ( t , x ) .

Remark 2.1.7. Let's observe that the matrix σ ( t , x ) satisfying (5) could be not unique. In fact, given the symmetric positive semidefinite matrix a ( t , x ) , the matrix σ ( t , x ) such that a ( t , x ) = σ ( t , x ) σ T ( t , x )/ 2 in general is not unique. This means that we would end up with different averaged equations of the form (9) . Anyway this is not a problem because the law of the solution of (9) depends on σ ( t , x ) only through a ( t , x ) , e.g. see [20, chapter 5].

Let now B B ( ℝ l ) be the space of bounded measurable functions.

Remark 2.1.8. If for fixed t , x the transition semigroup of the frozen equation {u1D4AB t , x s } s ≥ 0 defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

has a unique invariant measure µ t , x with a certain rate of decay to the equilibrium, then the vector

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the matrix

are the natural candidates for b ( t , x ) and a ( t , x ) respectively.

Remark 2.1.9. Thanks to (7) , (8) b , σ satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every 0 ≤ t ≤ T , x ∈ ℝ d .

Now we assume an ℒ 2 -bound of the fast component:

Hypothesis 4. There exists C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.1.10. Hypotheses 3, 4 are implicit conditions: hence they need to be proven valid for a given slow-fast system of stochastic differential equations. In the next section we will provide an explicit condition under which they are satisfied, following the idea of remark 2.1.8.

We can now introduce the main theorem of this work which states that the averaging principle holds for system (3).

Theorem 1 (Averaging Principle) . Assume that hypotheses 1, 2, 3, 4 hold. Then X ǫ → X weakly in u1D49E [ 0, T ] d as ǫ → 0 where the process X is the unique strong solution of the averaged equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here we have considered the following definition:

Definition 2.1.11. Let {( Ω ǫ , ℱ ǫ , P ǫ )} ǫ&gt; 0 be a family of probability spaces. On each of them consider a random variable X ǫ with values in a complete metric space S . Let ( Ω , u1D509 , P ) be another probability space on which a random variable X with values in S is given. We say that X ǫ → X weakly in S as ǫ → 0 if the family of probability measures induced by { X ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 converges weakly as ǫ → 0 to the probability measure induced by X .

Remark 2.1.12. We remind that u1D49E [ 0, T ] d is a complete metric space with metric

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.1.13. The averaged equation (9) has a unique strong solution thanks to hypothesis 3 and remark 2.1.9 .

## 2.2 Proof of the Main Theorem

We start by constructing an auxiliary process obtained by a discretization in time: fix ∆ ∈ [ 0, T ] and let K = 0... ⌈ T / ∆ ⌉ -1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 and we choose the length of the intervals ∆ = ∆ ( ǫ ) = ǫ ( log ǫ -1 ) 1 / 4 such that as ǫ → 0 then ∆ → 0 and ∆ / ǫ →+∞ .

Remark 2.2.1. Following Khasminskii's idea the proof is based on the previous discretization. We notice that in each time interval the time component and the slow component of the coefficients are fixed while the fast component is free to move. In fact this is the idea of the proof: to consider an approximated process in which only the fast component evolves because it is much faster than the other two t and x which can then be considered fixed.

We now prove the following a priori estimates:

Lemma 2.2.2. Let p ≥ 2 , then there exists a constant C = C ( p , T ) &gt; 0 such that ∀ ǫ &gt; 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let's fix R &gt; 0 and consider the stopping time τ R = inf ( t &gt; 0, | X ǫ t | ≥ R ) . Let's define X ǫ R ( t ) = X ǫ τ R ∧ t , then:

It follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

BD By Hölder inequality and by sublinearity we obtain the estimate for the second term on the right hand side:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Burkholder-Davis-Gundy and Hölder inequalities and by sublinearity we have the estimate for the third term on the right hand side:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Putting everything together we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the constants C 1 , C 2 , C 3 are independent of ǫ . Defining

we can apply Gronwall's Lemma because v ( t ) ≤ max ( R p , | x 0 | p ) &lt; +∞ obtaining:

where the constant C is independent of ǫ . Letting R →∞ we see that τ R →+∞ a.s. with respect to ℙ and this implies:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying Beppo Levi's theorem to (13) we get (11). Using (11) it's easy to prove (12).

□

We now prove the following lemma:

Lemma 2.2.3. Let p ≥ 2 , then there exists a constant C = C ( p , T ) &gt; 0 such that ∀ ǫ &gt; 0

for every t 1 , t 2 ∈ [ 0, T ] .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let t 1 ≤ t 2 ∈ [ 0, T ] , by usual calculation we have:

where C p is independent of ǫ . Finally using (11) we get (14), in fact:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the constants C , C 1 , C 2 are independent of ǫ . In the same way it's possible to prove (15).

We are now ready to prove theorem 1.

Proof. We start by showing the following relation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In order to do this we first prove:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let's fix t ∈ [ K∆ , (( K + 1 ) ∆ ) ∧ T ) , then:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

□

First we consider the term I ǫ 1 ( t ) . By Hölder inequality and hypothesis 1 we have:

An analogous estimate can be obtained for the term I ǫ 2 ( t ) using Ito's Isometry and hypothesis 1:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Putting everything together we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By lemma 2.2.3 and since t ∈ [ K∆ , (( K + 1 ) ∆ ) ∧ T ) , we have:

By Gronwall's lemma it follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which tends to zero as as ǫ → 0 since ∆ = ǫ ( log ǫ -1 ) 1 / 4 . This implies (17). We can now prove (16):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We consider the first term on the right hand side E ǫ 1 . By Holder's inequality and hypothesis 1 we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (18) and lemma 2.2.3 it implies E ǫ 0 as ǫ 0.

In a similar way we treat the term E .

1 → → ǫ 2 By Doob's inequality and Lipschitzianity we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from which it follows E ǫ 2 → 0 as ǫ → 0. This implies (16).

Now we want to apply [14, chapter 2: problem 4.11] to the family of the laws induced by the processes {( ˆ X ǫ , W , ˜ W )} ǫ to show that it is tight.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Until now we have considered processes on a time horizon T fi xed. To apply the result we need to extend them from [ 0, T ] to [ 0, +∞) , by choosing

for ω ∈ Ω , t ≥ T where Z is any of the processes we have considered.

We remind that u1D49E [ 0, +∞) d is a complete separable metric space with the following metric:

In this way we keep the continuity of the trajectories and we can see Z as a random variable with values on (u1D49E[ 0, +∞) d , ℬ(u1D49E[ 0, +∞) d )) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We show that the hypotheses of [14, chapter 2: problem 4.11] hold:

- (i) sup ǫ u1D53C [ barex barex ( ˆ X ǫ 0 , W 0 , ˜ W 0 ) barex barex 2 ] = (| x 0 | 2 , 0, 0 ) (ii) Since u1D53C [ | W t -W s | 4 ] ≤ C | t -s | 2 for every 0 ≤ s , t ≤ T and by (14) we have:

for every 0 ≤ s , t ≤ T .

This implies the family of the laws induced by {( ˆ X ǫ , W , ˜ W )} ǫ is tight in u1D49E [ 0, +∞) 2 d + l . Then by Prohorov's theorem it is weakly compact. This means that any sequence {( ˆ X ǫ n , W , ˜ W )} ǫ n has a subsequence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

{( ˆ X ǫ n ′ , W , ˜ W )} ǫ n ′ converging weakly in u1D49E [ 0, +∞) 2 d + l . In virtue of [3, theorem 2.6] if we prove that the ˆ ǫ ˜ 2 d l

Then thanks to (16) and extension (19) we have that {( X ǫ n ′ , ˆ X ǫ n ′ , W , ˜ W )} ǫ n ′ converges weakly in u1D49E [ 0, +∞) 3 d + l to ( ˆ X 0 , ˆ X 0 , W , ˜ W ) and by the Skorokhod's theorem we can find a new probability space ( Ω ∗ , ℱ ∗ , ℙ ∗ ) and random variables {( x ǫ n ′ , ˆ x ǫ n ′ , w ǫ n ′ , ˜ w ǫ n ′ )} ǫ n ′ defined on it with values in u1D49E [ 0, +∞) 3 d + l that have the same law of {( X ǫ n ′ , ˆ X ǫ n ′ , W , ˜ W )} ǫ n ′ and such that {( x ǫ n ′ , ˆ x ǫ n ′ , w ǫ n ′ , ˜ w ǫ n ′ )} ǫ n ′ converges a.s. to a random variable ( ˆ x 0 , ˆ x 0 , w , ˜ w ) with values in u1D49E [ 0, +∞) 3 d + l that has the same law of ( ˆ X 0 , ˆ X 0 , W , ˜ W ) .

limit is unique then the whole family {( X , W , W )} ǫ converges weakly in u1D49E [ 0, +∞) + . Hence we take an arbitrary subsequence {( ˆ X ǫ n ′ , W , ˜ W )} ǫ n ′ converging weakly in u1D49E [ 0, +∞) 2 d + l to a certain process ( ˆ X 0 , W , ˜ W ) .

For semplicity we rename {( x ǫ , ˆ x ǫ , w ǫ , ˜ w ǫ )} ǫ the subsequence {( x ǫ n ′ , ˆ x ǫ n ′ , w ǫ n ′ , ˜ w ǫ n ′ )} ǫ n ′ converging a.s.

To obtain the uniqueness of the limit mentioned above and hence obtain the thesis of the theorem we prove that the law of the process ˆ x 0 coincides with the law of the unique solution of (9) or equivalently that it is the unique solution to the corresponding martingale problem. In order to do this we want to apply [14, chapter 5: proposition 4.6].

Hence we consider the probability P induced by ˆ x 0 on (u1D49E[ 0, +∞) d , ℬ(u1D49E[ 0, +∞) d )) and the filtration u1D509 t = u1D4A2 t + where {u1D4A2 t } is the augmentation under P of the canonical filtration ℬ(u1D49E[ 0, t ) d ) . In this setting we consider the martingale problem associated with defined by

{u1D49C t } t ≥ 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular the probability P is a solution to the martingale problem associated with {u1D49C t } t ≥ 0 if the process { M f t } t ≥ 0 defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a continuous u1D509 t -martingale under P for every f ∈ u1D49E 2 ( ℝ d ) . By [14, chapter 5: proposition 4.6] in order for P to be a solution to the martingale problem it is enough to prove that the process { M f t } t ≥ 0 is a continuous u1D509 t -martingale under P for the choices f ( x ) = x i and f ( x ) = x i x j for every 0 ≤ i , j ≤ d .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore we set u1D509 ′ t = σ { w s , ˜ w s , s ≤ t } , we fix the component i ≤ d and we show that the process { m x i t } t ≥ 0 defined by

is a continuous martingale with respect to u1D509 ′ t , t ≥ 0. Notice that ˆ x 0 0 = x 0 a.s.

( Ω ∗ , ℱ ∗ , ℱ ′ t , w t , ˜ w t , ℙ ∗ ) which we then denote by ( ˆ x ǫ t , ˆ Y ǫ t ) and we have:

On ( Ω ∗ , ℱ ∗ , ℱ ′ t , w t , ˜ w t , ℙ ∗ ) we consider system (3) and we notice that the slow component of the solution is indistinguishable from x ǫ t defined above. Hence we denote by ( x ǫ t , Y ǫ t ) the solution of system (3) on ( Ω ∗ , ℱ ∗ , ℱ ′ t , w t , ˜ w t , ℙ ∗ ) . Analogously ˆ x ǫ t is indistinguishable from the slow component of the discretized process on

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a.s. in Ω ∗ , ∀ t ∈ [ K∆ , ( K + 1 ) ∆ ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the process is a continuous local u1D509 ′ t -martingale, t ≥ 0. We need to pass this property to the limit as ǫ → 0. Now we take t 1 ≤ t 2 and we show that:

  We define ˜ Y ǫ s as the time-changed process

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we see that the processes ˜ Y ǫ s + K∆ / ǫ and y ( K∆ , x ǫ K∆ , Y ǫ K∆ ) s are indistinguishable on [ 0, ∆ / ǫ ) . Here y ( K∆ , x ǫ K∆ , Y ǫ K∆ ) s satisfies (6) with x ǫ K∆ , Y ǫ K∆ frozen and Brownian motion

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By hypothesis 3, 4, by the Markov property and by (11) we obtain (22), in fact:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By dominated convergence for uniform integrable functions for the second term on the right side it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From this and by dominated convergence for uniform integrable functions we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (21) the term inside the expectation on the left-hand-side is a sum of stochastic integrals. It implies ∀ t 1 ≤ t 2

where the convergence as ǫ → 0 is in ℒ 1 ( Ω ∗ ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This implies that { m x i t } t ≥ 0 is a continuous u1D509 ′ t -martingale.

Now we show that the following process is a continuous martingale with respect to u1D509 ′ t , t ≥ 0

Then we have that u1D509 ′ t ⊇ ℱ ˆ x 0 t = σ { ˆ x 0 s , s ≤ t } : in fact the process ˆ x 0 t is u1D509 ′ t -measurable since it is the a.s. limit of the family { ˆ x ǫ } ǫ which is u1D509 ′ t -measurable. This implies that { m x i t } t ≥ 0 is a continuous ℱ ˆ x 0 t -martingale. Finally it follows that the process { M x i t } t ≥ 0 defined by (20) with f ( x ) = x i is a continuous u1D509 t -martingale under P for every i ≤ d .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For t ∈ [ K∆ , ( K + 1 ) ∆ ) we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As before we have that the following process is a continuous u1D509 ′ t -martingale, t ≥ 0

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∀ ≤ ∀ ≤ 1 ≤ 2

and we need to pass this property to the limit process as ǫ → 0. With the same argument of before we are able to show that i , j d , 0 t t

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we treat the last term remaining and we show that ∀ i , j ≤ d , 0 ≤ t 1 ≤ t 2

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

First we prove:

In fact we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C 1 is independent of ǫ .

Similarly to (22) also the second term on the right-hand-side goes to zero:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C 2 is independent of ǫ and by hypothesis 4 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with C 3 , C 4 independent of ǫ . Notice that u1D53C [ | ˆ x ǫ K∆ | barex Y ǫ K∆ ] ≤ C 3 , in fact:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and u1D53C [ | ˆ x ǫ K∆ | 2 barex barex Y ǫ s = y s , s ≤ K∆ ] ≤ C 3 because we can repeat the same proof of (12) with any deterministic continuous function y s . This implies (27). As before by (27) and dominated convergence we have (26).

At this point we can apply [14, chapter 5: proposition 4.6] and say that there exists a d-dimensional ˆ u1D509 t -Brownian motion { w 0 t } t ≥ 0 defined on an extension ( ˆ Ω , ˆ u1D509 , ˆ ℙ ) of (u1D49E[ 0, +∞) d , ℬ(u1D49E[ 0, +∞) d ) , P ) such that for η ∈ u1D49E[ 0, +∞) d , we have that ( ˆ Ω , ˆ u1D509 , ˆ u1D509 t , ˆ ℙ , X t ≔ η ( t ) , w 0 t ) is a weak solution to (9). Moreover thanks to remark 2.1.13 the solution of (9) is unique. Then by [14, chapter 5] the probability P is the unique solution to the martingale problem associated with {u1D49C t } t ≥ 0 and fixed initial condition P ( η ∈ u1D49E[ 0, +∞) d , η ( 0 ) = x 0 ) = 1. By [3, theorem 2.6] it follows that the whole family { ˆ X ǫ } ǫ converges weakly in u1D49E [ 0, +∞) d to the unique strong solution of (9) and this implies the weak convergence in u1D49E [ 0, T ] d . By (16) we have the thesis of the theorem. □

Conditions (24), (25), (26) imply that the process { m x i x j t } t ≥ 0 is a continuous martingale with respect to u1D509 ′ t , t ≥ 0 and then the process { M x i x j t } t ≥ 0 defined by (20) with f ( x ) = x i x j is a continuous u1D509 t -martingale under P for every i , j ≤ d .

## 3 Explicit conditions

In this section following the idea of remark 2.1.8 we provide some explicit conditions under which the implicit hypotheses 3, 4 of the previous section are verified. In this way we can prove the validity of the averaging principle under only explicit conditions, in a similar way to what happens in [22] but with σ dependent on Y ǫ .

Let's consider system (3) under hypotheses 1, 2. Moreover we assume the following non-degeneracy and dissipativity conditions:

Hypothesis 5 (Non-degeneracy) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hypothesis 6 (Dissipativity) . There exists a constant β &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every 0 ≤ t ≤ T , x ∈ ℝ d , y 1 , y 2 ∈ ℝ l .

Under these conditions we show that hypotheses 3, 4 are satisfied. We start by proving the validity of the following standard lemmas:

## Lemma 3.0.1.

for every 0 ≤ s , 0 ≤ t ≤ T , x ∈ ℝ d , y 1 , y 2 ∈ ℝ l .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. By Ito's formula and hypothesis 6 we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

□

Lemma 3.0.2. There exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every 0 ≤ s , 0 ≤ t 1 , t 2 ≤ T , x 1 , x 2 ∈ ℝ d , y ∈ ℝ l .

Proof. By hypothesis 6 we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then by Young's inequality we have:

for some C 2 &gt; 0.

By the comparison theorem this implies the thesis.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 3.0.3. There exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every 0 ≤ s , 0 ≤ t ≤ T , x ∈ ℝ d , y ∈ ℝ l .

Proof. By Ito's formula and hypothesis 6 we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Young's inequality and the sublinearity of B and C we have:

for some C 1 &gt; 0.

Then by the comparison theorem we have the thesis.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

□

□

Now we are ready to prove that hypotheses 3, 4 are satisfied:

Lemma 3.0.4. Hypothesis 3 holds.

Proof. By lemma 3.0.3 for fixed 0 ≤ t ≤ T , x ∈ ℝ d the family of the laws induced by { y t , x , y s } s ≥ 0 is tight in ℝ l . Then by the Krylov-Bogoliubov theorem the semigroup

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

has an invariant measure µ t , x .

Moreover there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In fact since µ t , x is invariant measure and by lemma 3.0.3 we have for every s &gt; 0

for every 0 ≤ t ≤ T , x ∈ ℝ d .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By taking s large enough we have (31).

Then by lemma 3.0.1 and (31) we have the exponential decay to equilibrium:

let φ ∈ B B ( ℝ l ) be Lipschitz with Lipschitz constant L ( φ )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some C 1 &gt; 0.

This implies also the uniqueness of the invariant measure µ t , x .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then by choosing φ ( y ) = b ( t , x , y t , x , y s ) for fixed t ≥ 0, x ∈ ℝ d we have

Integrating with respect to [ t 0 , t 0 + τ ] for t 0 , τ &gt; 0 and dividing by τ it implies (4) with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we notice that a ( t , x , y ) = σ ( t , x , y ) σ ( t , x , y ) T / 2 satisfies the condition:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some ˜ C &gt; 0, for every 0 ≤ t 1 , t 2 ≤ T , x 1 , x 2 ∈ ℝ d , y 1 , y 2 ∈ ℝ l . Then similarly to the previous calculation we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some C 2 &gt; 0.

Now integrating with respect to [ t 0 , t 0 + τ ] for t 0 , τ &gt; 0 and dividing by τ it implies (5) with

and

chosen as the unique symmetric positive definite square root. Finally we show that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some C &gt; 0. This concludes the proof.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (32) and by lemma 3.0.2 we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some C 3 , C 4 &gt; 0.

Letting s →+∞ we have (36).

With a similar calculation by (34) we can show that a satisfies:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some C 5 &gt; 0.

Since σ is symmetric we consider the equality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As σ is invertible with bounded inverse by hypothesis 5 we have (37).

Lemma 3.0.5. Hypothesis 4 holds.

□

Proof. By Ito's formula and hypothesis 6 we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then by Young's inequality, the sublinearity of B and C and (11) we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for suitable C 1 , C 2 &gt; 0 independent of ǫ .

Then by the comparison theorem we have the thesis.

□

Thus we have shown validity of the averaging principle under only explicit conditions:

Theorem 2 (Averaging Principle II) . Assume that hypotheses 1, 2, 5, 6 hold. Then X ǫ → X weakly in u1D49E [ 0, T ] d as ǫ → 0 where the process X is the unique strong solution of the averaged equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the coefficients b , σ are defined by (33) , (35) respectively.

Since it will be useful in the financial application we prove that the averaging principle holds also when the fast equation is perturbed by a slower term of the form ǫ -η D ( t , X ǫ t , Y ǫ t ) for 0 ≤ η &lt; 1. Indeed let's consider the following perturbed system for 0 ≤ t ≤ T

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 In this case the discretized process for t ∈ [ K∆ , (( K + 1 ) ∆ ) ∧ T ) becomes:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 Analogously we have the following proposition:

Proposition 2. The conclusions of theorem 2 hold also when we consider system (38) under hypotheses 1, 2, 5, 6 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every 0 ≤ t , s ≤ T , x , x 1 , x 2 ∈ ℝ d , y , y 1 , y 2 ∈ ℝ l .

Let's observe that in this context it doesn't make sense anymore to talk about "frozen equation" for (6). Anyway, since we are going to prove (39), we continue to refer to it in this way.

Proof. Step 1 : we prove that the hypotheses of theorem 1 are verified. In fact lemmas 3.0.1, 3.0.2, 3.0.3 and 3.0.4 hold with the same proof since the frozen equation is the same as before. For what concerns lemma 3.0.5 consider the inequality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since η &lt; 1 the dominating terms are the ones with coefficient of order 1 ǫ . This implies the thesis of the lemma by a similar argument as before.

Step 2 : we prove the following estimate:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some ν , C &gt; 0, for every ǫ &gt; 0, K = 0... ⌊ T ⌋ . Here y ( K∆ , x ǫ K∆ , Y ǫ K∆ ) s satisfies (6) with x ǫ K∆ , Y ǫ K∆ frozen and Brownian motion

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and ˜ Y ǫ s as usual is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

First we notice that now ˜ Y ǫ s satisfies:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every s ∈ [ 0, ∆ / ǫ ) , for every K . Then for s ∈ [ 0, ∆ / ǫ ) and K , fixed by the dissipativity we have:

where C 1 is independent of ǫ and K . Here we have used the fact that u1D53C [| ˜ Y ǫ s + K∆ / ǫ | 2 ] ≤ C for C independent of ǫ and K .

Then by the comparison theorem we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every s ∈ [ 0, ∆ / ǫ ) and C 2 independent of ǫ and K . This implies (39).

Step 3 : we prove that the conclusion of theorem 1 hold. The proof is the same of the one for theorem 1, what changes is the following:

limits (17) and (16) follow by a similar calculation as before.

Then (22) follows by the splitting

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally (24) and (27) follow by a similar argument. This concludes the proof.

which tends to zero as ǫ → 0 by (39).

□

Remark 3.0.6. With similar ideas we can perturb also the diffusion term of the fast equation with a slower term of order ǫ -θ , 0 ≤ θ &lt; 1 / 2 .

## 4 Financial Application: Local Stochastic Volatility Model

## 4.1 Objective Probability

Under the objective probability measure P we consider a local stochastic volatility model defined by the following system of stochastic differential equations dependent on a small parameter ǫ ∈ ( 0, 1 ]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

  where 0 ≤ t ≤ T , { S ǫ t } t ≥ 0 is the stock price, the real function ℋ( t , s , y ) is the local stochastic drift, ℱ( t , s , y ) is the local stochastic volatility, ℬ( t , s , y ) and u1D49E ( t , s , y ) are the coefficients of the process { Y ǫ t } t ≥ 0 and { W t } t ≥ 0 and { ˜ W t } t ≥ 0 are Brownian motions with instantaneous correlation ρ ∈ (-1, 1 ) . The parameter ǫ represents the ratio of time scales between the stock price and the stochastic volatility.

We assume that

where { Z t } t ≥ 0 is a Brownian motion independent of { W t } t ≥ 0 so that corr ( W t , ˜ W t ) = ρ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To apply the theory of the previous section it is convenient to consider the log-price X ǫ t = log ( S ǫ t ) . By Ito's formula we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We assume that

  where x 0 = log ( s 0 ) , H ( t , x , y ) = ℋ( t , e x , y ) , F ( t , x , y ) = ℱ( t , e x , y ) , B ( t , x , y ) = ℬ( t , e x , y ) and C ( t , x , y ) = u1D49E ( t , e x , y ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for M&gt; 0, M 1 &gt; 0, M 2 &gt; 0, 0 ≤ t ≤ T , x , y ∈ ℝ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for L &gt; 0, γ 0 &gt; 0, 0 ≤ t , s ≥ T , x 1 , x 2 , y 1 , y 2 ∈ ℝ and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for β &gt; 0, 0 ≤ t ≤ T , x , y 1 , y 2 ∈ ℝ .

Remark 4.1.1. As we have seen in section 3 the dissipativity condition (43) gives all the ergodic properties. It is satisfied for example by the coefficients of the Ornstein Uhlenbeck process in [9].

Since system (42) satisfies hypotheses 1, 2, 5, 6 then by theorem 1 we have that X ǫ → X weakly in u1D49E [ 0, T ] as ǫ → 0 where the process X is the unique strong solution of the averaged equation

Here we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ t , x is the distribution of the unique invariant measure for the semigroup of the frozen equation {u1D4AB t , x s } s ≥ 0 defined by u1D4AB t , x s φ ( y ) = u1D53C [ φ ( y t , x , y s )] , y ∈ ℝ , φ ∈ B B ( ℝ )

Then we define S t = exp ( X t ) and by Ito's formula we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the family of processes { X ǫ } ǫ converges weakly in u1D49E [ 0, T ] to X then the family of processes { S ǫ = exp ( X ǫ )} ǫ converges weakly in u1D49E [ 0, T ] to the process S = exp ( X ) . We have then the following theorem:

Theorem 3. The family { S ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 converges weakly in u1D49E [ 0, T ] as ǫ → 0 to the unique strong solution S of the averaged equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let's notice that the limit model for the stock price { S t } t ≥ 0 is a local volatility model with local drift ℋ( t , s ) and local volatility ℱ( t , s ) .

## 4.2 Risk Neutral Pricing

Now as in [9] we construct a family of risk neutral measures by means of Girsanov theorem: indeed let the short rate ℛ( t , S ǫ t , Y ǫ t ) where ℛ( t , s , y ) is a deterministic function. Then set r ( t , x , y ) = ℛ( t , log ( s ) , y ) . Assume that r ( t , x , y ) is a bounded and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every 0 ≤ t , s ≤ T , x 1 , x 2 , y 1 , y 2 ∈ ℝ . Let θ t = ( H ( t , X ǫ t , Y ǫ t ) -r ( t , X ǫ t , Y ǫ t ))/ F ( t , X ǫ t , Y ǫ t ) and define:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for an arbitrary adapted bounded γ t .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now by Girsanov theorem W ∗ and Z ∗ are independent Brownian motions under a measure Q γ defined by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then { Q γ } γ is a family of equivalent risk-neutral martingale measures parametrized by γ which is called market price of volatility risk. We assume that γ t = γ ( t , X ǫ t , Y ǫ t ) and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every 0 ≤ t , s ≤ T , x 1 , x 2 , y 1 , y 2 ∈ ℝ . Then under Q γ (42) becomes:

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or equivalently:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 where λ ( t , s , y ) = Λ ( t , log ( s ) , y ) .

Now let 0 ≤ τ ≤ T and consider a financial European option with maturity T . A derivative of this kind is defined by its non negative payoff Ψ = Ψ ( s ) which prescribes the value of the contract at its maturity. Under the risk neutral measure Q γ we consider the fair price P ǫ τ of the contract at time τ . This is calculated as:

where ℱ τ = σ ( W ∗ t , Z ∗ t , 0 ≤ t ≤ τ ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying the theory of section 3 we can show the following theorem:

Theorem 4. Under the risk neutral measure Q γ the family { S ǫ } ǫ&gt; 0 converges weakly in u1D49E [ 0, T ] as ǫ → 0 to the solution S of the averaged equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover let Ψ ∈ u1D49E B ( ℝ ) and 0 ≤ τ ≤ T then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

Let's notice that again the limit model for the stock price { S t } t ≥ 0 is a local volatility model with ℛ( t , s ) , ℱ( t , s ) .

Proof. Set D ( t , x , y ) = C ( t , x , y ) Λ ( t , x , y ) and notice that F 2 ( t , x , y ) and D ( t , x , y ) are bounded and satisfy

for C &gt; 0.

Therefore we can apply proposition 2 to system (46) under the risk neutral measure Q γ . Then the family of processes { X ǫ } ǫ converges weakly in u1D49E [ 0, T ] to the solution X of

This implies that the family of processes { S ǫ = exp ( X ǫ )} ǫ converges weakly in u1D49E [ 0, T ] to the process S = exp ( X ) satisfying (48).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

When the short rate is deterministic we can proceed in this way: by the Markov property we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the weak convergence of S ǫ it follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then by the Markov property we have (49).

If however the short rate is not deterministic we need to consider the integral process

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and consider ( S ǫ , I ǫ , Y ǫ ) under the risk neutral measure. Then ( S ǫ , I ǫ ) converges weakly in u1D49E [ 0, T ] 2 to ( S , I ) where the process I is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we have

As ( S ǫ , I ǫ , Y ǫ ) is Markovian:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then by the weak convergence of ( S ǫ , I ǫ ) we have:

which is (49).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4.3 Path-dependent Options

Now we treat path-dependent options. We follow a similar approach to the one in [13] by setting the problem in an infinite dimensional setting which permits us to take into account the whole trajectory of the stock price.

We assume for simplicity that the short rate is deterministic ℛ( t ) but the approach works also in the general case ℛ( t , S ǫ t , Y ǫ t ) by considering the agumented system with integral process I ǫ as we have just done.

For t ∈ [ 0, T ] under the risk-neutral measure Q γ consider the vector process

where the notation S ǫ t (·) denotes the trajectory S ǫ t ( θ ) = S ǫ t + θ , θ ∈ [-T , 0 ] . Here we set S ǫ θ = ν 0 ( θ ) where ν 0 ∈ u1D49E [-T,0] is a given function.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then by [7] the couple ( u1D4AE ǫ t , Y ǫ t ) solves an infinite dimensional stochastic differential equation on the Hilbert space H = ℝ × ℒ 2 [-T , 0 ] × ℝ and it is a Markov process thanks to the regularity of the coefficients of this equation. Moreover we set H 1 = ℝ × ℒ 2 [-T , 0 ] .

Now consider a bounded path-dependent option with exercise date T of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Ψ : H 1 → ℝ is bounded and continuous.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under the risk neutral measure Q γ we consider the fair price P ǫ τ of the contract at time 0 ≤ τ ≤ T . This is calculated as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

□

where

By the Markov property we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since S ǫ T (·) is continuous, S ǫ T ( 0 ) = S ǫ T and u1D49E [T , 0 ] ⊂ ℒ 2 [-T , 0 ] we can consider the restriction of the operator Ψ to the set of continuous functions in the following way:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since Ψ is bounded and continuous it is possible to show that Ψ is also bounded and continuous. Then we have:

R

By the weak convergence of S ǫ in the space of continuous functions we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now for t ∈ [ 0, T ] let's consider the vector process

Here we set S θ = ν 0 ( θ ) .

As before by [7] u1D4AE t solves an infinite dimensional stochastic differential equation on the Hilbert space H 1 = ℝ × ℒ 2 [-T , 0 ] and it is a Markov process. Therefore by the Markov property we have the following theorem:

Theorem 5. Let Ψ : H 1 → ℝ be bounded and continuous. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

This result has some limitations: even if the functionals defined on ℝ × ℒ 2 permit to treat Asian options, they exclude many path-dependent derivatives, for example look-back options which are functions of the supremum (or infimum) of the stock price with respect to time. Therefore we want to set a strategy to cover also these derivatives: we start by considering look-back options of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Ψ 0 : ℝ 2 → ℝ is a continuous bounded function and a ∈ u1D49E[T , 0 ] . We consider as usual the fair price P ǫ τ of the contract at time 0 ≤ τ ≤ T by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then for δ &gt; 0 we define Ψ δ : H 1 → ℝ in the following way:

where

and we notice that

for every η ∈ u1D49E[T , 0 ] . This implies:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since Ψ δ is bounded we have the Markov property:

Then by dominated convergence we have:

This implies:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As before by the weak convergence of S ǫ in the space of continuous functions we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

This approach works in general for path-dependent derivatives defined by functionals on the space u1D49E [T , 0 ] which have a regular approximation through functionals on ℝ × ℒ 2 [-T , 0 ] , indeed we have:

Theorem 6. Let Ψ : u1D49E [T , 0 ] → ℝ be bounded and continuous. Moreover assume there exists a family of uniformly bounded functionals { Ψ δ } δ&gt; 0 , Ψ δ : H 1 → ℝ such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then with the usual notations we have:

## Acknowledgements

The author would like to thank his PhD's supervisors Giuseppina Guatteri and Gianmario Tessitore for their constant support. He also wants to thank Sandra Cerrai and Carlo Sgarra for some useful conversations.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## References

- [1] M. Bardi, A. Cesaroni, L. Manca. Convergence by viscosity methods in multiscale financial models with stochastic volatility. SIAM Journal on Financial Mathematics 1.1 (2010): 230-265. https://doi.org/10.1137/090748147
- [2] L. Bergomi. Stochastic volatility modeling. CRC press, 2015.
- [3] P. Billingsley. Convergence of Probability Measures. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Second Edition, 1999.
- [4] S. Cerrai. A Khasminskii type averaging principle for stochastic reaction-diffusion equations. Ann. Appl. Probab. 19(3) (2009) 899-948. doi:10.1214/08-AAP560.
- [5] S. Cerrai, A. Lunardi. Averaging principle for nonautonomous slow-fast systems of stochastic reaction- diffusion equations: the almost periodic case. SIAM J. Math. Anal. 49 (2017) 2843-2884. https://doi.org/10.1137/16M1063307
- [6] Choi S.Y., Fouque J.P., Kim J.H. Option pricing under hybrid stochastic and local volatility. Quantitative Finance. 2013 Aug 1;13(8):1157-65. https://doi.org/10.1080/14697688.2013.780209
- [7] Chojnowska-Michalik. Reprentation theorem for general delay equations. (1978).
- [8] de Feo Filippo, The averaging principle for stochastic differential equations and a financial application. Master's Thesis, Politecnico di Milano, 2020. https://www.politesi.polimi.it/handle/10589/165293
- [9] J. P. Fouque, G. Papanicolaou, R. Sircar. Derivatives in Financial Markets with Stochastic Volatility. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
- [10] J. P. Fouque, G. Papanicolaou, R. Sircar, and K. Solna. Singular perturbation in option pricing. SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 63.5 (2003): 1648-1665. https://doi.org/10.1137/S0036139902401550
- [11] Fouque Jean-Pierre, George Papanicolaou, Ronnie Sircar, and Knut Sølna. Multiscale stochastic volatility for equity, interest rate, and credit derivatives. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
- [12] M.I. Freidlin, A.D. Wentzell, Random Perturbations of Dynamical Systems. Springer, New York, NY, 1998.
- [13] Fuhrman M., Tessitore G. Generalized directional gradients, backward stochastic differential equations and mild solutions of semilinear parabolic equations. Applied Mathematics and Optimization. 2005 May 1;51(3):279-332. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00245-004-0814-x
- [14] I. Karatzas, S. E. Shreve. Brownian Motion and Stochastic Calculus. Springer, New York, NY, 1998. 47-127.
- [15] Khasminskii R.Z. On an averaging principle for Itô stochastic differential equations. Kibernetika, 4(3) (1968), 260-279. (Russian).
- [16] Lorig M. Pricing derivatives on multiscale diffusions: An eigenfunction expansion approach. Mathematical Finance 24.2 (2014): 331-363. https://doi.org/10.1111/mafi.12007
- [17] Lorig M., S. Pagliarani, A. Pascucci. Explicit implied volatilities for multifactor local-stochastic volatility models. Mathematical Finance 27.3 (2017): 926-960. https://doi.org/10.1111/mafi.12105
- [18] Wu Fuke, Tianhai Tian, James B. Rawlings, and George Yin. Approximate method for stochastic chemical kinetics with two-time scales by chemical Langevin equations. The Journal of chemical physics 144.17 (2016): 174112. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4948407
- [19] Jan Sanders, Ferdinand Verhulst. Averaging Methods in Nonlinear Dynamical Systems. Springer, New York, NY, 1985.
- [20] Stroock D.W., Varadhan S.R. Multidimensional Stochastic Processes. Springer, 2007.
- [21] A. Yu. Veretennikov. On the averaging principle for systems of stochastic differential equations. Mathematics of the USSR-Sbornik 69.1 (1991): 271.
- [22] Wei Liu, Michael Röckner, Xiaobin Sun, Yingchao Xie, Averaging principle for slow-fast stochastic differential equations with time dependent locally Lipschitz coefficients, Journal of Differential Equations, Volume 268, Issue 6, 2020, Pages 2910-2948, ISSN 0022-0396, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jde.2019.09.047.

- [23] E. Weinan , D. Liu, E. Vanden-Eijnden. Analysis of multiscale methods for stochastic differential equations. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 58.11 (2005): 1544-1585.
- [24] Xu Yong, Ruifang Wang. Averaging Principles for Nonautonomous Two-Time-Scale Stochastic Reaction-Diffusion Equations with Jump. Complexity 2020 (2020).