## Preface: Long-range Interactions and Synchronization

Shamik Gupta, Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda University, India Romain Bachelard, Universidade Federal de São Carlos, Brazil Tarcísio Marciano da Rocha Filho, Universidade de Brasília, Brazil

Spontaneous synchronization is a general phenomenon in which a large population of coupled oscillators  of  diverse  natural  frequencies  self-organize  to  operate  in  unison.  The  phenomenon occurs in physical and biological systems over a wide range of spatial and temporal scales, e.g., in electrochemical  and  electronic  oscillators,  Josephson  junctions,  laser  arrays,  animal  flocking, pedestrians  on  footbridges,  audience  clapping,  etc.  Besides  the  obvious  necessity  of  the synchronous firings of cardiac cells to keep the heart beating, synchrony is desired in many manmade systems  such  as  parallel  computing,  electrical  power-grids.  On  the  contrary,  synchrony could also be hazardous, e.g., in neurons, leading to impaired brain function in Parkinson's disease and  epilepsy.  Due  to  this  wide  range  of  applications,  collective  synchrony  in  networks  of oscillators has attracted the attention of physicists, applied mathematicians and researchers from many other fields. An essential aspect of synchronizing systems is that long-range order naturally appear  in  these  systems,  which  questions  the  fact  whether  long-range  interactions  may  be particular suitable to synchronization. In this context, it is interesting to remind that long-range interacting system required several adaptations from statistical mechanics à la Gibbs Boltzmann, in  order  to  deal  with  the  peculiarities  of  these  systems:  negative  specific  heat,  breaking  of ergodicity or lack of extensivity. As for synchrony, it is still lacking a theoretical framework to use the tools from statistical mechanics. The present issue presents a collection of exciting recent theoretical developments in the field of synchronization and long-range interactions, in order to highlight the mutual progresses of these twin areas.

- The  paper  [1]  ' Phase  diagram  of  noisy  systems  of  coupled  oscillators  with  a  bimodal frequency  distribution '  by  Campa  studies  systems  of  globally-coupled  phase  oscillators  in presence of Gaussian, white noise, for the case when the distribution of natural frequencies of the oscillators is bimodal and its analytical continuation in the complex plane has only a few poles in the lower half plane. The stationary-state phase diagram of the oscillator system is shown to exhibit a  very  rich  behaviour,  with  regions  characterized  by  synchronized  states,  periodic  states,  and bistability. With the increase in noise strength, the author argues that the phase diagram tends to coincide with the one for unimodal frequency distributions.
- The paper [2] ' Traveling chimera states ' by Omelchenko studies existence of traveling chimera or broken-symmetry states in a prototype model involving a heterogeneous network of nonlocally coupled phase oscillators. The study invokes a long-time coarse-grained dynamics given by the so-called  Ott-Antonsen  equation.  It  is  demonstrated  that  the  equation  provides  a  reliable description of traveling chimera states for heterogeneous oscillators with Lorentzian distribution of natural frequencies, while it fails to do so for the case of identical oscillators.
- In the paper [3] ' Linear response theory for coupled phase oscillators with general coupling functions ,' Terada et al. develop a linear response theory for a wide class of globally-coupled phase oscillator systems prepared in a nonsynchronized reference state and subject to an external force. This allows them to compute the asymptotic value of the order parameter in the system. Remarkably, the proposed theory applies for any natural frequency distribution of the oscillators, as well as for any phase-lag parameter and any value of the time-delay parameter characterizing the interaction among the oscillators.
- In the work [4] ' Synchronization in disordered superconducting arrays ,' Wiesenfeld studies the effect of quenched disorder on the synchronization properties of a class of circuits known as Josephson junction arrays. In particular, a comparative assessment of four different dynamical scenarios involving Josephson junction arrays is offered through a mapping of the corresponding dynamics onto a tractable model of globally-coupled phase oscillators.
- In the paper [5] ' The Winfree model with heterogeneous phase-response curves: analytical results ,' Pazó et al. study the Winfree model of globally-coupled phase oscillators, considered an important milestone in the mathematical description of collective synchronization. In particular, they consider an extension of the model in which the oscillator natural frequencies are taken to be heterogeneous, as also the phase-response curves determining the response of an oscillator to an input  pulse.  For  this  model,  an  approximate  dynamics  is  derived  in  which  the  oscillators  are coupled through their phase differences, and for which the results are found to be fully consistent with those for the original model for Lorentzian heterogeneities.
- The  paper  [6]  ' Synchronized  states  of  one-dimensional  long-range  systems  induced  by inelastic collisions ' by Joyce et al. reports on a family of simple one dimensional particle systems with  long-range  interactions  and  subjected  to  inelastic  interactions.  The  work  unveils  that  the system evolves towards states that are highly ordered in phase space, with particle motions that are periodic and synchronized in relative phase. An interesting result obtained for a self-gravitating system is that these states show a remarkable stability when the inelastic interactions are turned off, with the phase space order persisting much longer than expected from a long-range system relaxing toward equilibrium.
- In the paper [7] ' Synchronization in complex networks with long-range interactions '  Rakshit et al. investigate the dynamics of a complex network that includes all possible k-path couplings between all pairs of nodes in the network. The work is devoted to the derivation of local and global asymptotic stability conditions for complete synchronization in the system.
- The  paper  [8]  ' Ageing  in  mixed  populations  of  Stuart-Landau  oscillators:  the  role  of diversity ' by Sahoo et al. studies the question of ageing transition in a population of globally coupled Stuart-Landau oscillators, namely, the increase in time of the number of inactive (or nonoscillatory) units. The system has an initial population that is either a mixture of active and inactive oscillators or an ensemble of active oscillators with a mixture of distinct frequencies. It is shown that the ageing transition is determined by the degree of dynamical diversity in the system.
- In [9] ' Criticality of spin systems with weak long-range interactions ', Defenu et al. investigate systems that lie at the transition between short- and long-range, displaying on the one hand the extensivity  used  in  Bolzmann-Gibbs  approach,  and on  the other hand  a  universality  class  that departs from the true short-range systems. These 'weak long-range' systems are reviewed using both classical and quantum spin systems. The use of the functional renormalization group allows the  authors  to  compute  the  critical  exponents  of  the  system,  and  to  characterize  in  detail  the signatures in criticality of the transition from short- to long-range interactions.
- In [10] ' One-dimensional quantum many body systems with long-range interactions ', Maity and coauthors review the dynamics of quantum one-dimensional chains, focusing on the effect of long-range interactions  on  the  growth of  the  entanglement  entropy,  the  propagation of mutual information  and  non-equilibrium  phase  transitions.  They  study  in  more  detail  the  long-range version of the Kitaev chain, identifying the range of interaction from which long-range features arise. Motivated by the relevance of these effects for superconductor theory, they pay particular attention to the role of pairing terms.
- In [11] ' Lieb-Robinson bounds for open quantum systems with long-ranged interactions ', Sweke and coauthors derive Lieb-Robinson bounds for open quantum systems with power-law interactions. These bounds describe the propagation of quantum correlations, entanglement and quantum information, so they may be of great relevance for quantum simulators based on arrays of Rydberg atoms or trapped ions. The locality bounds derived present a power-law decay, which is inherited from the considered interaction.
- In [12] ' Equilibrium time-correlation functions of the long-range interacting Fermi-PastaUlam  model ',  Di  Cintio et al. investigate  the  Fermi-Pasta-Ulam  chain  with  power-law interactions,  showing  the  presence  of  long-wavelength  propagating  modes.  These  numerical findings  are  in  excellent  agreement  with  predictions  from  a  linear-dispersion  theory.  The simulations also support the validity of the dynamical scaling hypothesis. A surprising ballistic behavior is reported for 1 𝑟𝑟 2 / interactions, showing that the celebrated FPU model and its variants still hold many surprises.
- In  [13]  ' Fluctuation-dominated  phase  ordering  at  a  mixed  order  transition ',  Barma  and coauthors discuss the order parameter correlation function in presence of a mixed order transition. Characterized by a diverging correlation length and a discontinuity of the order parameter, these transitions are shown to exhibit fluctuation-dominated order for an Ising model with long-range interactions. It is suggested that this feature may be observed in a variety of mixed-order transition systems.
- In [14] ' Long-range interaction induced collective dynamical behaviors ', Sathiyadevi et al. study the interplay between repulsive and attractive coupling in a collection of Stuart-Landau limit cycle  oscillators.  They  report  on  the  swing  of  the  synchronized  states,  since  their  stability  is challenged by the emergence of solitary or cluster states. The authors are able to derive some bounds which predict accurately the transition from one regime to the other, shedding light on the synchronization of systems with competing interactions.
- In [15] ' Prethermalization in the transverse-field Ising chain with long-range interactions ', Mori  studies  the  out-of-equilibrium  dynamics  of  a  long-range  Ising  chain  with  power-law interactions.  The  prethermalization  is  characterized  by  a  separation  in  timescales,  one  being associated with the quasi-conserved quantities, the other stemming from the growth of quantum fluctuations.  The  discrete  truncated  Wigner  approximation  is  shown  to  describe  properly  this initial dynamics, while the tools necessary to study the full equilibration of a large quantum system remain to be identified.
- In[16]  ' Entropy production and Vlasov equation for self-gravitating systems ',  Farias  and coauthors discuss the validity of the Vlasov equation to describe the violent relaxation process that characterizes the initial transition to long-lived out-of-equilibrium states in long-range systems. Focusing on self-gravitating systems, the authors show that the growth of entropy production is in excellent  agreement  with  full  molecular  dynamics.  Their  work  highlights  the  importance  of dealing appropriately with the coarse-grained phase-space to describe the loss of resolution and the consequent entropy production.
- In [17] ' Periodically driven integrable systems with long-range pair potentials ', Nandy et al. investigate the periodic driving of a Kitaev chain with power-law interactions. The authors identify a critical range above which the system displays particularly long equilibration times, as measured from a reduced density matrix. This behavior is also true for correlation functions, and mutual information also exhibits an interesting transition, with a multiple-light-cone structure. The work opens new avenues for the study of the Floquet dynamics of integrable systems.

## References:

- [1] Alessandro Campa 2020 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 53 154001
- [2] O E Omel'chenko 2019 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 52 104001
- [3] Yu Terada and Yoshiyuki Y Yamaguchi 2020 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 53 044001
- [4] Kurt Wiesenfeld 2020 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 53 064002
- [5] Diego Pazó et al. 2019 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 52 154001
- [6] Michael Joyce et al. 2019 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 52 494001
- [7] Sarbendu Rakshit et al. 2020 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 53 154002
- [8] Samir Sahoo et al. 2019 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 52 464001
- [9] Nicolò Defenu et al . 2020 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 53 143001
- [10] Somnath Maity et al . 2020 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 53 013001
- [11] Ryan Sweke et al . 2019 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 52 424003
- [12] P Di Cintio et al. 2019 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 52 274001
- [13] Mustansir Barma et al . 2019 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 52 254001
- [14] K Sathiyadevi et al. 2019 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 52 184001
- [15] Takashi Mori 2019 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 52 054001
- [16] Calvin A Fracassi Farias et al. 2018 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 51 494002
- [17] Sourav Nandy et al. 2018 J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. 51 334002