## Modeling and simulation in supersonic three-temperature carbon dioxide turbulent channel flow

Guiyu Cao a,b , Yipeng Shi c, ∗ , Kun Xu d , Shiyi Chen a,b, ∗

Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Southern University of Science and Technology,

a Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, People's Republic of China

b Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory for Data-Driven Fluid Mechanics and Engineering

Applications, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055, People's Republic of China

c Department of Aeronautics &amp; Astronautics Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People's Republic of China

d Department of Mathematics, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong

## Abstract

This paper pioneers the direct numerical simulation (DNS) and physical analysis in supersonic three-temperature carbon dioxide ( CO 2 ) turbulent channel flow. CO 2 is a linear and symmetric triatomic molecular, with the thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature effects arising from the interactions among translational, rotational and vibrational modes under room temperature. Thus, the rotational and vibrational modes of CO 2 are addressed. Thermal non-equilibrium effect of CO 2 has been modeled in an extended three-temperature BGK-type model, with the calibrated translational, rotational and vibrational relaxation time. To solve the extended BGK-type equation accurately and robustly, non-equilibrium high-accuracy gas-kinetic scheme is proposed within the well-established two-stage fourthorder framework. Compared with the one-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow, supersonic three-temperature CO 2 turbulence enlarges the ensemble heat transfer of the wall by approximate 20%, and slightly decreases the ensemble frictional force. The ensemble density and temperature fields are greatly affected, and there is little change in Van Driest transformation of streamwise velocity. The thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature effects of CO 2 also suppress the peak of normalized root-mean-square of density and temperature, normalized turbulent intensities and Reynolds stress. The vibrational modes of CO 2 behave quite differently with rotational and translational modes. Compared with the vibrational temperature fields, the rotational temperature fields have the higher similarity with translational temperature fields, especially in temperature amplitude. Current thermal non-equilibrium models, high-accuracy DNS and physical analysis in supersonic CO 2 turbulent flow can act as the benchmark for the long-term applicability of compressible CO 2 turbulence.

Keywords: Carbon dioxide flow, Vibrational modes, Three-temperature effects, Supersonic turbulent channel flows

## 1. Introduction

Mars exploration programs are currently experiencing a revival, such as amazing Mars robotic helicopter 'Ingenuity' operating on Mars [1]. Mars's atmosphere consists of 95 . 32% carbon dioxide ( CO 2 ). For accurate predictions of surface drag and heat flux on Martian vehicles, it is necessary to take the peculiarities of CO 2 into account. Different with the dominant diatomic gases nitrogen ( N 2 ) and oxygen ( O 2 ) on earth, CO 2 is a linear and symmetric triatomic molecular, which has three vibrational modes [2]. Triatomic molecular CO 2 is equipped with the inherent thermal non-equilibrium multi-temperature effects arising from the interactions among the translational, rotational and vibrational modes [3, 4].

Carbon dioxide is widely studied in the applications of physical chemistry and fluid dynamics, i.e., CO 2 -N 2 gas laser system [5], environmental green-house problems [6], and Mars entry vehicles [7, 8, 9]. Complex molecular structure and multiple internal energy relaxation mechanisms in CO 2 significantly affect its physical and chemical properties [10]. In fluids community, of special interest is the evaluation of bulk viscosity in CO 2. Stokes' viscosity relation does not hold for CO 2 [11], as the bulk viscosity can be thousands of times larger than the shear viscosity. Many research works are engaged in experimental and theoretical studies in the bulk viscosity of CO 2 [12, 13]. Recent experiments [14, 15] show that the vibrational modes contribute dominantly to the bulk viscosity of CO 2 , and the bulk viscosity from rotational modes is only one half of its shear viscosity approximately [15]. Thus, the vibrational modes should be modelled carefully when simulating CO 2 flows. In view of the importance of multiple internal energy modes, the multiple internal energy relaxation mechanisms of CO 2 [3, 4] have been modeled and analyzed, which confirm that equilibrium one-temperature gas flow description is not valid for CO 2 flows even under room temperature (i.e., 300 K ). To the author's knowledge, the thermal non-equilibrium physical models considering the multi-temperature effects of CO 2 and its applications in turbulent flows are seldom reported. For accurate predictions of CO 2 turbulence, it is necessary to take the three-temperature effects of CO 2 into account.

In the past few decades, the gas-kinetic scheme (GKS) based on the Bhatnagar-GrossKrook (BGK) model [16, 17] has been developed systematically for the computations from low speed flows to hypersonic ones [18, 19]. Based on the time-dependent flux solver, including generalized Riemann problem solver and GKS [20, 21], a reliable two-stage fourthorder framework was provided for developing the high-order GKS (HGKS) into fourth-order accuracy. With the advantage of finite volume GKS and HGKS, they have been naturally implemented as a direct numerical simulation (DNS) tool in simulating turbulent flows [22, 23, 24], especially for compressible turbulence [25, 26]. Aiming to conduct the large-scale DNS, a parallel in-house computational platform of HGKS has been developed in uniform grids and curvilinear grids [27, 28], with high efficiency, fourth-order accuracy and super robustness. In addition, with the discretization of particle velocity space, a unified gas-kinetic scheme (UGKS) [29, 30] and unified gas-kinetic wave particle method (UGKWP) [31, 32, 33] have been developed for multi-scale physical transport problems. The well-developed HGKS and multi-scale UGKS/UGKWP provides the solid foundation for thermal non-equilibrium multi-temperature modeling and simulation in CO 2 flows. The multi-scale modeling and numerical framework can be applied in multi-scale CO 2 flows, i.e., the Mar's re-entry vehicles from rarefied to continuum regimes. As a starter, current study focuses on the supersonic CO 2 turbulence in the continuum regime.

∗ Corresponding author

Email addresses: caogy@sustech.edu.cn (Guiyu Cao), syp@mech.pku.edu.cn (Yipeng Shi), makxu@ust.hk (Kun Xu), chensy@sustc.edu.cn (Shiyi Chen)

In this paper, the vibrational modes of CO 2 are addressed, and the translational, rotational and vibrational relaxation time of CO 2 are calibrated. The three-temperature effects of CO 2 are modeled in an extended three-temperature BGK-type model within the wellestablished kinetic framework [34, 35, 36]. To achieve high-order accuracy in space and time for simulating the supersonic CO 2 turbulence, the non-equilibrium high-accuracy GKS has been constructed with the second-order kinetic flux, fifth-order WENO-Z reconstruction [37], and two-stage fourth-order time discretization [21]. One-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow [38, 39] is simulated firstly to validate the numerical set-up with bulk Mach number Ma = 3 and bulk Reynolds number Re = 4880. Considering the translational, rotational, and vibrational specific heats at constant volume, one-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow of thermally perfect gas has been studied [40]. With implementing the non-equilibrium high-accuracy GKS in the large-scale parallel in-house platform [27, 28], for the first time, the DNS in supersonic three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow is conducted. Compared with the one-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow, the three-temperature effects of CO 2 are analyzed. Numerical simulation confirms the thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature performance of CO 2 . Both the maximum ensemble temperature and normalized r.m.s. temperature sort from high to low is translational temperature, rotational temperature, and vibrational temperature. Compared with the vibrational temperature fields, the rotational temperature fields has the higher similarity with translational temperature fields both in temperature amplitude and its structure.

For physical modeling and numerical simulation in supersonic three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow, this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 addresses the internal energy modes of CO 2 . Extended thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature BGK-type model and corresponding non-equilibrium high-accuracy GKS for CO 2 are included in Section 3. Numerical examples and discussions are presented in Section 4. The last section is the conclusion and remarks.

## 2. Internal energy modes of carbon dioxide

Thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature effects of CO 2 mainly arise from the interactions among internal energy modes [4]. This section addresses the vibrational modes of CO 2 , and focuses on the translational, rotational and vibrational relaxation time for the extended three-temperature BGK-type model.

## 2.1. Rotational and vibrational modes

Carbon dioxide is a linear and symmetric triatomic molecular, with rotational and vibrational internal energy modes. The characteristic rotational temperature is defined as

θ r = h 2 P / (8 π 2 k B I ), where h P is the Planck constant, k B the Boltzmann constant, I the molecular moment of inertia. For carbon dioxide, θ r = 0 . 56 K can be obtained [2], while the θ r for N 2 and O 2 is 2 . 88 K and 2 . 08 K , respectively. Under room temperature, it is well known that the rotational degrees of freedom (d.o.f.) are assumed to be excited completely for N 2 and O 2 . Since CO 2 is with the smaller characteristic rotational temperature, the rotational d.o.f. of CO 2 are regarded as complete excitation in current study (i.e., CO 2 gas temperature above 300 K ).

Carbon dioxide is equipped with three vibrational modes as one symmetric stretching mode ν 1 , one double degenerated bending mode ν 2 , and one asymmetric stretching mode ν 3 . The characteristic vibrational temperature reads θ v = h P ˜ νc L /k B , where ˜ ν is the characteristic wavenumber, and c L the speed of light in the vacuum. In experimental studies of CO 2 , infrared spectrum gives the wavelength for corresponding vibrational modes ν 2 and ν 3 , and Raman spectroscopy provides the wavelength for ν 1 [2]. Table 1 presents the characteristic wavenumber, wavelength ( λ = 1 / ˜ ν ), characteristic vibrational temperature and corresponding degeneracy of CO 2 . The double degenerated bending modes ν 2 are most likely to be activated with characteristic vibrational temperature θ v = 959 . 66 K , which is much lower than that of N 2 with θ v = 3521 K and O 2 with θ v = 2256 K . Thus, the vibrational modes of N 2 and O 2 is usually considered in high-temperature applications, i.e., re-entry vehicles experiencing the temperature above 800 K [41]. However, the excitation of vibrational modes of CO 2 requires to be modeled and simulated even under the room temperature [4, 15].

Table 1: Parameters for three vibrational modes of CO 2 .

| Vibrational mode  Wavenumber(˜  ν  )/  cm  -  1  Wavelength(  λ  )/  µm  θ  v  /  K  Degeneracy  ν  1  1388  7  .  20  1997  .  02  1  ν  2  667  14  .  99  959  .  66  2  ν  3  2349  4  .  26  3379  .  69  1   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

With the assumption that there is a unique vibrational temperature at each point in the flow fields, the translational internal energy E t , rotational internal energy E r , and vibrational internal energy E v per unit mass of CO 2 read

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with translational d.o.f. as N t , rotational d.o.f. as N r , and vibrational d.o.f. as N v , where T t , T r and T v represent translational temperature, rotational temperature and vibrational temperature, respectively. In Eq.(3), θ v,i is the characteristic vibrational temperature of vibrational mode ν i , and g i is the corresponding degeneracy of mode ν i as shown in Table

1. The total specific heat at constant volume C V can be obtained by the sum of three components as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C V,t , C V,r and C V,v denotes the componential specific heat at constant volume for translational internal energy, rotational internal energy and vibrational internal energy, respectively. In current study, the supersonic CO 2 turbulence is considered above 300 K , thus, translational d.o.f. as N t = 3 and rotational d.o.f. as N r = 2 are adopted. Vibrational d.o.f. as N v can be obtained by the definition as C V,v = N v R/ 2, and the specific heat ratio γ is the function of vibrational d.o.f. as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In Eq.(9), C P is the total specific heat at constant pressure. In the high-temperature limit, note that the vibrational d.o.f. as N v approaches to classical definition with 2 ∑ 3 i =1 g i θ v,i /T v e θ vib,i /T v -1 .

For compressible wall-bounded turbulence, the Prandtl number Pr plays a key role in determining the statistical turbulent quantities [27], especially for density and temperature fields. For CO 2 , the Pr can be calculated as Pr = µC P /κ , where shear viscosity µ and thermal conductivity κ depends on the translational temperature T t as subsequent Eq.(10) and Eq.(12), and C P relies on the vibrational temperature as Eq.(9). Figure 1 presents the comparisons on γ and Pr between CO 2 and air. For air, the specific heat ratio γ almost keeps as 1 . 4 up to 800 K , and Pr is fixed at approximate 0 . 7 between 300 K and 800 K . In terms of CO 2 , experimental measurements on γ and Pr show the strong temperaturedependent behavior [42]. We find the numerical profile of γ in CO 2 with Eq.(9) agrees well with the experimental one. The numerical profile of Pr is calculated with the assumption of T t = T v , and this assumption dose not hold for experimental measurement. Thus, it is reasonable to find the discrepancy in Pr between the numerical profile and experimental result. In following simulation, without the assumption of T t = T v as shown in Figure 1, the Pr of CO 2 depends on the practical translational and vibrational temperatures. Notice that the γ and Pr must be computed locally in each time step for each computational grid

with

[34].

Figure 1: Comparisons on the specific heat ration γ (left) and Prandtl number Pr (right) for CO 2 and air. The numerical profile of Pr is calculated with the assumption T t = T v . Experimental results are adapted from the Ref [42].

<!-- image -->

## 2.2. Translational, rotational and vibrational relaxation time

For CO 2 gas flows, non-equilibrium translational, rotational, and vibrational internal modes are equipped with different relaxation time. Aiming to the following construction of thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature BGK-type model, the translational, rotational and vibrational relaxation time requires to be determined firstly. Translational relaxation time τ t is related with shear viscosity µ , and the power law [42] gives the approximation of shear viscosity as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where T t is the translational temperature, n t = 0 . 79 and µ 0 = 1 . 370 × 10 -5 kg/ ( m · s ) at T 0 = 273 K for CO 2 is approximately valid between 209 K and 1700 K . While, n t = 0 . 666 and µ 0 = 1 . 716 × 10 -5 kg/m · s for air is approximately valid between 210 K and 1900 K . From Chapman-Enskog expansion [17, 19], the translational relaxation time τ t of CO 2 can be obtained by τ t = µ/p , where p is the pressure. Thus, the corresponding power law of translational relaxation time τ t reads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where τ t 0 = 1 . 35 × 10 -10 s at T 0 = 273 K with the atmosphere pressure 101 . 325 × 10 3 Pa . The power law also gives the approximation of thermal conductivity κ [42] as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where n κ = 1 . 30 and κ 0 = 1 . 46 × 10 -2 W/ ( m · K ) at T 0 = 273 K for CO 2 is approximately valid between 180 K and 700 K . While, n κ = 0 . 81 and κ 0 = 2 . 41 × 10 -2 W/ ( m · K ) for air is valid between 210 K and 2000 K . The thermal conductivity in Eq.(12) gets involved with the calculation of Pr as shown in Figure 1 and following numerical simulation in CO 2 turbulence. For comparison, the Sutherland law for shear viscosity and thermal conductivity of CO 2 and air, as well as the curve-fit expression in the shear viscosity of CO 2 [7] over a much wider range of translational temperature has been provided in Appendix A.

The rotational relaxation time τ r and vibrational relaxation time τ v are related with the bulk viscosity η b [13], which is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where η b,c represents the effect of elastic collisions, and η b,int accounts for the inelastic collisional contribution of the internal d.o.f. [43]. For dilute gas, η b,c can be neglected, resulting in

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ is the specific heat ratio as Eq.(9), R the gas constant, C V,l the specific heat at constant volume as Eq.(5) - Eq.(7), and τ l the relaxation time for the l th internal energy mode. Assuming that the rotational and vibrational modes relax independently with a single rotational relaxation time τ r and vibrational relaxation time τ v , the bulk viscosity as Eq.(14) can be rewritten as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

η r b denotes the componential bulk viscosity arises from the rotational modes, and η v b the componential bulk viscosity results from the vibrational modes.

The power law of CO 2 for rational relaxation time is calibrated by Eq.(16), with the combination of experimental data [15] and Parker equation [44, 45]. As reported in experimental study [15], the vibrational modes remain frozen when measuring the bulk viscosity of CO 2 with Rayleigh-Brillouin light scattering spectroscopy at 532 nm . In such circumstance,

with the rotational modes contribute solely to the bulk viscosity, and Eq.(15) reduces to η b = η r b . Thence, the seminal estimated experimental data of η r b using Hammond-Wiggings hydrodynamic model [15] is utilized to calibrate the τ r . Power law of rotational relaxation time τ r is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where n r = 1 . 59 and τ r 0 = 2 . 99 × 10 -10 s at T 0 = 273 K is approximately valid between 250 K and 2000 K with the atmosphere pressure. The details in calibrating the rotational relaxation time τ r can be find in Appendix B. With the well-known calibration of pτ v [13], the vibrational relaxation time can be calibrated as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where n v = -1 . 353 and τ v 0 = 1 . 89 × 10 -6 s at T 0 = 800 K is approximately valid between 300 K and 1700 K with the atmosphere pressure.

Figure 2: Comparisons on translational relaxation time τ t , rotational relaxation time τ r and vibrational relaxation time τ v for CO 2 and air.

<!-- image -->

As power laws of Eq.(11), Eq.(18) and Eq.(19) present, all relaxation times only depend on the translational temperature. Figure 2 presents the comparisons on translational, rotational and vibrational relaxation time for CO 2 and air. In Figure 2, the translational relaxation time of air is slightly larger than that of CO 2 . We clearly observe that the vibrational relaxation time τ v can be approximately thousands of times longer than that of τ t and τ r . Current quantitative calibration on τ t , τ r and τ v deviates from the previous theoretical calculations using kinetic theory [10], while the qualitative behaviors are similar. It should be noted that the bulk viscosity of CO 2 is mainly dominated by the η v b arising from the vibrational modes [15]. Thus, present τ v indeed gives the large bulk viscosity with Eq.(17), which is consistent with the findings of inherent large bulk viscosity of CO 2 [11, 43].

## 3. Three-temperature kinetic model and numerical scheme for carbon dioxide

In this section, an extended thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature BGK-type model for CO 2 is introduced with well-calibrated relaxation time. The three-temperature kinetic equation is going to be solved by the proposed finite-volume non-equilibrium high-accuracy GKS.

## 3.1. Three-temperature BGK-type model

In terms of one-temperature equilibrium gas flow, the BGK model [16] has been well proposed. For thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature diatomic gas flow, the extended BGK-type model [34, 46] reads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where f ( x i +1 / 2 ,j m ,k n , t, u , ξ r , ξ v ) is the number density of molecules at position ( x 1 , x 2 , x 3 ) T and time t , with particle velocity u = ( u 1 , u 2 , u 3 ) T and internal energy ( ξ r , ξ v ) T . The left hand side of Eq.(20) represents the free streaming of molecules in space, and the right side denotes the collision term. In Eq.(20), two intermediate equilibrium states f v and f r , and Maxwellian distribution g are introduced with three temperatures T t , T r and T v as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ρ is the density, U denotes three-dimension velocities ( U 1 , U 2 , U 3 ) T , λ t = m 0 / (2 k B T t ) is related to the translational temperature T t , λ r = m 0 / (2 k B T r ) and λ v = m 0 / (2 k B T v ) account for the rotational temperature T r and vibrational temperature T v , respectively. Above extended BGK-type kinetic model has the similarity with the two relaxation time BGK models for gases with internal d.o.f. [47, 48]. For triatomic molecule CO 2 , we reasonably adopt above three-temperature extend BGK-type model, with the well-calibrated relaxation time as Eq.(11), Eq.(18) and Eq.(19). The right-hand-side collision operator as Eq.(20) contains three terms, corresponding to the elastic collision ( f → f v ) and inelastic collisions ( f v → f r and f r → g ). As shown in Figure 2, for multiple relaxation precess of CO 2 , notice that the inelastic collision takes longer time than that of elastic collision. The additional term Q v resulting from the inelastic collisions accounts for the internal energy exchange among the translational, rotational and vibrational internal energy.

The relation between density ρ , momentum ρ U , total energy ρE , rotational internal energy ρE r , and internal vibrational energy ρE v are determined by taking moments of the intermediate equilibrium distribution function f v as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the vector of extended collision invariants ψ v = (1 , u 1 , u 2 , u 3 , 1 2 ( u 2 1 + u 2 2 + u 2 3 + ξ 2 r + ξ 2 v ) , 1 2 ξ 2 r , 1 2 ξ 2 v ) T and dΞ v = d u 1 d u 2 d u 3 d ξ r d ξ v . In Eq.(24), total energy is E = U 2 / 2 + E t + E r + E v . Eq.(20) introduces the new rotational and vibrational temperatures T r and T v , thus, the constraints of rotational and vibrational internal energy relaxation have to be imposed on the extended kinetic model to self-consistently determine all unknowns. Since only mass, momentum and total energy are conserved during molecule collisions, the compatibility condition for the collision term turns into

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Source terms S r and S v are from the internal energy exchange among translational, rotational and vibrational modes during inelastic collision. These source terms cannot be derived from the BGK model itself. These two source terms for the rotational internal energy and vibrational internal energy can be modeled through the Landau-Teller-Jeans-type relaxation model [34, 36], which read

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For CO 2 , the rotational and vibrational relaxation time τ r and τ v have been determined by Eq.(18) and Eq.(19). The left unknown equilibrium rotational internal energy ( ρE r ) eq and vibrational one ( ρE v ) eq are determined by the assumption T v = T r = T t = T eq [34, 36], i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the translational d.o.f. as N t , rotational d.o.f. as N r and vibrational d.o.f. as N v . Up to this point, the thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature BGK-type model for CO 2 is completed with the well-determined relaxation time τ t , τ r , and τ v , as well as the modeling source terms S r and S v .

Using the intermediate equilibrium state f v , with the frozen of rotational and vibrational internal energy exchange, the 1st-order Chapman-Enskog expansion [17] gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from which the corresponding non-equilibrium three-temperature macroscopic governing equations in three-dimensions can be derived [36]. The technical details in the standard derivation of three-temperature macroscopic equations are similar as that of deriving twotemperature macroscopic equations [49], which are omitted in this paper. The key finding is that two additional equations get involved with above source terms Eq.(26) and Eq.(27), which govern the evolutionary dynamics of rotational internal energy ρE r and vibrational internal energy ρE v . Thus current thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature macroscopic system goes beyond the one-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow of thermally perfect gas [40]. The non-equilibrium three-temperature macroscopic equations give the fixed Prandtl number Pr = 1. In the numerical simulation of supersonic CO 2 turbulent channel flow, the heat flux through the cell interface will be corrected to obtain the targeted Pr to any realistic value [42]. The three-temperature BGK-type equation as Eq.(20) is going to be solved by following non-equilibrium high-accuracy GKS, as the numerical fluxes at cell interfaces are evaluated based on the time-dependent gas distribution solution.

## 3.2. Non-equilibrium high-accuracy gas-kinetic scheme

For finite-volume non-equilibrium GKS, the key procedure is updating the macroscopic flow variables inside each control volume through the numerical fluxes. In this section, the spatial and temporal high-accuracy non-equilibrium GKS is proposed within the two-stage fourth-order framework [21].

Taking moments of the extended three-temperature BGK-type model as Eq.(20) and integrating with respect to control volume, the finite volume scheme can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Q ijk is the cell averaged macroscopic variables as Eq.(24), S ijk is the cell averaged source term as Eq.(25). The control volume Ω ijk = [( x 1 ) i -∆ x 1 / 2 , ( x 1 ) i +∆ x 1 / 2] · [( x 2 ) j -∆ x 2 / 2 , ( x 2 ) j +∆ x 2 / 2] · [( x 3 ) k -∆ x 3 / 2 , ( x 3 ) k +∆ x 3 / 2], | Ω ijk | is the volume of Ω ijk and F s ( t ) is the time-dependent numerical flux across the cell interface Σ s . The numerical flux F s ( t ) | x 1 in x 1 - direction is given as example

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where n is the outer normal direction. The Gaussian quadrature is used over the cell interface for Eq.(33), where ω mn is the quadrature weight, x i +1 / 2 ,j m ,k n = [( x 1 ) i +1 / 2 , ( x 2 ) j m , ( x 3 ) k n ] T , and [( x 2 ) j m , ( x 3 ) k n ] is the quadrature point of cell interface [( x 2 ) j -∆ x 2 / 2 , ( x 2 ) j +∆ x 2 / 2] · [( x 3 ) k -∆ x 3 / 2 , ( x 3 ) k + ∆ x 3 / 2]. When constructing numerical fluxes for Eq.(20), the secondary relaxation term Q v is splitly taken into account as the source term S ijk in Eq.(32).

Without considering Q v , the gas distribution function f ( x i +1 / 2 ,j m ,k n , t, u , ξ r , ξ v ) in the local coordinate can be obtained by the integral solution of Eq.(20) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x ′ = x i +1 / 2 ,j m ,k n -u ( t -t ′ ) is the trajectory of molecule on grids, f 0 the initial gas distribution function, and f v the corresponding intermediate equilibrium state in the form of Eq.(21). Along the line of GKS [18], for the multi-dimensional kinetic solver, f v and f 0 can be constructed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where f v l and f v r are the initial gas distribution functions on both sides of a cell interface Σ s . f v 0 is the initial intermediate equilibrium state located at the cell interface, which can be determined through the compatibility condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting f v and f 0 into Eq.(34), the time-dependent gas distribution function at the Gaussian point is evaluated as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With the relation of macroscopic variables and intermediate equilibrium distribution function f v , the spatial mesoscopic coefficients a 1 , a l 1 , · · · , a l 3 , a r 3 and temporal mesoscopic coefficients A , A l , A r in Eq.(38) can be determined and details are presented in Appendix C. It is noticed that Eq.(38) provides a gas evolution process from kinetic scale to hydrodynamic scale on grids, where both inviscid and viscous fluxes are recovered from a time-dependent and multi-dimensional gas distribution function at a cell interface. This flux function couples the inviscid and all dissipative terms [18, 35], and has advantages in comparison with traditional hydrodynamic solver in which the Riemann solver [50] and central difference are used for the inviscid and viscous terms splitly. For Prandtl number fix, similar to Ref [18], the total energy flux F ( ρE ) in Eq.(33) is modified as F new ( ρE ) = F ( ρE ) + (1 /Pr -1) q , where the time-dependent heat flux through the cell interface can be evaluated precisely by q = ∫ ( u -U ) { [( u i -U i ) 2 + ξ 2 r + ξ 2 v ] / 2 } fd Ξ v . As presented in Section 2.1, Pr depends on both the translational and vibrational temperatures, which is computed locally in each time step for each computational grid.

With the time-dependent kinetic flux as Eq.(38), the second-order accuracy can be achieved by one step integration. To achieve high-order accuracy in space and time, the fifth-order WENO-Z spatial reconstruction [37] and two-stage fourth-order time discretization [20, 21] are implemented. For source term in Eq.(32), the one-step forward Euler method is applied in two-stage updating process to guarantee the robustness. Notice that the T v and N v as Eq.(3) and Eq.(8) should be calculated in the center of control volume for source term, as well as at the cell interface when calculating non-equilibrium fluxes in Appendix C. Newton-Raphson method is utilized to compute the T v at n +1 step. With the initial guess T v at n step, several iterations are enough to obtain the convergent solution, i.e., with convergence error ϵ T v ≡ || T ∗ v -T ∗∗ v || /T n v ≤ 10 -8 where T ∗ v and T ∗∗ v are the successive iterated value during the iteration process. || φ || denotes the absolute value of φ . The present non-equilibrium high-accuracy GKS has been constructed with the second-order kinetic flux as Eq.(38), fifth-order WENO-Z reconstruction, two-stage fourth-order time discretization. Current non-equilibrium high-accuracy GKS is well implemented in the in-house parallel computational platform for turbulence simulation [26, 28], and the DNS in supersonic CO 2 turbulent channel flow is presented subsequently.

## 4. Numerical simulation and discussion

Numerical simulations in supersonic turbulent channel flows with bulk Mach number Ma = 3 . 0 and bulk Reynolds number Re = 4880 are implemented in this section. The benchmark as equilibrium one-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow is validated with HGKS [27, 28] firstly. The supersonic thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow is simulated with detailed physical analysis.

## 4.1. One-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow

The computational studies of supersonic turbulent channel flow [38, 40, 51, 39] have been extensively carried out to study the compressible turbulent boundary layer. Onetemperature supersonic turbulent channel flow with bulk Mach number Ma = 3 . 0 and bulk Reynolds number Re = 4880 [38, 39] is firstly used to validate the high-accuracy of in-house HGKS solver with non-uniform grids [27]. In the computation, the physical domain is ( x, y, z ) ∈ [0 , 4 πH ] × [ -H,H ] × [0 , 4 πH/ 3] and the computational domain takes ( ξ, η, ζ ) ∈ [0 , 4 πH ] × [0 , 3 πH ] × [0 , 4 πH/ 3]. The coordinate transformation is given as previous studies [27, 28]. The periodic boundary conditions are used in streamwise X -direction and spanwise Z -directions, and the non-slip and isothermal boundary conditions are utilized in wall-normal Y -direction. In what follows, note that X -, Y - and Z - directions are equivalent as x 1 -, x 2 - and x 3 - directions in Section 3.2. ( U 1 , U 2 , U 3 ) T is re-expressed in ( U, V, W ) T for convenient comparisons with refereed studies.

The turbulent channel flow is initiated with uniform density ρ = 1, and the initial streamwise velocity U ( y ) profile is given by the perturbed Poiseuille flow profile U ( y ) = 1 . 5(1 -y 2 ) + white noise, where the white noise is added with 10% amplitude of local streamwise velocity. The spanwise and wall-normal velocity is initiated with white noise. The initial uniform pressure is computed through the corresponding intial bulk Mach number and Reynolds number. The targeted non-dimensional parameters bulk Mach number Ma and bulk Reynolds number Re are defined as Ma = U b /c w , Re = ρ b U b H/µ w . The bulk velocity U b and bulk density ρ b are given by U b = ∫ H -H U ( y )d y and ρ b = ∫ H -H ρ ( y )d y . H = 1 is the half height of the channel, µ w the wall molecule viscosity. c w = √ γRT w is the wall sound speed, T w the wall temperature and R the gas constant. T w is set to 1 in current simulation. In current on-temperature validation case, the shear viscosity µ adopts the exact same power law µ ( T ) ∝ T 0 . 7 [38], where T is the equilibrium temperature. The plus unit Y + and plus velocity U + are defined as Y + = ρu τ y/µ , U + = U/u τ with the friction velocity u τ = √ τ w /ρ w , the wall shear stress τ w = µ w ∂U/∂y ∣ ∣ w , and the wall density ρ w . The friction Mach number Ma τ and the friction Reynolds number Re τ are given by Ma τ = u τ /c w and Re τ = H/δ v with δ v = µ w / ( ρ w u τ ). The heat flux q w and the non-dimensional heat flux B q of the wall are defined as q w = -κ∂T/∂y ∣ ∣ w , B q = q w / ( ρ w C P u τ T w ). In the one-temperature validation, the fixed Prandtl number Pr = 0 . 70 is used as refereed simulation [38], which is close to the Pr of air as shown in Figure 1. These statistical quantities are used to quantitatively validate the performance of HGKS and non-equilibrium high-accuracy GKS subsequently.

Table 2: Supersonic one-temperature turbulent channel flow: numerical parameters of current validation case G 1 and the reference simulations [38, 39]. '-' means that the data can not be find in the refereed paper.

| Case  Physical domain  N  x  ×  N  y  ×  N  z  ∆  Y  +  min  /  Y  +  N  10  ∆  X  +  ∆  Z  +  Ref  1  4  πH  ×  2  H  ×  4  πH/  3  144  ×  90  ×  60  0.20/17  39  24  Ref  2  4  πH  ×  2  H  ×  4  πH/  3  400  ×  210  ×  320  0.65/-  14.32  5.96  G  1  4  πH  ×  2  H  ×  4  πH/  3  128  ×  128  ×  128  0.52/12.94  43.36  14.45   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

In this one-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow simulation, the details of numerical parameters are given in Table 2. The numerical cases of DNS in refereed paper[38] and [39] are denoted as Ref 1 and Ref 2 , and case G 1 is implemented by one-temperature HGKS [28]. The spectral method and high-order difference scheme is used in Ref 1 and Ref 2 , respectively. ∆ Y + min is the first grid center space off the wall in the wall-normal direction, and Y + N 10 is the plus unit for the first ten points (grid center) off the wall. ∆ X + and ∆ Z + are the equivalent plus unit for uniform streamwise and spanwise grids, respectively. As shown in Table 2, the grid resolution of case G 1 meet the requirement for DNS [38]. The constant moment flux is used to determine the external force [28] in transition and the fully developed turbulence periods. The supersonic turbulent channel flow takes longer time to transit than that of near incompressible turbulent channel flow with Ma = 0 . 1. During the fully developed turbulence period, 680 characteristic periodic time H/U b is used to obtain the statistically stationary turbulence. In what follows, the ensemble average of φ over time and the X - and Z -directions is represented by 〈 φ 〉 . The fluctuation of φ is denoted by φ ′ = φ -〈 φ 〉 , and the root-mean square (r.m.s.) of φ is defined as φ ′ rms = √ 〈 ( φ -〈 φ 〉 ) 2 〉 , where φ represents the density, temperature and velocity, etc. To further quantify the performance of HGKS in one-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow, the profiles of normalized r.m.s. of density ρ ′ rms / 〈 ρ 〉 , r.m.s. of Mach number Ma ′ rms , and normalized r.m.s. temperature T ′ rms / 〈 T 〉 , and the profiles of normalized turbulence intensities (r.m.s. of velocities as U ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 , V ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 , W ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 ) and Reynolds stress -〈 ρU ′ V ′ 〉 / 〈 τ w 〉 are presented in Figure 3. In order to account for the mean property of variations caused by compressibility, the Van Driest (VD) transformation [52] is proposed for the mean velocity, i.e., density-weighted velocity 〈 U 〉 + V D = ∫ 〈 U 〉 + 0 ( 〈 ρ 〉 / 〈 ρ w 〉 ) 1 / 2 d 〈 U 〉 + . Compared with the refereed DNS solution [38], the well-agreed performance of case G 1 confirms the high-accuracy flow-fields has been obtained by current HGKS for one-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow. The small deviations between the case G 1 and Ref 1 may result from the numerical solutions in different governing equations. For VD transformation of streamwise velocity, the solution from case G 1 matches well with the DNS in very fine grids [39] with fixed Prandtl number Pr = 0 . 72. Subsequently, non-equilibrium high-accuracy GKS for three-temperature model proposed in Section 3.2 is used to simulate supersonic thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow.

Figure 3: Supersonic one-temperature turbulent channel flow: the profiles of normalized r.m.s. of density ρ ′ rms / 〈 ρ 〉 , r.m.s. of Mach number Ma ′ rms and normalized r.m.s. of temperature T ′ rms / 〈 T 〉 (upper), and the profiles of normalized turbulence intensities U ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 , V ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 , W ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 and Reynolds stress -〈 ρU ′ V ′ 〉 / 〈 τ w 〉 (lower).

<!-- image -->

## 4.2. Three-temperature supersonic CO 2 turbulent channel flow

For the first time, the DNS in supersonic thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow is implemented. The numerical setup is same as one-temperature validation case G 1 in Section 4.1. The bulk Mach number and bulk Reynolds number take Ma = 3 . 0 and Re = 4880. The three-temperature initial flow fields restarts from the onetemperature fully developed turbulence, with initializing three temperatures as T t = T r = T v . With absolute wall temperature T w = 1, the equivalent wall temperature T we = 300 K is adopted to compute the practical physical temperatures when determining τ r and τ v . The isothermal boundary condition is utilized for translational temperature T t . To the author's knowledge, there is no report on wall boundary condition for CO 2 . In current study, assuming rotational and vibrational modes of CO 2 do not exchange internal energy with the wall, thus, adiabatic boundary condition is used for rotational and vibrational temperatures in wall-normal Y -direction. The realistic wall boundary conditions for rotational and vibrational internal energy of CO 2 deserve to be explored by seminal experimental measurements and theoretical studies.

To balance the wall shear stress, the constant moment flux is used to determine the external force of supersonic thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow. In Figure 4, note that the mean average of φ over whole computational domain (or the two wall planes) is represented by [ φ ]. After the long running time, the statistical mean variables as [ ρ w ], [ ρE ], [ ρE r ] and [ ρE v ] in Figure 4 oscillate in a narrow range, indicating that the three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow reaches the fully developed state. Specifically, the mean total energy [ ρE ] of one-temperature case G 1 is approximate 94% of current three-temperature CO 2 . The larger mean total energy [ ρE ] of three-temperature CO 2 is reasonable, since the CO 2 turbulence is equipped with the additional excited vibrational internal energy. Figure 5 shows three-dimension contours of translational, rotational, and vibrational temperatures of supersonic CO 2 turbulent flows in the fully developed turbulence period. We clearly observe that the contour of vibrational temperature distinguishes from the translational and rotational temperature contours, confirming the thermal nonequilibrium performance.

To quantitatively analyze the three-temperature performance of supersonic CO 2 turbulence, 900 characteristic periodic time H/U b is used to obtain the statistically stationary three-temperature turbulence. The key ensemble quantities at the wall and the center plane of channel are presented in Table 3. Running case C 1 denotes the supersonic thermal nonequilibrium three-temperature CO 2 case. Again, ensemble quantities from case G 1 agree well with these of refereed solution in Ref 1 [38]. Compared with the solutions of one-temperature case G 1 , the ensemble friction velocity 〈 u τ 〉 , the ensemble friction Mach number 〈 Ma τ 〉 and the ensemble center density 〈 ρ c 〉 (density at the center plane of channel, namely at Y = 0 plane) of case C 1 are slightly larger. The non-dimensional heat flux B q of the wall of case C 1 is slightly smaller than that of case G 1 . While the ensemble wall density 〈 ρ w 〉 , the ensemble friction Reynolds number Re τ , and the ensemble central equilibrium temperature 〈 T eq c 〉 of case C 1 reduce dramatically. Frictional force and heat transfer of the wall is of special interest in the long-term applicability of compressible CO 2 turbulence. The ensemble frictional force 〈 τ w 〉 of case G 1 and case C 1 is 3 . 41 × 10 -3 and 3 . 32 × 10 -3 , respectively. While, the ensemble heat flux 〈 q w 〉 of G 1 and C 1 is -0 . 0309 and -0 . 0396, respectively. It is concluded that the thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature effects of CO 2 enlarge the ensemble heat transfer by 20%, and slightly decrease the ensemble frictional force.

Figure 4: Supersonic thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow: the time history of mean wall density [ ρ w ] (left), and the time history of mean total energy [ ρE ], mean rotational internal energy [ ρE r ] and mean vibrational internal energy [ ρE v ] (right).

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: Supersonic thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow: contours of translational, rotational, and vibrational temperatures.

<!-- image -->

Table 3: Supersonic thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow: ensemble quantities at the wall and the center plane of channel.

| Case  〈  ρ  w  〉  〈  u  τ  〉  /U  b  〈  Ma  τ  〉  〈  Re  τ  〉  〈  B  q  〉  〈  ρ  c  〉  〈  T  eq  c  〉  Ref  1  2.388  0.0387  0.116  451  0.137  0.952  2.490  G  1  2.407  0.0376  0.113  442  0.137  0.948  2.521  C  1  2.080  0.0400  0.120  406  0.127  0.966  2.084   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Figure 6: Supersonic thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow: the profiles of ensemble density 〈 ρ 〉 , ensemble Mach number 〈 Ma 〉 , and ensemble equilibrium temperature 〈 T eq 〉 (left), and the profiles of ensemble streamwise velocity profiles 〈 U 〉 + and VD transformation of streamwise velocity 〈 U 〉 + V D (right).

<!-- image -->

For the first-order ensemble statistical quantities in supersonic three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow, the profiles of key ensemble quantities are presented in Figure 6. The equilibrium temperature T eq is defined as Eq.(28). Compared with the one-temperature case G 1 , we observe the large discrepancies in the near-wall density profiles (approximate || Y/H || ≥ 0 . 8) and the equilibrium temperature profiles in the off-wall region (approximate || Y/H || ≤ 0 . 95). Both the ensemble wall density and central equilibrium temperature

&gt;

Figure 7: Supersonic thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow: the profiles of normalized r.m.s. of density ρ ′ rms / 〈 ρ 〉 , r.m.s. of Mach number Ma ′ rms and normalized r.m.s. of equilibrium temperature ( T eq ) ′ rms / 〈 T eq 〉 (left), and the profiles of normalized turbulence intensities U ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 , V ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 , W ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 and normalized Reynolds stress -〈 ρU ′ V ′ 〉 / 〈 τ w 〉 (right).

<!-- image -->

decrease by approximate 15%. It can be concluded that the thermal non-equilibrium threetemperature effects of supersonic CO 2 affect its ensemble thermal quantities greatly. In Figure 6, the ensemble streamwise velocity in the log-law region of case C 1 is lower than that of case G 1 , indicating that the 〈 U 〉 + in log-law region is suppressed by the non-equilibrium three-temperature effects. There is little change in the ensemble Mach number 〈 Ma 〉 and ensemble VD transformation of streamwise velocity 〈 U 〉 + V D , showing that the VD transformation [52] still works well for supersonic CO 2 turbulent channel flow. Figure 7 shows that the peak normalized r.m.s. of density ρ ′ rms / 〈 ρ 〉 and equilibrium temperature ( T eq ) ′ rms / 〈 T eq 〉 of supersonic three-temperature CO 2 are suppressed near the wall region, and the corresponding peak locations are much closer to the wall than these of case G 1 . While, the peak of r.m.s. of Mach number Ma ′ rms in case C 1 is larger than that of case G 1 . Compared with one-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow, Figure 7 shows that the normalized turbulent intensities of three-temperature CO 2 are suppressed above the Y + ≈ 20, Y + ≈ 100, and Y + ≈ 40 regions for U ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 , V ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 , and W ′ rms / 〈 u τ 〉 , respectively. Correspondingly, the normalized Reynolds stress is suppressed above the Y + ≈ 120 region. In supersonic turbulent channel flow, it can be concluded that the thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature effects of CO 2 suppress the peak of normalized r.m.s. of density and temperature, normalized turbulent intensities and Reynolds stress.

Be of special interest in the non-equilibrium performance of three internal energy modes of supersonic three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow. Figure 8 shows the ensemble average of translational, rotational and vibrational temperatures. At the wall, the three ensemble temperatures sort from the high to low as 〈 T v 〉 , 〈 T r 〉 , 〈 T t 〉 , and the opposite order of three temperatures is observed in the off-wall region (approximate || Y/H || ≤ 0 . 95). Figure 8 as well shows that the peak of normalized r.m.s. of translational temperature ( T t ) ′ rms / 〈 T t 〉

<!-- image -->

Y

Figure 8: Supersonic thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow: the ensemble translational, rotational, and vibrational temperature 〈 T t 〉 , 〈 T r 〉 , 〈 T v 〉 (left), and the normalized r.m.s. of translational, rotational, and vibrational temperature ( T t ) ′ rms / 〈 T t 〉 , ( T r ) ′ rms / 〈 T r 〉 , ( T v ) ′ rms / 〈 T v 〉 (right).

Figure 9: Supersonic thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature CO 2 turbulent channel flow: slices of translational, rotational, and vibrational temperatures at Y + = 20 . 3 (left column) and Y + = 40 . 6 (right column).

<!-- image -->

and rotational temperature ( T r ) ′ rms / 〈 T r 〉 is almost co-located at Y + ≈ 15. While the peak location of normalized r.m.s. of vibrational temperature ( T v ) ′ rms / 〈 T v 〉 is far from the wall at Y + ≈ 30. The peak value of normalized r.m.s. of temperatures sorting from the high to low is translational temperature, rotational temperature, and vibrational temperature. Additionally, it is observed that ( T v ) ′ rms / 〈 T v 〉 is larger than ( T t ) ′ rms / 〈 T t 〉 and ( T r ) ′ rms / 〈 T r 〉 above the Y + ≈ 30 region. Figure 9 clearly shows the streamwise low-temperature and high-temperature ribbon-like regions for all three temperatures. At Y + = 20 . 3, the lowtemperature ribbon-like regions are dominated in vibrational temperature fields, while the high-temperature ones dominate the translational temperature fields at Y + = 40 . 6. Compared with the vibrational temperature fields, Figure 9 obviously shows the rotational temperature fields have the higher similarity with translational temperature fields in temperature amplitude. As shown in Figure 2, for CO 2 , the rotational relaxation time τ r is much closer with the translational relaxation time τ t . However, the vibrational relaxation time τ v is thousands of times larger than that of τ t . Thus, the T t and T r are more likely to be equilibrium through the interaction between translational and rotational modes with closer relaxation time. Meanwhile, the much longer relaxation process of vibrational modes may account for its small correlation with translational modes and rotational modes.

## 5. Conclusion and remarks

The present paper focuses on thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature effects of carbon dioxide ( CO 2 ) in supersonic turbulent channel flow. Essential ingredient has been addressed for compressible CO 2 turbulent flows, namely, the thermal non-equilibrium interactions among translational, rotational, and vibrational modes. The three vibrational modes of CO 2 are addressed, and the double degenerated bending modes ν 2 is equipped with the characteristic vibrational temperature θ v = 959 . 66 K , which is much lower than that of N 2 and O 2 . Thus, the excitation of vibrational modes of CO 2 requires to be modeled and simulated carefully even under the room temperature. The translational, rotational and vibrational relaxation time of CO 2 are calibrated. Then, CO 2 is modeled in an extended three-temperature BGK-type model within the well-established kinetic framework. To achieve high-order accuracy in space and time for simulating CO 2 turbulence, the nonequilibrium high-accuracy GKS has been constructed with the second-order kinetic flux, fifth-order WENO-Z reconstruction, and two-stage fourth-order time discretization.

With implementing the non-equilibrium high-accuracy GKS in the large-scale parallel in-house solver, the DNS of supersonic CO 2 turbulent channel flow is conducted. Compared with the one-temperature supersonic turbulent channel flow, the three-temperature effects of CO 2 are analyzed. The ensemble frictional force and ensemble heat flux of the wall, as well as the typical ensemble and fluctuating turbulent quantities of supersonic CO 2 turbulent channel flow are investigated. Thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature effects of CO 2 enlarges the ensemble heat transfer of the wall by approximate 20%, and slightly decreases the ensemble frictional force. The ensemble density and temperature fields are greatly affected, and both the ensemble wall density and central equilibrium temperature decrease by approximate 15%. The ensemble streamwise velocity in log-law region is suppressed.

There is little change in VD transformation of streamwise velocity, which shows that the VD transformation still works well for supersonic CO 2 turbulent channel flow. We observe that the peak of normalized r.m.s. of density and temperature, normalized turbulent intensities and Reynolds stress are suppressed in supersonic three-temperature CO 2 turbulent flow.

Numerical simulation confirms the thermal non-equilibrium three-temperature performance of CO 2 . The streamwise low-temperature and high-temperature ribbon-like regions are clearly observed for all three temperatures near the wall region. The vibrational modes of CO 2 behave quite differently with rotational and translational modes. The peak positions of normalized r.m.s. of translational temperature and rotational temperature are almost co-located. Both the maximum ensemble temperature and normalized r.m.s. temperature sort from high to low is translational temperature, rotational temperature, and vibrational temperature. Compared with the vibrational temperature fields, the rotational temperature fields have the higher similarity with translational temperature fields both in temperature amplitude and its structure. The much longer relaxation process of vibrational modes of CO 2 may account for its small correlation with translational modes and rotational modes.

In the future, we expect to explore the interdisciplinary studies on CO 2 transition in supersonic/hypersonic flat plate, i.e., the overheating phenomenon at the late transitional period [53]. The multi-scale numerical framework UGKS and UGKWP [29, 54] also provide the solid foundation in further multi-scale CO 2 flows, i.e., the Mars re-entry vehicles from rarefied to continuum regimes. In addition, the realistic wall boundary conditions for rotational and vibrational internal energy of CO 2 deserve to be explored for more delicate simulations in wall-bounded CO 2 turbulence.

## Ackonwledgement

Many thanks to Dr. Zhao Wang for helpful discussions on the wall boundary conditions of CO 2 gas flows. This research is supported by the National Numerical Windtunnel project, the Department of Science and Technology of Guangdong Province (2020B1212030001). The authors would like to acknowledge TaiYi supercomputers in the SUSTech for providing high performance computational resources.

## Appendix A. Sutherland law and curve-fit shear viscosity of CO 2

For dilute CO 2 gas flows, Sutherland law [42] gives the shear viscosity as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the reference shear viscosity µ 0 = 1 . 370 × 10 -5 kg/ ( m · s ), T 0 = 273 K and S = 222 K is approximately valid between 190 K and 1700 K . In terms of air, it is noted that µ 0 = 1 . 716 × 10 -5 kg/m · s , T 0 = 273 K and S = 111 K for air is approximately valid between 210 K and 1900 K . Sutherland law gives the thermal conductivity [42] as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the reference thermal conductivity κ 0 = 1 . 46 × 10 -2 W/ ( m · K ), T 0 = 273 K and S = 1800 K is approximately valid between 180 K and 700 K . In terms of air, it is noted that κ 0 = 2 . 41 × 10 -2 W/ ( m · K ), T 0 = 273 K and S = 194 is approximately valid between 160 K and 2000 K .

It is reported that the shear viscosity of CO 2 [7] is well approximated over a wide range of temperature up to 20000 K . The curve-fit expression of shear viscosity reads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A = -0 . 01952739, B = 1 . 047818, and C = -14 . 32212. In Eq.(41), shear viscosity µ is in the unit kg/ ( m · s ).

## Appendix B. Calibrated rotational relaxation time of CO 2

This appendix provides the power law for rotational relaxation time τ r of CO 2 . For bulk viscosity η r b arising from the rotational modes, the calibration data of CO 2 [15] is utilized as Table 4. Based on the least-square method, with T 0 = 273 K , calibration data in Table 4 provides the τ r 0 = 2 . 99 × 10 -10 s and n r = 4 . 47. It should be noted that the data of bulk viscosity in high temperature is not adequate.

Table 4: Calibration data [15] for determining the rotational relaxation time τ r of CO 2 .

| T  t  /K  258  .  05  274  .  36  293  .  24  312  .  80  330  .  73  353  .  15  η  r  b  /µ  0  .  226  0  .  180  0  .  188  0  .  198  0  .  200  0  .  191   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

To absorb the high-temperature information of τ r , the power n r should be corrected based on the refereed calculation of CO 2 [45]. The rotational relaxation time is used as τ r = Z r τ t , where the rotational collision number Z r is given by Parker equation [44] as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

T ∗ is the characteristic temperature of inter-molecular potential, and Z ∞ r is the limiting value. The values Z ∞ r = 20 . 39 and T ∗ = 91 . 5 K are used for CO 2 [45]. Thence, with the fixed T 0 = 273 K and τ r 0 = 2 . 99 × 10 -10 s , the Zrτ t = τ r 0 ( T/T 0 ) n r gives the corrected power n r = 1 . 59 at T = 2000 K .

## Appendix C. Connection between macroscopic variables and mesoscopic coefficients

The connection between the spatial derivatives of macroscopic flow variables and the expansion of intermediate equilibrium distribution function f v as Eq.(21) reads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a denotes the spatial mesoscopic coefficients in Eq.(38) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Eq.(43) can be rewritten into following linear system

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Each component of ( a 1 , . . . , a 6 , a 7 ) T in Eq.(45) can be determined uniquely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the temporal mesoscopic coefficient in Eq.(38), the relation between temporal derivatives of macroscopic variables and f v can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The temporal derivatives of macroscopic variables can be given according to the compatibility condition as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In a similar way, the above components ( A 1 , . . . , A 6 , A 7 ) T in Eq.(48) can be determined uniquely.

## References

- [1] Mars helicopter - nasa mars. https://mars.nasa.gov/technology/helicopter/, 2022.
- [2] Peter Atkins and Julio de Paula. Physical chemistry. eight ed, 2006.
- [3] EV Kustova and EA Nagnibeda. On a correct description of a multi-temperature dissociating co2 flow. Chemical physics , 321(3):293-310, 2006.
- [4] E Kustova, M Mekhonoshina, and A Kosareva. Relaxation processes in carbon dioxide. Physics of Fluids , 31(4):046104, 2019.
- [5] Raymond L Taylor and Steven Bitterman. Survey of vibrational relaxation data for processes important in the c o 2-n 2 laser system. Reviews of Modern Physics , 41(1):26, 1969.
- [6] RJ Stouffer, Syukuro Manabe, and K Bryan. Interhemispheric asymmetry in climate response to a gradual increase of atmospheric co2. Nature , 342(6250):660-662, 1989.
- [7] GRAHAM CANDLER. Computation of thermo-chemical nonequilibrium martian atmospheric entry flows. In 5th Joint Thermophysics and Heat Transfer Conference , page 1695, 1990.
- [8] Y-K Chen, WD Henline, and ME Tauber. Mars pathfinder trajectory based heating and ablation calculations. Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets , 32(2):225-230, 1995.
- [9] Robert D Braun and Robert M Manning. Mars exploration entry, descent and landing challenges. In 2006 IEEE Aerospace Conference , pages 18-pp. IEEE, 2006.
- [10] Elena Kustova and Mariia Mekhonoshina. Models for bulk viscosity in carbon dioxide. In AIP Conference Proceedings , volume 2132, page 150006. AIP Publishing LLC, 2019.
- [11] L Tisza. Supersonic absorption and stokes' viscosity relation. Physical Review , 61(7-8):531, 1942.
- [12] Xingguo Pan, Mikhail N Shneider, and Richard B Miles. Power spectrum of coherent rayleigh-brillouin scattering in carbon dioxide. Physical Review A , 71(4):045801, 2005.
- [13] Mark S Cramer. Numerical estimates for the bulk viscosity of ideal gases. Physics of fluids , 24(6):066102, 2012.
- [14] Seyed Hossein Jamali, Mariette De Groen, Othonas A Moultos, Remco Hartkamp, Thijs JH Vlugt, Wim Ubachs, and Willem Van De Water. Rayleigh-brillouin light scattering spectra of co2 from molecular dynamics. The Journal of Chemical Physics , 151(6):064201, 2019.
- [15] Yuanqing Wang, Wim Ubachs, and Willem Van De Water. Bulk viscosity of co2 from rayleigh-brillouin light scattering spectroscopy at 532 nm. The Journal of Chemical Physics , 150(15):154502, 2019.
- [16] Prabhu Lal Bhatnagar, Eugene P Gross, and Max Krook. A model for collision processes in gases. i. small amplitude processes in charged and neutral one-component systems. Physical review , 94(3):511, 1954.
- [17] Sydney Chapman and TG Cowling. The mathematical theory of non-uniform gases: An account of the kinetic theory of viscosity, thermal conduction and diffusion in gases. cambridge mathematical library. Cambridge University Press , 1:27-52, 1970.
- [18] Kun Xu. A gas-kinetic bgk scheme for the navier-stokes equations and its connection with artificial dissipation and godunov method. Journal of Computational Physics , 171(1):289-335, 2001.

- [19] Kun Xu. Direct modeling for computational fluid dynamics: construction and application of unified gas-kinetic schemes . World Scientific, 2015.
- [20] Jiequan Li and Zhifang Du. A two-stage fourth order time-accurate discretization for lax-wendroff type flow solvers i. hyperbolic conservation laws. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing , 38(5):A3046A3069, 2016.
- [21] Liang Pan, Kun Xu, Qibing Li, and Jiequan Li. An efficient and accurate two-stage fourth-order gaskinetic scheme for the euler and navier-stokes equations. Journal of Computational Physics , 326:197221, 2016.
- [22] Song Fu and Qibing Li. Numerical simulation of compressible mixing layers. International journal of heat and fluid flow , 27(5):895-901, 2006.
- [23] Wei Liao, Yan Peng, and Li-Shi Luo. Gas-kinetic schemes for direct numerical simulations of compressible homogeneous turbulence. Physical Review E , 80(4):046702, 2009.
- [24] G Kumar, Sharath S Girimaji, and J Kerimo. Weno-enhanced gas-kinetic scheme for direct simulations of compressible transition and turbulence. Journal of Computational Physics , 234:499-523, 2013.
- [25] Guiyu Cao, Liang Pan, and Kun Xu. Three dimensional high-order gas-kinetic scheme for supersonic isotropic turbulence i: criterion for direct numerical simulation. Computers &amp; Fluids , 192:104273, 2019.
- [26] Guiyu Cao, Liang Pan, and Kun Xu. Three dimensional high-order gas-kinetic scheme for supersonic isotropic turbulence ii: Coarse-graining analysis of compressible ksgs budget. Journal of Computational Physics , 439:110402, 2021.
- [27] Guiyu Cao, Kun Xu, Liang Pan, and Shiyi Chen. High-order gas-kinetic scheme in general curvilinear coordinate for iles of compressible wall-bounded turbulent flows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.08609 , 2021.
- [28] Guiyu Cao, Liang Pan, and Kun Xu. High-order gas-kinetic scheme with parallel computation for direct numerical simulation of turbulent flows. Journal of Computational Physics , 448:110739, 2022.
- [29] Kun Xu and Juan-Chen Huang. A unified gas-kinetic scheme for continuum and rarefied flows. Journal of Computational Physics , 229(20):7747-7764, 2010.
- [30] Juan-Chen Huang, Kun Xu, and Pubing Yu. A unified gas-kinetic scheme for continuum and rarefied flows iii: Microflow simulations. Communications in Computational Physics , 14(5):1147-1173, 2013.
- [31] Yajun Zhu, Chang Liu, Chengwen Zhong, and Kun Xu. Unified gas-kinetic wave-particle methods. ii. multiscale simulation on unstructured mesh. Physics of Fluids , 31(6):067105, 2019.
- [32] Chang Liu, Yajun Zhu, and Kun Xu. Unified gas-kinetic wave-particle methods i: Continuum and rarefied gas flow. Journal of Computational Physics , 401:108977, 2020.
- [33] Xiaojian Yang, Wei Shyy, and Kun Xu. Unified gas-kinetic wave-particle method for gas-particle two-phase flow from dilute to dense solid particle limit. Physics of Fluids , 34(2):023312, 2022.
- [34] Chunpei Cai, Danny D Liu, and Kun Xu. One-dimensional multiple-temperature gas-kinetic bhatnagargross-krook scheme for shock wave computation. AIAA journal , 46(5):1054-1062, 2008.
- [35] Guiyu Cao, Hualin Liu, and Kun Xu. Physical modeling and numerical studies of three-dimensional non-equilibrium multi-temperature flows. Physics of Fluids , 30(12):126104, 2018.
- [36] Hualin Liu, Guiyu Cao, and Weifang Chen. Multiple-temperature gas-kinetic scheme for type iv shock/shock interaction. Communication in Computational Physics , page 853, 2021.
- [37] Marcos Castro, Bruno Costa, and Wai Sun Don. High order weighted essentially non-oscillatory weno-z schemes for hyperbolic conservation laws. Journal of Computational Physics , 230(5):1766-1792, 2011.
- [38] Gary N Coleman, John Kim, and Robert D Moser. A numerical study of turbulent supersonic isothermal-wall channel flow. Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 305:159-183, 1995.
- [39] Peng Zhang and Zhenhua Xia. Contribution of viscous stress work to wall heat flux in compressible turbulent channel flows. Physical Review E , 102(4):043107, 2020.
- [40] XiaoPing Chen, XinLiang Li, and ZuChao Zhu. Effects of dimensional wall temperature on velocitytemperature correlations in supersonic turbulent channel flow of thermally perfect gas. SCIENCE CHINA Physics, Mechanics &amp; Astronomy , 62(6):1-11, 2019.
- [41] John David Anderson. Hypersonic and high temperature gas dynamics . Aiaa, 2000.
- [42] Frank M White and Joseph Majdalani. Viscous fluid flow , volume 3. McGraw-Hill New York, 2006.

- [43] George Emanuel. Bulk viscosity of a dilute polyatomic gas. Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics , 2(12):2252-2254, 1990.
- [44] JG Parker. Rotational and vibrational relaxation in diatomic gases. The Physics of Fluids , 2(4):449462, 1959.
- [45] E Kustova, I Alekseev, and L Tan. Investigation of shock wave structure in co2 based on the continuum and dsmc approaches. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series , volume 1959, page 012032. IOP Publishing, 2021.
- [46] Zhao Wang, Hong Yan, Qibing Li, and Kun Xu. Unified gas-kinetic scheme for diatomic molecular flow with translational, rotational, and vibrational modes. Journal of Computational Physics , 350:237-259, 2017.
- [47] TF Morse. Kinetic model for gases with internal degrees of freedom. The physics of fluids , 7(2):159-169, 1964.
- [48] Henning Struchtrup. The bgk model for an ideal gas with an internal degree of freedom. Transport theory and statistical physics , 28(4):369-385, 1999.
- [49] Guiyu Cao. High-order gas-kinetic schemes for turbulence modeling and simulation . Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Hong Kong), 2021.
- [50] Eleuterio F Toro. Riemann solvers and numerical methods for fluid dynamics: a practical introduction . Springer Science &amp; Business Media, 2013.
- [51] Ming Yu, Chun-Xiao Xu, and Sergio Pirozzoli. Genuine compressibility effects in wall-bounded turbulence. Physical Review Fluids , 4(12):123402, 2019.
- [52] PG Huang and Gary N Coleman. Van driest transformation and compressible wall-bounded flows. AIAA journal , 32(10):2110-2113, 1994.
- [53] Kenneth J Franko and Sanjiva K Lele. Breakdown mechanisms and heat transfer overshoot in hypersonic zero pressure gradient boundary layers. Journal of Fluid Mechanics , 730:491-532, 2013.
- [54] Yipei Chen, Yajun Zhu, and Kun Xu. A three-dimensional unified gas-kinetic wave-particle solver for flow computation in all regimes. Physics of Fluids , 32(9):096108, 2020.