White paper on

## Quantum  Information  Science  and Technology for Nuclear Physics Input  into  U.S.  Long-Range  Planning, 2023

## Table of Contents

Executive Summary

Introduction

Quantum Sensing

How will quantum sensing advance NP?

What are the strategic priorities in the next 5-10 years?

What do we need in the next 5-10 years?

How does QS in NP impact other NSF and DOE areas?

Quantum Simulation and Computing

How will QC/QS advance NP?

What are the strategic goals to accelerate?

How does QC/QS in NP impact other NSF and DOE areas?

Workforce Development

Recommendations of the Quantum Information Science for U.S. Nuclear Physics Long Range Planning workshop

## Appendices

Appendix I: Workshop Participants

Appendix II: Community Science Presentations

Appendix III: Endorsement of support for NP-QIST in other LRP events

## Executive Summary

The  Department  of  Energy  (DOE),  the  National  Science  Foundation  (NSF),  the  National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), and other agencies are investing substantially in basic research in quantum information science and technology (QIST) and its applications, and this funding is anticipated to continue beyond the next decade. During the previous long-range planning (LRP) period, research at the interface of nuclear physics (NP) and QIST has  benefited  substantially  from  this  increased  investment.  It  has  resulted  in  important advances and benchmarking for future research and in growing interdisciplinary collaborations.

Advances  made  over  the  past  two  decades  in  atomic,  molecular,  optical,  and  material sciences, as well as cryogenic infrastructure, are accelerating the development of quantum sensors and quantum integrated systems, and in some cases are providing revolutionary approaches to  historically  inaccessible  problems.  Quantum  sensors are already  in  use  in certain  high-priority  NP  programs,  such  as  neutrinoless  doubleβ decay,  neutrino  mass measurements,  sterile-neutrino  searches,  precision  tests  of  fundamental  symmetries, permanent electric dipole moment searches, and as probes of rare and exotic processes. Their targeted use in NP continues to grow, and expanding research and development in this area, including through investments in facilities at national laboratories and universities, is essential.

With  a substantial increase in computing  capability enabled  by superposition  and entanglement, quantum computing and quantum simulation have the potential to provide capabilities that are unique, and that far exceed those possible with classical computation alone in addressing specific challenges in NP. These range from properties of nuclei and dense  matter  to  dynamics  of  non-equilibrium  strongly-interacting  matter  or  neutrino gasses. Furthermore, quantum-information tools are beginning to guide the design of more efficient classical NP simulations, and quantum entanglement is now being investigated as a new guiding principle in our understanding of NP phenomena and the Standard Model. The community  will  substantially  benefit  from  strengthening  its  efforts  in  the  co-design  of quantum-simulation devices for the NP program, better engaging with the DOE Quantum Testbed Program, and further developing reliable access to forefront quantum hardware, including industry platforms and other testbeds at national laboratories and universities. Programs and partnerships that enable collaborations across NP in QIST are increasingly valuable.

The NP community's understanding of the interactions between particles and matter serves as  an  asset  in  the  development  of  quantum  computers  and  quantum  sensors,  and  of  a sustainable  quantum  workforce.  For  exam ple,  nuclear  physicists'  expertise  in  shielding against cosmic rays and in the development of radio-pure materials for rare-event searches, is playing an important role in increasing the coherence times of next-generation qubits for a range of computing and sensing applications. Likewise, the co-design of physics-informed hardware and hardware-aware algorithms for NP systems is leading to new and improved capabilities and efficiencies for quantum simulations in NP and other domain sciences. We encourage strengthening such cross-disciplinary activities and collaborations between the NP and QIST communities.

A diverse and sustainable quantum-ready workforce is a necessity for both the NP and QIST communities. Owing to its broad application space, QIST attracts science talent into NP from a variety of backgrounds. This talent is then empowered by acquiring skills at the nexus of emerging quantum technology and computing trends in NP research. Recruiting and training this  new  generation  of  researchers  will  accelerate  the  development  and  integration  of quantum technologies in NP research, and propel growth and diversity in the NP workforce.

The Quantum  Information  Science  for  US  Nuclear  Physics  Long  Range  Planning -2023 workshop, therefore, unanimously endorses the following two recommendations.

Solving grand challenges in Nuclear Physics (NP) requires the development  of fundamentally new tools for simulation and sensing. U.S. Nuclear Science is in an early stage of benefiting from and contributing to the advancement of Quantum Information Science and Technology (QIST). To capitalize on this progress, we recommend:

- Increasing support for driving advances at the interface of NP and QIST to uniquely address Nuclear Science objectives.

This support will advance the development of quantum sensor technology for NP; enhance  the  (co-)development,  integration,  and  application  of  quantum-based simulation  and  computation  hardware and  techniques  for  NP;  grow  cross-cutting research and partnerships that leverage NP expertise to accelerate advances in QIST (including access to forefront hardware and fabrication); and expand the training of, and  robust  professional  pathways  for,  a  diverse  and  inclusive  quantum-ready workforce for NP, with cross-disciplinary collaborations in QIST.

- Establishing  an  ' NP  Quantum  Connection '  that  will  realize  the  transformational potential of QIST in addressing NP grand challenges.

This national initiative will enable a community-wide integration of quantum sensing and simulation in NP research; facilitate sharing of resources and expertise among NP,  interagency  programs,  and  the  national  and  international  QIST  community; support bridge junior faculty and scientist positions, postdoctoral fellowships, and graduate and undergraduate students; and strengthen ties with the QIST community, technology companies, and other domain sciences.

## Introduction

Quantum information science and technology (QIST) uses the fundamental laws of nature to detect  and  acquire,  manipulate,  transmit  and  store  information  in  ways  that  exceed  the capabilities  of  classical  physics.  Entanglement  and  coherence,  which  are  essentially quantum, are at the heart of these new capabilities. The range of possible applications of QIST is significant, including advancing nuclear-physics (NP) research and technology. The systems  and  environments  relevant  to  NP  research  range  from  high-density,  nonequilibrium strongly-interacting many-body systems, to technology that is sensitive to the most-weakly interacting particles. The use of entanglement and coherence in developing and understanding these systems is now at the forefront of NP research, development, and technology. Concurrently, rapid advances in QIST during the past two decades suggests that revolutionary advances in NP experiment, computing, and theory may be possible in the near future.  Beyond  understanding  and  utilizing  coherence  and  entanglement  in  NP  systems, quantum sensing and quantum simulation are two main areas in which mutually beneficial advances to NP and QIST are expected.

QIST was not considered in  depth  during  the  previous  long-range  planning activity,  but emerged as being of significance to NP during the subsequent period. Since then, there have been a number of high-profile developments in QIST, both scientifically and organizationally. In particular, the National Quantum Initiative (NQI) Centers have been established, and the agencies are providing significant funding for QIST and related research within the domain sciences. Quantum computers have begun to be accessible to NP researchers via the cloud, through  collaborations with technology  companies,  DOE  testbeds,  NQI  centers,  or collaborations with colleagues at universities and national laboratories. Collaborations have been established,  through  grassroots  efforts  or  via  funded  proposals,  that  have  brought together QIST and NP researchers to develop quantum sensors, improve qubits, conceive quantum algorithms, and co-design aspects of quantum computers.

A vision for the potential benefits of QIST for NP and, conversely, the potential impact of the NP knowledgebase on QIST, has been captured in earlier whitepapers [1,2] and the 2019 NSAC Subcommittee report on Quantum Information Science [3]. In preparation for the 2023 NSAC Long Range Plan (LRP), members of the Nuclear Science community gathered to discuss the current state of, and plans for further leveraging opportunities in, QIST in NP research at the Quantum Information Science for U.S. Nuclear Physics Long Range Planning workshop  [4],  held  in  Santa  Fe,  New  Mexico  on  January  31 -Feb  1,  2023.  The  workshop, jointly-sponsored  by  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  (LANL)  and  the  InQubator  for Quantum Simulation (IQuS), included 45 in-person participants and 53 remote attendees. The outcome of the workshop identified strategic plans and requirements for the next 5-10 years to advance quantum sensing and quantum simulations within NP, and to develop a diverse quantum-ready  workforce. The plans include resolutions endorsed by the participants to address the compelling scientific opportunities at the intersections of NP and QIST. These endorsements are aligned with similar affirmations by the LRP Computational Nuclear Physics and AI/ML Workshop, the Nuclear Structure, Reactions, and Astrophysics LRP Town Hall, and the Fundamental Symmetries, Neutrons, and Neutrinos LRP Town Hall communities, see Appendix III.

While  there  has  been  substantial  progress  on  integrating  advances  in  QIST  in  NP  as evidenced in the following, the efforts, both for sensing and for simulation, are often subcritical.  Part  of  the  success  of  the  whitepaper  workshop  has  been  to  make  the  broader community  aware  of  this  progress.  We  propose  to  formalize  and  enhance  sharing  of developments and thereby better link efforts at different institutions through the proposed "NP Quantum Connection". This organization would be able to play a particularly important role in workforce development.

During  breakout  discussion  sessions  on  quantum  sensing  and  quantum  computing  and simulation, and with a focus on multidisciplinary connections and workforce development, workshop participants provided valuable input on four main questions:

- How will quantum sensing and simulation advance NP?
- What are the strategic goals to accelerate?
- What do we need in the next 5-10 years to achieve those goals?
- How does quantum sensing and simulation in NP impact other NSF and DOE areas?

This whitepaper summarizes the conclusions reached during these community discussions, and provides further context and explanation for the Recommendations.

## Quantum Sensing

Quantum sensors have many applications, including in imaging, communication, medicine, deep-space exploration, national security, and the domain sciences. Their integration into NP applications importantly advances NP research, and also accelerates the transfer of such quantum technologies into the supply chain. Further, expertise in the NP community helps drive forward the development of quantum sensors and other quantum devices.

## How will quantum sensing advance NP?

In  many instances, quantum-enabled sensors are already being deployed in high priority nuclear physics initiatives. These technologies can enhance the reach of a myriad of different types of probes: from the measurement of non-zero neutrino masses, to searches for beyond Standard Model physics via light and heavy sterile neutrino states, coherent neutrino nuclear scattering, precision measurements of nuclearβ decay and its energy decay spectrum, dark photons, and precision tests of the CKM matrix unitarity.

Currently  deployed  technologies  involve  instruments  sensitive  to  low  energy  transitions, such as superconducting tunnel junctions (STJs) and transition-edge sensors (TESs). Looking forward, entanglement in many-body systems can be used as a tool to reduce fluctuations below the standard quantum limit (SQL). Such a reduction of fluctuations can be realized with so-called squeezed states. For atomic sensors, a significant boost to the sensitivity of the phase sensor is possible when using entangled states.

Superconducting nanowire particle detectors are being developed for NP applications, in particular, for the Electron Ion Collider (EIC) and for experiments at Jefferson Lab. Building on  the  existing  superconducting  nanowire  single  photon  detector  (SNSPDs)  technology, SNSPDs can now operate in magnetic fields above 5 T, at high rates, and with nearly zero dark count rate. The detection occurs through the excitation of a pair of quasi-electrons which rapidly scatter, generating a concentration of quasi-particles high enough to suppress the superconducting state across the width of the superconductor. This hot-spot formation process proceeds rapidly and is one of the fastest and most sensitive means of detecting individual quantum excitations. Ongoing research aims to leverage these characteristics for a broader range of unconventional applications for SNSPDs from low-energy ion detectors to high-energy particle tracking. Certain rare nuclei possess novel properties and are poised to benefit, and benefit from, quantum techniques in the future. These "nuclear sensors" have the potential to achieve unprecedented  precision  in  searches  for  Beyond  Standard  Model  (BSM)  physics  and metrology.  Two  concrete  examples  are  searches  for  electric  dipole  moments  (EDMs)  in octupole-deformed nuclei and nuclear clocks based on low-energy isomer levels. Future improvements to measurement precision will  likely  employ  quantum  techniques  such  as squeezing, entanglement, or coherent molecule assembly to achieve the ultimate potential sensitivity to BSM physics. Significant sensing tasks in NP rely on an array of sensors working collectively. Generating entangled  states  in  distributed  systems  is,  however,  challenging.  A  novel  approach  uses variational  quantum  circuits  to  tailor  the  entangled  states  to  a  configuration  that  can maximize measurement sensitivity. Such circuits have been extensively explored in quantum machine learning as quantum neural networks for optimization and inference applications, but  they  have,  to  date,  rarely  been  used  in  sensing  settings.  In  NP,  the  adoption  of variationally-enhanced, distributed quantum sensing could significantly boost the sensitivity of axion searches, and in measurements of the neutrino mass via β -decay using cyclotron radiation emission spectroscopy (CRES).

## What are the strategic priorities in the next 5-10 years?

To maximize the investments made in NP to tackle the grand challenge goals defined in the field  with  the  added  capabilities  of  quantum  sensing,  we  recommend  prioritizing  the following activities: Leverage Existing Quantum 1.0 Technologies to Full Advantage. Several existing technologies like transition edge sensors and superconducting tunnel junctions (informally referred to as 'Quantum 1.0') are already in use in a number of NP experiments. However, there are lik ely many high impact applications that have not yet been realized. A high priority is to create an environment  where  the  full  application  range  of  Quantum  1.0  devices  can  be  explored. Among the many limiting factors that have prevented such exploration up to now is the short supply of such sensors. The capability to produce them exists at just a few institutions and private vendors, a difficulty that is closely connected to the limited quantum workforce. The resulting bottleneck limits individual research g roups' ability to acquire devices for R&amp;D. The democratization  of  Quantum  1.0  device  access,  e.g.,  by  establishing  more  fabrication capability at national laboratories and universities (that can seed private enterprises) will be required  to  realize  the  full  potential  of  Quantum  1.0  sensors  for  NP  experiments.  To  be consistent with our goals of inclusivity, these new capabilities should be available to all in the US NP community. Coordinated Interagency Development of Quantum 2.0 Technologies. 'Quantum 2.0' sensors -i.e., sensors that take advantage of entanglement and/or coherence to enhance sensitivity to a particular phenomenon -will lead to breakthroughs in NP physics experiments. We have already seen the use of squeezed states to improve sensitivity in searches for axions and gravitational waves. Given the infancy of Quantum 2.0 within NP, broad, blue-sky ideas need to be supported. This development of Quantum 2.0 technologies would be greatly enhanced by  cooperation  with  agencies  where  there  is  mutual  interest -for  example,  HEP  and  the NNSA's Office of Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation (NA22) are obvious partners. Leverage  NP  expertise  to  help  the  QIST  community  go  beyond  Noisy  Intermediate  Scale Quantum (NISQ) technology that limits solid state devices. The impact of ionizing radiation on superconducting qubit decoherence was first measured by a cross-disciplinary collaboration  of  NP  researchers  and  QIST  experts.  The  NP  community  should  play  a significant role in reducing the impact of ionizing radiation by employing NP techniques such as  device  design,  radiation  transport  modeling,  shielding,  and  low  radioactivity  materials sourcing and production. The NP  community  should  seek  more  opportunities for collaboration  with  the  QIST  community  where  NP  expertise  can  be  brought  to  bear  on improving quantum technology.

## What do we need in the next 5-10 years?

The next decade offers a unique opportunity to realize the priorities outlined above. Below are ways in which these priorities can be achieved. Facilitate  Access  to  Resources,  Technology  and  Expertise. R&amp;D  to  develop  new  quantum sensors or to effectively deploy sensors on experiments is restricted by the limited number of institutions and vendors able to produce  these devices.  NP  should  encourage commercialization and large-scale production of mature Quantum 1.0 sensor technologies (e.g.,  STJs,  TESs,  MKIDs)  and  associated  readout  hardware  (e.g.,  SQUIDs,  JPAs,  TWPAs). Within the proposed NP Quantum Connection initiative , a foundry, or network of facilities, could be established to democratize development of improved Quantum 2.0 sensors, and provide expert assistance for device design to effectively utilize them. Continue  to  Address  Basic  Problems  Through  Dedicated  R&amp;D. There  are  several  known limitations of Quantum 1.0 sensors that can be addressed in the next few years. In general, faster  sensor  response  times,  higher  channel  counts,  and  more  effective  multiplexing (readout of many sensors on a single line) are needed. In most cases there is also a need to better understand the physics behind device operation. For example, the processes by which high  energy  (keV  and  above)  radiation  transfers  its  energy  to  broken  Cooper  pairs  in  a superconducting sensor is not understood in detail. This could be addressed by a program of modeling and experimentation. NP would benefit from a program specifically supporting detector  development,  such  as  HEP's  Advance  Detector  R&amp;D.  Some  promising  quantum sensing technologies are not currently associated with any NP experiment, making them unnatural residents of NP's research ecosystem. A dedicated program of quantum sensor R&amp;D  would  accelerate  development  and  lead  to  new  ideas  on  how  to  engage  quantum sensors in the solutions of NP's core science missions.

Secure the Rare Isotope Supply. In some cases, atoms of rare isotopes are used as quantum sensors  (and  potentially  quantum  memories).  Careful  planning  is  required  to  maintain  a stable  and  predictable  supply  of  these  isotopes,  and  partnership  with  the  DOE  Isotope Program is advised.

## How does QS in NP impact other NSF and DOE areas?

Advances  outlined  above  in  NP  have  potential  benefits  for  other  science  programs undertaken in the US. Below we list a few of such cases. Nonproliferation  Applications. Precise  isotopic  assays  of  nuclear  materials  can  provide information  on  material  source  and  history.  Obtaining  this  information  via  detected radiation, however, is challenging due to the close proximity and complexity of relevant lines, orders of magnitude variation in line intensity, and in cases, limited or incomplete nuclear data. Proof of principle quantum sensors based on x-ray and gamma-ray spectrometers have already demonstrated the capability to isolate weak gammas lines, such as those from 242 Pu, that cannot be separated using conventional technology. For the first time, sensor arrays of this  type  allow  non-destructive  assay  of  safeguards-relevant  samples  without  special preparation. Dark Matter. Over the past 10 years the dark matter direct detection community has focused on low-mass fermionic particle candidates with masses much below the GeV scale. Due to the low relative velocity in the galactic dark matter halo, the energies imparted in detector targets is on the scale of meV. As such, there has been much interest in the dark matter community  in  ultra-low  threshold  precision  detectors.  This  community  would  benefit greatly from the development of quantum sensors for NP applications. This is similar to the logic  that  motivates  Quantum  1.0  sensors  in  BSM  searches  in  very  low-recoil  energy detection for coherent neutrino-nucleus scattering. High-channel-count Multiplexing. Cryogenic hardware used to read out quantum sensors, including  in  NP  experiments,  has  largely  converged  on  superconducting  microwave resonators and/or SQUIDs. The need to read out large quantum sensor arrays has driven the  development  of  novel  SQUID/resonator  readout  architectures  with  progressively increasing multiplexing factors. These readout technologies may have potential uses outside of quantum sensing, e.g., the readout of future large quantum computing qubit arrays. Large  Sensor  Arrays  for  Astronomy .  High-pixel  count,  low-threshold  sensor  arrays  with sensitivity to single THz photons are needed for next generation astrophysical instruments to perform high red-shift surveys to study stellar and galactic formation. Such detectors will rely  on  the  same  type  of  readout  and  multiplexing  solutions  that  will  be  useful  in  NP applications as discussed above. Medical  Physics. Quantum  sensing  will  improve  several  aspects  of  detection  in  medical physics. Nuclear data applications have been discussed above -high resolution, low-energy, low-threshold detectors can support data on isotopes that are promising for new medical diagnostics and therapies (e.g., cancer therapy  with Auger-emitting  isotopes). It has also been  shown  that  quantum  imaging  can  improve  images  obtained  by  positron  emission tomography  (PET)  by  taking  advantage  of  the  entanglement  correlation  between  e+/eannihilation photons to beat statistical noise limits.

## Sidebar: Radiation and Quantum Computing

In  order  to  make  quantum  computing  a  viable  and  usable  technology,  the  underlying  units  of computation, qubits, must simultaneously exhibit high fidelity and long coherence times. Over the past two decades, advances in device design, fabrication, and materials have increased coherence times by six  orders  of  magnitude.  Nonetheless,  to  realize  the  full  promise  of  quantum  computing,  far  longer coherence  times  will  be  needed  to  achieve  the  operational  fidelity  required  for  fault-tolerant computation.  Coherence  for  superconducting  qubits  can  be  spoiled  by  an  excess  density  of  quasiparticles,  and  quasi-particle  densities  far  exceed  what  is  naively  expected  from  thermal  equilibrium. Recent measurements made by several groups have shown that one creeping contribution to quasiparticle poisoning appears due to ionizing radiation stemming from external gamma radiation, cosmic rays,  and  radiogenic  contamination  of  materials  surrounding  the  qubit.  This  source  of  quasi-particle poisoning is particularly worrisome for QIS applications, since ionizing radiation appears to affect multiple qubits simultaneously. Since quantum error correction (QEC) schemes -necessary for scaling quantum computing -rely on qubits to exhibit random, uncorrelated errors, correlated error sources would render such schemes ineffective. Ionizing radiation has been deemed "catastrophic" because of its ability to potentially circumvent traditional QEC algorithms.

Figure 1. Layout and simulation of a 4-qubit chip used to investigate the effect of correlated error sources including cosmic rays and background radiation. In the simulation on the right, muons are denoted by blue tracks, photons by red [Nature 594 (2021) 369]. (Image reproduced with permission of the authors. )

<!-- image -->

A number of techniques are being devised so as to reduce the impact of radiation. These include spatially distributed error correction schemes, material engineering to promote phonon down-conversion, and developing a more comprehensive understanding of the underlying microscopic physics that leads to quasiparticle  poisoning.  NP's  historic  expertise  in  low  radioactivity  design,  including  sourcing  and producing materials with low levels of intrinsic radioactivity, can directly help here to reduce the impact of ionizing radiation on qubits. Hybrid devices combining qubits and classical/Quantum 1.0 sensors on a single chip will enable identification of likely quasiparticle poisoning and rejecting calculations in which they occur. This sensor-assisted quantum fault mitigation technique is complementary to quantum error correction (QEC) and, crucially, can identify correlated errors that defeat QEC algorithms. In addition, NP's unique experience in operating sensitive experiments at underground facilities may provide an ideal testbed to test high fidelity qubit systems in low radioactivity environments.

## Sidebar: Thermal Kinetic Inductance Detectors

Studies of low energy nuclear physics processes have long played a central role in our efforts to better understand the natural world and future experiments are well positioned to help answer some of the most fundamental of questions: why is there more matter than antimatter in the universe and what are the unseen forces that disappeared as the universe expanded and cooled? The scarcity of new physics at colliders has increased the importance of exploring new and complementary routes to answering these questions. Precision measurements in beta decay are particularly compelling as they can be sensitive to BSM physics at high mass scales, in some cases well beyond that of next generation accelerators. To fully realize this potential, significant increases in precision must be supported through the exploration and application of paradigm shifting technologies.

Figure  2.  Dr.  Mae  Scott  developing  a  low-temperature  test-stand  for  testing  of  CP-TKIDs  with  beta sources (Image reproduced with permission from Mae Scott.)

<!-- image -->

Particle detection for low energy nuclear physics experiments relies heavily on technologies that are, in essence,  decades  old  and  are  reaching  fundamental  limits  in  performance.  Recently,  advances  in quantum science and technology have benefited precision physics measurements across a variety of fields, from the search for low mass dark matter to background limited astronomy. Detection of particles from nuclear physics processes can also take advantage of these advances. A compelling example is the charged-particle  thermal  kinetic  inductance  detector  (CP-TKID),  a  new  detection  paradigm  which combines a conventional thermal calorimeter with a superconducting microwave resonator [Scott2022]. In this type of device, the kinetic inductance of the superconducting resonator is used to accurately measure the change in temperature of a thermally-isolated island due to energy deposited by a charged particle. CP-TKIDs are far more promising than other quantum sensors for scaling to the high-multiplicity large-area detector arrays needed for both full kinematic reconstruction and the low-density sources of some nuclear physics experiments. In addition, calculations suggest that a 10x improvement in energy resolution over existing technology can be achieved, allowing detection of particles with energies well below 1 MeV. Furthermore, previously unexplored CP-TKID topologies may allow for true backscatter suppression supporting precision spectrum and absolute rate measurements.

## Quantum Simulation and Computing

Together with theory and experiment, simulation and computing is a third pillar of Nuclear Science. Classical high-performance computing (HPC) continues to be essential in advancing the NP research program, and NP problems contribute to driving continued expansion of HPC capabilities. The nuclear-theory community has been taking significant steps over the past decade to provide accurate predictions in the realm of many-body NP starting from the underlying ab initio theories, according to the roadmap shown in Fig. 1. Unfortunately, the computational resources required to address such problems grow exponentially with the number of quantum-mechanical degrees of freedom in the system (e.g., nucleons in ab initio nuclear many-body calculations). Not only that, Monte Carlo importance-sampling

Figure 3. A roadmap for quantum computing and simulation in NP research. (Image reproduced with permission from Zohreh Davoudi.)

<!-- image -->

techniques  suffer  from  sign  problems  (or  closely-related  signal-to-noise  degradation)  in systems with non-zero fermionic densities and in studies of (real-time) dynamics.

Therefore, important problems in NP will remain beyond the capabilities of classical HPC. Quantum computing (QC) and quantum simulation (QS) hold the promise for exponential gains to make the required leap in NP many-body problems. Large Hilbert spaces can be encoded  exponentially  more  compactly  in  (ideal)  qubits  or  other  quantum-informationprocessing units,  and quantum  superposition  and  entanglement  allow  for  efficient parallelization  of  the  algorithms  that  process  encoded  many-body  wavefunctions.  In  the following, we elaborate on the NP problems that will likely see the largest benefit from QC and QS, how QC and QS are expected to provide such benefits, what the requirements are, and  how  the  advances  made  in  this  endeavor  may  impact  other  areas  of  science  and technology.

## How will QC and QS advance NP?

Addressing grand computational problems in NP with QC and QS. It is expected that QC and QS will uniquely provide predictive capabilities for a range of problems in NP. These include:

- elucidating the phases and phase transitions of strongly-interacting matter governed by QCD, and properties of dense matter in, for example, the interior of neutron stars,
- studying non-equilibrium phenomena such as evolution of matter created in heavyion collisions or after the Big Bang, transport phenomena, thermalization dynamics, fragmentation, and hadronization,
- elucidating energy transfer mechanisms in supernovae explosions and neutron-star mergers  by simulating coherent neutrino oscillations in dense astrophysical environments,
- constraining electroweak response functions of nucleons and nuclei of relevance to nuclear  astrophysics,  to  searches  for  violation  of  fundamental  symmetries  of  the Standard Model, and to the EIC,
- studying low-energy nuclear reactions and fission processes, important for the study of nuclear matter at the limits of stability, and for understanding the formation and role of nuclei in the universe,

and more. The pace and form of hardware and algorithmic advances will determine when the community will realistically witness the ultimate quantitative impact of QC and QS in these problems.

Enhancing classical-computational NP with quantum-information tools. Ideas and strategies originally  rooted  in  QIST  are  leading  to  new  developments  in  classical  algorithms.  An example is new classical solutions to sign problems informed by QIST principles. In another example, entanglement can be realized as an organizing principle in identifying the most efficient  Hamiltonian  frameworks  and  basis  considerations  in ab  initio nuclear  structure calculations,  or  in  QCD  fragmentation  algorithms -just  as  measures  of  entanglement  are used in the development and validation of tensor-network methods in quantum many-body physics.

Gaining new insights through the lens of entanglement and quantum information. The drive to  cast  NP  computational  problems  in  the  framework of  QC  and  QS  in  recent  years  has inspired new efforts in considering  entanglement as a probe of nuclear phenomenology, underlying  interactions,  and  emergent  symmetries.  For  example,  spin-flavor  and  other larger 'accidental' symmetries in low -energy nucleon-nucleon and baryon-baryon interactions  have  been  found  to  be  consistent  with  entanglement  suppression.  In  deep inelastic scattering, parton distribution functions are proposed as a probe of entanglement entropy  in  the  hadrons.  In  particle  colliders,  the  entanglement  among  pairs  of  emitted hadron-antihadrons can probe mechanisms of fragmentation and hadronization after the collision.  In non-equilibrium evolution of quantum many-body systems and lattice gauge theories, the entanglement spectrum reveals stages of thermalization, or lack thereof. Last but not least, studies on defining, probing, and harnessing entanglement in quantum fields may lead to deeper insights into the underlying interactions of the Standard Model, and to the  design  of  new  distributed  quantum-sensing  networks  in  search  of  new  fields  and interactions in nature. The continuation of such studies will yield early demonstrations of the transformational impact of QIST in NP even before quantum advantages in QC and QS are obtained.

## What are the strategic goals to accelerate?

Identifying  a  roadmap  and  laying  the  theoretical  and  algorithmic  groundwork. The  NP community  is  establishing  a  roadmap  that  identifies  strategic  NP  problems  suitable  for quantum  simulation,  including  an  improved  understanding  of  complexity  classes  of problems of interest, and how physics insights and classical-computational input may be optimally  included.  The  community  continues  to  develop  and  improve  algorithms  that translate the NP computational problem to the language of quantum hardware, and is at the early stages of establishing rigorous error bounds informed by properties of the physical system,  underlying  symmetries,  and  empirical  investigations  for  each  target  quantity. Furthermore, efficient Hamiltonian frameworks and state representations consistent with underlying symmetries are being examined, and systematic uncertainties associated with Hilbert-space truncations, simulation-time digitization, and other sources of theoretical and algorithmic  error,  are  being  quantified.  This  groundwork  is  essential  in  leveraging  both NISQ-era and future fault-tolerant quantum computing systems for NP. Leveraging NISQ quantum technologies. Implementing small instances of NP problems on current NISQ devices is allowing the community to gain quantum-simulation experience, understand  the  limitations  of  current  and  near-term  hardware,  and  improve  algorithms. Examples relevant  to  the  quantum  simulation  of  gauge  field  theories  are  prototype  field theories in lower 1+1 and 2+1 dimensions, and in simpler non-equilibrium quench scenarios that are providing new opportunities for probing non-equilibrium physics of gauge theories, thermalization mechanisms, and the role of entanglement, and may inspire  new experimental  probes  for  the  high-energy  particle-collision  experiments.  Similarly,  lowdimensional  models  of  linear  response  functions,  scattering,  and  state  preparation  are forging  the  path  to  efficient  quantum  simulations  of  nuclear  structure  and  low-energy nuclear dynamics. Another impact of NISQ simulations is in verification, or revealing the shortcomings, of classically-computed predictions in computationally-hard NP problems. For  example,  NISQ-era  simulations  are  shedding  light  on  the  importance  of  quantum coherence  and  entanglement  in  neutrino  gasses  even  in  smaller  model  systems,  hence probing mean-field and other semi-classical approximations. Technology co-design for NP applications, strengthening cross-disciplinary collaborations, and leveraging  quantum  testbeds. The  standard  paradigm  of  universal  gate-based  quantum computing may not be the optimal framework for nearer term advances, given that a broader set  of  tools  in  quantum  simulators  are  increasingly  available.  For  example,  local  multidimensional  Hilbert  spaces  and  multi-body  interactions,  the  presence  of  dynamical fermionic and bosonic modes, and the relevance of higher spatial dimensions, are common features  required  for  many  NP  simulations.  Such  features  can  be  mapped  to  similar properties in a range of quantum architectures, including trapped ions, cold atoms in optical lattices, Rydberg arrays controlled by optical tweezers, superconducting circuits in optical cavities, artificial lattices of dopants in semiconductors, and many more. Conversely, QIST will benefit from co-design opportunities arising from pursuing NP goals, by developing NPspecific  quantum-simulation  platforms  and  algorithms,  including  benchmarking  and verification, which may inform future technology developments. For example, custom qubit connectivity and custom gates, modular and distributed systems suited to locality patterns of  physical  interactions,  novel  qubits  and  resonator  hardware,  and  noise-aware  errormitigation  techniques  can  be  co-developed  and  tested  for  NP  applications.  Similarly, hardware-aware and problem-informed custom gates can be used in analog simulations, or efficiently  interweaved  with  standard  digital  gates  in  hybrid  digital-analog  quantum computations, to reduce circuit depth and mitigate the impact of decoherence and noise. Such  co-design  activities  can  only  be  pursued  through  collaborations  with  technology partners in academia, government sector, and industry, as well as low-level control access to  quantum hardware. For example, national DOE testbeds are established to provide an avenue  for  connecting  domain  scientists  with  applications  to  hardware  developers,  and nuclear physicists are leveraging these resources to advance near-term NP simulations. Expediting  development  of  classical-quantum  approaches  and  leveraging  HPC  capabilities. Certain tasks in simulation remain inefficient even for quantum computers and simulators. For example, ground-state preparation for a class of quantum many-body Hamiltonians is known to be QMA-complete. Similarly, preparing thermal (mixed) states is not a natural task in a quantum computer. On the other hand, classical-computational methods in NP have been  successful  in  generating  good  approximations  to  ground-state  wavefunctions  of certain nuclei, or constrain the structure of hadrons and nuclei probed in lattice QCD, which could  be  used  to  inform  and  expedite  quantum  algorithms  for  state  preparation.  Hybrid classical-quantum  algorithms  such  as  variational  quantum  eigensolvers  (VQE),  that  have been  advanced  for  quantum-chemistry  applications,  have  the  promise  of  facilitating spectroscopy  and  state-preparation  tasks  in  NP.  Co-processing  algorithms  exploiting quantum and classical computers to enact the coordinated propagation of different (e.g., spatial and spin) components of the Hilbert space will play an important role in realizing noise-resilient simulations of nuclear dynamics in the near term. Last but not least, moving further  into  the  NISQ  era  and  beyond,  measurement  tasks  on  quantum  computers  will become increasingly complex, as the number of qubits increases, and may require storing and processing large amounts of data that will only be plausible with HPC resources.

## What do we need in the next 5-10 years?

Continued, reliable,  and  timely  support  of  a  growing  workforce  and  of  activities. While  the prospect of QC and QS for NP was not considered in the last LRP process, the extent of activities and the number of researchers in this area have grown significantly. This is in part due  to  the  rapid  advancement  of  quantum  techniques  and  technologies,  increased awareness among domain scientists about the potential of QC and QS in breaking barriers in  computationally  intractable  problems,  and  increased  federal  support  and  new  crosscutting collaborations enabled by the National Quantum Initiative Act. The NP community has  produced  results  that  demonstrate  how  quantum-simulation  technologies  can  be leveraged for a range of problems. However, we are in the early stages of building a robust program  of  long-term  impact.  The  momentum  generated  in  recent  years  needs  to  be maintained,  the  cross-disciplinary  connections  and  university,  government  and  industry partnerships that have been built need to be sustained, and robust job opportunities should be provided to the growing workforce that is trained in the NP-QIST intersection. Broad  access  to  state-of-the-art  quantum  computers  and  quantum  simulators. As  with classical  computing,  timely  and  sustained  access  to  forefront  computing  hardware  and software  is  key  in  enabling  grand  scientific  discoveries.  NP  physicists  have  been  gaining access  to  quantum-computing  devices,  from  cloud  access,  to  hub  access  at  select universities  and  national  labs,  to  DOE  quantum  testbeds,  to  direct  collaborations  with individuals at the hardware companies, or with experimentalists with quantum platforms at the universities. As a result, access to forefront quantum computers and simulators has not been uniform among the members of the community. Broad, reliable access to forefront quantum  and  classical  computing  systems  and  their  support  teams  will  be  essential  for advancing  NP  objectives.  Low-level  control  access  to  quantum  testbeds  is  particularly desirable to accelerate progress in the co-design of quantum NP algorithms and hardware. Active  participation  in  algorithmic  and  hardware  co-design. As  with  classical  computing, there is likely no single quantum-hardware architecture, and no single universal computing framework,  for  quantum-simulation  developments.  It  will  be  a  missed  opportunity  for nuclear scientists to limit their focus to only commercially available qubit and gate-based systems on the market that will likely not be optimized for NP problems. Engagement with hardware developers in academia, government labs, and industry will be the key to expedite problem-specific quantum-computational solutions in NP. This will allow the community to map  the  problems  to  the  most  suitable  hardware,  and  to  identify  the  most  suitable computing mode, from digital to hybrid analog-digital to analog settings.

## How does QC and QS in NP impact other NSF and DOE areas?

Cross-disciplinary  connections  with  High-Energy  Physics,  Astrophysics,  and  Cosmology. Quantum simulation has the potential to provide computationally-feasible approaches to many important questions spanning collider physics, neutrino (astro)physics, cosmology and early-universe  physics,  and  quantum  gravity.  Simulating  systems  of  relevance  to  these programs often involve quantum field theories at their core, in the form of Standard Model theories and their effective descriptions, or beyond the Standard Model theories including conformal field theories. Furthermore, accurate NP simulations are essential for experiments that use atomic nuclei for discovering new particles and interactions, and for predicting properties of neutron stars and evolution of dense astrophysical environments. As a result, many of the simulation frameworks developed in NP will have a large overlap with developments  in  those  fields,  and  many  of  the  NP  solutions  to  be  enabled  by  quantum computing  will  have  a  direct  impact  on  High-Energy  Physics  (HEP),  Astrophysics,  and Cosmology. As with  the  classical-computing  era,  close  collaboration among NP  and  HEP physicists and astrophysicists are anticipated in the quantum-computing era. Cross-disciplinary  connections  with  Condensed  Matter  Physics. Condensed  Matter  (CM) studies  involve  strongly-coupled  spin,  fermion,  and  boson  systems,  often  in  lower dimensions,  as  well  as  phenomena  such  as  (anomalous  and  chiral)  transport,  topological phases, superfluidity, and superconductivity. Quantum field theories can emerge as effective low-energy descriptions in such phenomena. For example, topologically ordered states with long range entanglement, relevant for fractional quantum Hall effect and for fault-tolerant topological quantum computation, can be effectively described by lattice gauge theories. Therefore, quantum-simulation tools for gauge theories within NP research can be used in CM research  and  vice  versa.  An  example  of  the  interplay  between  the  two  areas  is  the development of  Tensor  Networks  as  an  efficient  Hamiltonian  simulation  method  for  CM systems with bounded entanglement--a method that was quickly adopted and improved for Hamiltonian simulations of low-dimensional lattice gauge theories in NP and HEP. Cross-disciplinary connections with Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics. Parallels between multi-nucleon systems and atomic systems close to unitarity have been exploited by both the  NP  and  Atomic,  Molecular,  and  Optical  Physics  (AMO)  communities,  for  example,  in exploring the role of Efimov states in three-body systems with short-range interactions and in  atomic  gasses.  Unitary  atomic  fermion  systems  at  large  densities  pose  severe  sign problems  for  classical  computing,  and  development  of  quantum  algorithms  for  these systems, in NP and AMO, will benefit both communities. Moreover, the AMO community has driven the development of analog and digital quantum-simulation platforms that are being explored in the NP community, and the NP requirements may inform the co-design of nextgeneration AMO simulation and computing hardware . Cross-disciplinary connections with Quantum Chemistry. Problems in the realm of quantum chemistry and biochemistry are similar to nuclear many-body problems in that they entail describing  properties  of  non-relativistic  many-fermion  systems,  through  finding  (often approximate) solutions to the corresponding Schrödinger equation. This similarity has led to transfer of many classical-computational tools between the two communities over the years, from  Hartree-Fock  to  post-Hartree-Fock  methods,  including  many-body  perturbation theory and coupled-cluster theory. Such cross-disciplinary developments have continued in the quantum-computing era, and will likely grow in the coming years. For example, quantum algorithms for state preparation and spectroscopy using variational quantum eigensolvers with a coupled-cluster ansatz have been commonly explored within both communities. Cross-disciplinary connections with Advanced Scientific Computing Research. The Advanced Scientific  Computing  Research  (ASCR)  program  within  the  DOE  supports  discovering, developing,  and  deploying  computational  and  networking  capability  to  analyze,  model, simulate, and predict complex phenomena of importance to a range of scientific disciplines. It has had a significant role in enabling state-of-the-art HPC in NP t hrough access to DOE's leadership-class facilities, new computing architectures and algorithms, and HPC expertise at National Laboratories. As the ASCR program embarks on developing quantum-computing capability  through  its  targeted  programs  and  initiatives,  NP  scientists  with  complex applications,  and  their  growing  knowledge  and  expertise  in  quantum  computing  and simulation, will continue to benefit from, and contribute to, ASCR. Cross-disciplinary connections with Quantum Information Science. In the field of Quantum Information Science (QIS), aspects such as topological quantum  computing, error correction, and fermion-to-qubit encodings have close connections to gauge theories. For example,  fault  tolerance  of  a  topological  quantum  computer  arises  from  a  non-local encoding of the states of the quasiparticles that are described by non-Abelian statistics, the Kitaev toric code for error correction realizes a topological phase of matter that exists in 𝑍2 lattice gauge theory, and the local fermionic to qubit maps often use auxiliary degrees of freedom  and  a  set  of  local  (gauge)  constraints  to  enforce  Fermi  statistics  in  the  qubit description of fermions. As a result, development of simulation frameworks for, and a deeper understanding of entanglement and dynamical properties of, gauge theories can have an impact on both NP and QIS fields alike.

## Sidebar: Quantum Simulation of Neutrino Flavor Evolution in Dense Matter

The  density  of  neutrinos  found  in  core-collapse  supernovae  is  large  enough  that  they contribute to the transport of energy and momentum, in flavor transport and in dynamics. Coherent evolution of flavors is determined, in part, by electroweak self-interactions among the  neutrinos,  and  the simulation  of  such  systems  generally lies  beyond  the  capabilities  of classical computation alone. Early studies of the quantum correlations and entanglement in coherent  evolution  of  simple  dense  neutrino  systems,  beyond  mean-field  descriptions,  are providing important insights into such dynamics.

Figure  4.  Quantum  simulations  of  coherent  neutrino  gasses.  The  approximate  lengths  over  which coherent neutrino oscillations are relevant during core-collapse supernovae (top left), a cartoon of a quantum circuit implementing time-evolution on a trapped-ion quantum computer (bottom left), and results obtained from a quantum simulation for a specific 4-neutrino system [Phys.Rev.D 107 (2023) 2, 023007] (right). [Image is reproduced with permission from Christian Bauer, Zohreh Davoudi, Natalie Klco, and Martin Savage.]

<!-- image -->

Understanding how to simulate systems of neutrinos and quantify their entanglement, which are complex in physical settings, is leading to new insights about their structure and dynamics, such as the recognition of the potential role of dynamical phase transitions, and the potential impact  of  multi-neutrino  entanglement  in  energy  transport  and  deposition.  A  number  of independent studies and simulations of modest-size systems of neutrinos are pushing the limits of accessible quantum computers, both in the number of qubits and operational fidelity. The neutrino evolution simulated on the quantum devices is currently limited to coherent forward scattering of systems with less than 20 neutrinos, using an effective 2-flavor model, and with an initial tensor-product state

## Sidebar: Quantum Simulation for Nuclear Dynamics

First-principles studies of dynamical nuclear many-body phenomena, from nuclear reactions and nuclear response functions to the evolution of matter in the early universe or in particle colliders,  is  an  overarching  goal  of  quantum  simulation  and  computing  in  NP.  While  time evolution is expected to be efficiently simulated using ideal quantum computers, states need to first be prepared and then measured to access observables via various strategies.

When  it  comes  to  simulations  based  in  the  Standard  Model,  early  ground-breaking simulations  demonstrated  access  to  real-time  phenomena,  such  as  pair  production  and vacuum fluctuations, in simpler models such as the 1+1 dimensional QED. Algorithms and codesigned  protocols  for  simulating  both  Abelian  and  non-Abelian  lattice  gauge  theories  in higher dimensions have also been developed, including three-dimensional SU(3) lattice gauge theory.  Progress  on  a  range  of  QCD-inspired  problems  has  been  significant  and  involves algorithms for, and in instances, small hardware implementation of, state preparation, lowlying  hadronic  spectra,  low-energy β -decay  amplitude  and  high-energy  particle  collisions, parton distributions functions, finite-density thermal phase diagram, transport properties of, and  dynamics  of  quarkonia  moving  in,  quark-gluon  plasma,  thermalization  dynamics  and dynamical  phase  transitions  in  non-equilibrium  states  of  matter,  and  fragmentation  and hadronization dynamics. While these efforts often involve simple prototype models and lowerdimensional systems, their framework and strategies can be adopted and generalized to QCD.

Figure 5. The structure of the magnetic operator in the pure SU(3) lattice gauge theory upon integration of  local  quantum  numbers  for  a  one-dimensional  string  of  plaquettes  (top  left)  and  for  a  twodimensional  sheet  of  plaquettes  (bottom  left).  The  active  quantum  registers  are  denoted  by  blue squares  while  the  neighboring  controls  are  denoted  by  green  circles.  Simulated  dynamics  of  the vacuum in terms of fluctuations in the electric energy for a two-plaquette system using a (truncated) global  basis  is  also  shown  (right).  The  simulation  was  implemented  using  IBM's  Athens  quantum processor. The figure has been adopted from [Phys.Rev.D 103 (2021) 9, 094501] .

<!-- image -->

When  it comes  to simulations based on nuclear effective Hamiltonians, the first milestone implementations on quantum hardware involved computing the ground state of the deuteron and light nuclei using IBM and Trapped ion devices, followed by subsequent implementations of simple models of radiative processes, and of a nuclear response function. The first quantum algorithm for simulating a generic nuclear Hamiltonian with two-body interactions was developed in the 2000s. This problem did not gain interest until a few years ago, leading to significant growth in algorithmic developments in a range of problems, including neutrino-nucleus scattering and nuclear ground-state preparation. Efforts are also ongoing in designing and benchmarking custom gates and quantum-classical algorithms for nuclear dynamics (see Fig. 4).

Figure 6. Schematic representation of the quantum-classical co-processing scheme used to simulate the scattering of two neutrons on the Advanced Quantum Testbed (AQT) at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (left), simulated real time evolution of the spin-state probabilities along the spatial trajectory for the triplet and singlet states of the two-neutron system (right).  Solid lines indicate the ideal evolution. Symbols denote the quantum simulation implemented on the AQT. The numbers on the horizontal axis mark arbitrarily chosen stages of the evolution along the trajectory of the relative distance between the two neutrons obtained by solving the classical equation of motion by direct integration. The figure is adopted from [arXiv:2302.06734].

<!-- image -->

## Workforce Development

Growing an NP QISTready workforce is crucial to advancing NP's objectives. Many of the scientific  challenges  that  we  face  require  an  integration  of  QIST  and  NP  experimental, theoretical, and computational expertise. Since the last LRP, a number of NP scientists have continued to evolve their research focus toward the interface with QIST, and scientists from other areas have changed focus toward QIST-NP problems. The NQI centers have activities focused on NP objectives, involving NP researchers, and are training postdoctoral associates, graduate students, and more senior scientists. Interdisciplinary collaborations born out of smaller  Quantum  Horizons  projects  and  engagement  with  DOE-supported  quantum testbeds  are  also  training  and  developing  graduate  students  and  postdoctoral  associates with  a  unique  blend  of  skills  at  the  interface  of  QIST  and  NP.  There  are  university  and national-laboratory  activities  directed  solely  at  advancing  NP-QIST  objectives,  which include  Department  of  Energy  Early  Career  Awards  in  the  area  of  QIST-NP,  and  the InQubator for Quantum Simulation (IQuS). Collaborations with technology companies are advancing NP and providing unique experiences and education, but remain at early stages.

It  is  desirable  that  priority  be  given  to  continuing  to  grow  and  integrate  a  sustainable quantum-expert workforce at each career stage for NP, to reap the benefits of developments in QIST, and to enable relevant advances in NP to be efficiently utilized to advance QIST. The cross-disciplinary nature of QIST suggests that broad engagement of nuclear physicists with scientists and engineers in other domains is essential to the development of a QIST-ready NP workforce. In addition to growing the workforce, it is essential that viable career paths for researchers at the interface of NP-QIST be sustainable, and recognized as such by early career scientists. A key focus of the proposed NP Quantum Connection would be to enhance the fabric of this community of researchers, and especially promoting opportunities across the range of career stages.

It  would  be  beneficial  to  learn  from  our  experiences  in  the  area  of  large-scale  classical computing and simulation. Forefront computational projects require significant R&amp;D and time investment by computational scientists. These investments include the development of algorithms and software in the co-design process. Such investments should be acknowledged and credited properly.

QIST is a new area in NP research, and due to its multidisciplinary nature, and excitement around its promise, is attracting a more diverse pool of talent into NP. Establishing a NP Quantum Connection provides an opportunity to actively and consciously build a diverse and welcoming community, with a researcher population that is representative of society, from the outset.

## Recommendations  of  the Quantum  Information  Science  for U.S. Nuclear Physics Long Range Planning workshop

Solving grand challenges in Nuclear Physics (NP) requires the development  of fundamentally new tools for simulation and sensing. U.S. Nuclear Science is in an early stage of benefiting from and contributing to the advancement of Quantum Information Science and Technology (QIST). To capitalize on this progress, we recommend:

- Increasing support for driving advances at the interface of NP and QIST to uniquely address Nuclear Science objectives.

This support will advance the development of quantum sensor technology for NP; enhance  the  (co-)development,  integration,  and  application  of  quantum-based simulation  and  computation  hardware and  techniques  for  NP;  grow  cross-cutting research and partnerships that leverage NP expertise to accelerate advances in QIST (including access to forefront hardware and fabrication); and expand the training of, and  robust  professional  pathways  for,  a  diverse  and  inclusive  quantum-ready workforce for NP, with cross-disciplinary collaborations in QIST.

- Establishing  an  ' NP  Quantum  Connection '  that  will  realize  the  transformational potential of QIST in addressing NP grand challenges.

This national initiative will enable a community-wide integration of quantum sensing and simulation in NP research; facilitate sharing of resources and expertise among NP,  interagency  programs,  and  the  national  and  international  QIST  community; support bridge junior faculty and scientist positions, postdoctoral fellowships, and graduate and undergraduate students; and strengthen ties with the QIST community, technology companies, and other domain sciences.

## Appendices

## Appendix I: Workshop Participants

## In-person Participants (45)

Joao  Barata,  Tanmoy  Bhattacharya,  Michael  Bishof,  Ian  Cloet,  Andrea  Delgado,  Michael DeMarco,  Caleb  Fink,  Adrien  Florio,  Marianne  Francois,  Dorota  Grabowska,  Shannon Hoogerheide, Mengyao Huang, Kazuki Ikeda, Marc Illa,  Kyungseon  Joo, Dmitri  Kharzeev, Karol Kowalski, Wai Kin Lai, Kyle Leach, Ben Loer, Ian Low, Joshua Martin, David Moore, Thomas  Mehen,  Niklas  Mueller,  James  Mulligan,  Pieter  Mumm,  Francesco  Pederiva,  Rob Pisarski, Mateusz Ploskon, Sanjay Reddy, Gautam Rupak, Hersh Singh, Maninder Singh, Ionel Stetcu, Jesse Stryker, Paul Szypryt, Semeon Valgushev, Brent VanDevender, Samuel Watkins, Christopher Wilson and Xiaojun Yao.

## Remote Participants (53)

Andrei  Afanasev,  Akif  Baha  Balantekin,  Alessandro  Baroni,  Raymond  Bunker,  Bipasha Chakraborty, Ivan Chernyshev, Vincenzo Cirigliano, Benjamin Clark, Shashi Kumar Dhiman, Weijie  Du,  Dipangkar  Dutta,  Robert  Edwards,  Abraham  Flores,  Alfredo  Galindo-Uribarri, Ronald  Fernando  Garcia  Ruiz,  Vesselin  Gueorguiev,  Fanqing  Guo,  Erin  Hansen,  Hector Hernandez, Koichi Hattori, Philipp Hauke, Morten Hjorth-Jensen, Keith Jankowski, Calvin Johnson, Denis Lacroix, Dean Lee, Huey-Wen Lin, Xiaohui Liu, Felipe J. Llanes-Estrada, John Looney, Misha Lukin, Alexis Mercenne, Jeff Miller, Emil Mottola, Berndt Mueller, Benjamin Nachman, John Negele, John Orrell, Amol Patwardhan, Daniel Phillips, Stephen Poole, Irene Qualters, Mike Rumore, Thomas Schaefer, Jeremy Scott, Rajeev Singh, James Vary, Juan-Jose Galvez-Viruet, Kyle Wendt, Hongxi Xing, Liang Yang, Glenn Young, Fanyi Zhao

## Workshop Co-organizers (6)

Douglas  Beck,  Joseph  Carlson,  Zohreh  Davoudi,  Joseph  Formaggio,  Sofia  Quaglioni  and Martin Savage.

## Appendix II: Workshop Presentations

## Overviews

- Quantum  simulation  for  Nuclear  Physics by  Sofia  Quaglioni  (LLNL)  and  Zohreh Davoudi (UMD)
- Superconducting sensors and related technology by Pieter Mumm (NIST)
- Quantum sensors in Nuclear Physics and future directions by Doug Beck (UIUC)
- Programmable quantum systems for simulations and sensing by Misha Lukin (Harvard)

## Quantum Sensing

- Low background cryogenic facility @ PNNL by Ben Loer (PNNL)
- Searches  for  massive  neutral  particles  emitted  in  nuclear  decays  with  mechanical quantum sensors by David Moore (Yale)
- Rare isotope doped superconducting tunnel junctions as a precision tool for BSM physics searches by Kyle Leach (Colorado School Mines)

## Quantum Field Theories and QCD

- Quantum simulations of real-time QCD processes by Dmitri Kharzeev (Stony Brook)
- Entropy suppression through quantum interference in electric pulses by Adrien Florio (BNL)
- Simulating  bosonic  theories  with  bosonic  quantum  circuits by  Michael  DeMarco (BNL/MIT)
- Jet evolution in nuclear matter by Joao Barata (BNL)
- 'QZD': a toy model for QCD by Rob Pisarski (BNL)
- Towards calculating first-principles strong interactions on universal  quantum computers by Jesse Stryker (UMD)
- Heavy-ion collisions - emergent phenomena in QCD by Mateusz Ploskon (LBNL)
- Entanglement suppression and emergent symmetries in low-energy QCD by Ian Low (Northwestern)
- Efficient quantum  simulations  of  lattice  gauge  theories by  Dorota  Grabowska (IQuS/UW)
- Quantum simulation of jet quenching in nuclear environments produced in heavy-ion and electron-ion collisions by Xiaojun Yao (IQuS/UW)

## Dense Neutrinos in Astrophysical Environments

- Entanglement in three-flavor collective oscillations by Baha Balantekin (Wisconsin)
- Multi-body entanglement in dense neutrino systems by Marc Illa (IQuS/UW/QSC)
- Neutrino flavor oscillations by Josh Martin (LANL)

## Analog Quantum Simulators

- Analog  quantum  simulation  of  topological  models  with  a  parametric  cavity by Christopher Wilson (IQC/Waterloo)
- Towards quantum simulations of Nuclear Physics Using Yb optical tweezer arrays by Michael Bishof (ANL)

## Quantum Many-Body Theory and Nuclear Physics

- Toward  hybrid  (classical/quantum)  computing  for  many-body  problems by  Karol Kowalski (PNNL)
- Nuclear Physics and QIS: challenges and opportunities by Niklas Mueller (IQuS/UW)
- Trapped  ion  quantum  simulation  of  collective  neutrino  oscillations by  Francesco Pederiva (Trento)
- Quantum machine learning applications to Nuclear Physics by Andrea Delgado (ORNL)
- Inelastic reactions on a quantum computer by Gautam Rupak (Mississippi State)
- Noise resilient quantum simulations for Nuclear Science by Kyle Wendt (LLNL)
- State preparation with a projection algorithm by Ionel Stetcu (LANL)
- Transitions in (1+1) light front 𝜑 4 theory using quantum computing method by Mengyao Huang (Iowa State)

## Appendix III: Endorsement of support for NP-QIST in other LRP events

The  mutual  role,  and  the  need  for  supporting  the  growth,  of  QIST  and  NP  has  been acknowledged and endorsed during the National Science Advisory Committee's 2023 Long -Range Planning  process,  including  in  two  community  Town  Hall  meetings  on  i)  Nuclear Structure, Reactions, and Astrophysics, and on ii) Fundamental Symmetries, Neutrons, and Neutrinos, sponsored by the Division of Nuclear Physics (DNP) of the American Physical Society (APS), as well as an LRP workshop on Computational Nuclear Physics and AI/ML. The excerpts of the relevant text of the resolutions, recommendations, and/or endorsements are provided in this appendix for reference.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## References

[1]  J.  Carlson  et  al.,  Quantum  Computing  for  Theoretical  Nuclear  Physics,  Institute  for Nuclear Theory Report 18-008 (2018).

[2] I. Cloet et al., Opportunities for nuclear physics and quantum information science. [arXiv: 1903.05453] (2019).

[3] D. Beck et al., Nuclear Physics and Quantum Information Science, Report from the NSAC Quantum Information Science Subcommittee , (2019). ISBN-10: 1671239067, ISBN-13: 9781671239067.

[4] https://iqus.uw.edu/events/quantum-information-science-for-nuclear-physics-longrange-planning-2022/