## Quantitative convergence rates for extended mean field games with volatility control

Erhan Bayraktar ∗

Hiroaki Horikawa †

## Abstract

We investigate the convergence of symmetric stochastic differential games with interactions via control, where the volatility terms of both idiosyncratic and common noises are controlled. We apply the stochastic maximum principle, following the approach of Laurière and Tangpi, to reduce the convergence analysis to the study of forward-backward propagation of chaos. Under the standard monotonicity conditions, we derive quantitative convergence rates for openloop Nash equilibria of N -player stochastic differential games toward the corresponding mean field equilibrium. As a prerequisite, we also establish the well-posedness of the conditional McKean-Vlasov forward-backward stochastic differential equations by the method of continuation. Moreover, we analyze a specific class of linear-quadratic settings to demonstrate the applicability of our main result.

## Contents

| 1  Introduction  1  1.1  Literature review  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  3  1.2  Structure of this paper  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5  2  Setting and main results  5  2.1  Notation .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5  2.2  Probabilistic setup  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5  2.3  The  N  -player game .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7  2.4  The mean field game  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  10  2.5  Main convergence result  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  11  3  Characterization of equilibria via the stochastic maximum principle  13  3.1  The maximum principle for the  N  -player game  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  13  3.2  The maximum principle for the mean field game  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  14  4  Proof of Theorem 2.14  14  5  Linear-quadratic example  27  A Well-posedness of conditional McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs  30  B Construction of conditionally i.i.d. copies of solutions to the McKean-Vlasov FBSDE  36   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 1 Introduction

We investigate the convergence problem of a class of symmetric N -player stochastic differential games with interactions through both states and controls. Let us first outline our setup. The precise formulation is provided in Section 2.

∗ Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, United States. E-mail address: erhan@umich.edu. This author is partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grant DMS-2507940 and by the Susan M. Smith chair.

† Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, United States. E-mail address: hhiroaki@umich.edu.

For each player i ∈ { 1 , . . . , N } , the controlled state dynamics are given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, α i denotes the control of player i , and L N ( X α t , α t ) := 1 N ∑ N i =1 δ ( X i, α t ,α i t ) represents the empirical distribution of the state-control configuration of all players at time t . Given the strategies of the other players α -i , each player i aims to minimize the cost functional defined by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A strategy profile α = ( α 1 , . . . , α N ) is called an N -player Nash equilibrium (NE) if, for all i ∈ { 1 , . . . , N } ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In a NE, each player selects the best possible strategy given the strategies of the other players.

Mean field games (MFGs), introduced by Lasry and Lions [34], and Huang et al. [28], are formulated as the limiting problem of symmetric stochastic differential games as the population size N tends to infinity. Intuitively, under this approximation, the influence of any single agent diminishes as the population grows. The system thus reduces to the control problem of a representative agent whose state dynamics depend on a given flow of probability measures. Specifically, in our setting, the state process of the representative agent is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for a given stochastic flow of probability measures ( ξ t ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] . The representative agent aims to find a strategy α that minimizes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ T denotes the first marginal of ξ T . A pair ( ˆ ξ, ˆ α ) is called a mean field equilibrium (MFE) if it satisfies both the optimality and the consistency conditions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where L 1 ( X ˆ α, ˆ ξ t , ˆ α t ) is the joint law of ( X ˆ α, ˆ ξ t , ˆ α t ) , conditioned on the realization of the common noise. In contrast to classical MFGs, which consider interactions solely through the state, our setting is referred to as extended MFGs [23] (or MFGs of controls).

In this paper, we address the convergence problem of the mean field approximation; specifically, the question of whether and how a sequence of NE ( α N ) N ∈ N for N -player games converges to the optimal control in the MFE. In our main theorem (Theorem 2.14), we establish the convergence rate for the squared error between the NE and the MFE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α N,i denotes the strategy of player i in the NE, and α i represents the conditionally independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) copies of the corresponding optimal strategy in the MFE (for the precise definition of these copies, see the end of Section 2).

To achieve this result, we adopt the forward-backward propagation of chaos technique, pioneered by Laurière and Tangpi [36], and further developed in [6, 30, 38]. Our strategy proceeds as follows:

- (i) characterize the NE via classical forward-backward stochastic differential equations (FBSDEs) using the stochastic maximum principle (SMP);
- (ii) characterize the MFE via the conditional McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs (MKV-FBSDEs) similarly using the SMP; and
- (iii) apply forward-backward propagation of chaos techniques to derive a quantitative convergence rate between the solutions of these two systems.

Although extended MFGs with volatility control hold significant appeal for applications, particularly in finance and economics, their analysis is often considered highly intractable. For instance, one major issue is the irregularity of the stochastic flow of conditional distributions ( L 1 ( X t , α t )) t ∈ [0 ,T ] .

Moreover, to demonstrate the applicability of our main result, we examine a specific class of linear-quadratic (LQ) MFGs. This setting appears novel compared to the existing literature, such as [9, 7, 25]. To maintain our primary focus, we do not derive explicit feedback controls as in the literature of LQ-MFGs, but restrict our discussion to the well-posedness of the game and the convergence results.

To overcome the difficulties, we leverage a type of monotonicity condition (see Assumption 2.12), which was considered in [8, 27, 37] for the well-posedness of fully coupled (MKV-)FBSDEs and successfully applied by Jackson and Tangpi [30] to the convergence problem of classical MFGs. Under this condition, we establish the well-posedness result of the conditional MKV-FBSDEs and consequently, the unique existence of the MFE. Furthermore, by imposing the additional smoothness condition on the coefficients of the game with respect to the measure argument (Assumption 2.13), following [30], we derive the stated O ( N -1 ) convergence rate of the equilibria.

## 1.1 Literature review

Introduced by Lasry and Lions [34], and Huang et al. [28], MFGs have become a powerful framework for modeling large systems of interacting agents. This framework considers a system of a large number of homogeneous agents who optimize their individual strategies while interacting weakly with the rest of the population that is, each player responds to the empirical distribution of the entire population. The theory analyzes the limiting behavior as the population size N →∞ . As a characterization of the MFE, a coupled system of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation and Fokker-Planck equation was introduced in [34]. The former characterizes the optimality of the representative agent, while the latter describes the flow of the distribution of the player's state.

Diverging from the compactness approach, the seminal work by Cardaliaguet et al. [10] succeeded in quantifying the convergence rate for closed-loop controls. By characterizing the value functions in the MFE via the master equation-which is, formally, the limit of the N -Nash system-they derived the convergence rate of the error between the master equation's solution and the value functions of the N -player game. This approach was further applied in [2, 3, 4, 5, 17, 18]. Remarkably, all of these papers also addressed the case with (uncontrolled) common noise.

Since the advent of the theory, the first direction of the convergence problem has been actively investigated: specifically, how the optimal strategy obtained in an MFE can form an ε -Nash equilibrium for an N -player game. However, the other direction-the naturally arising question of how and in what sense NE converge to the corresponding MFE-remained open for some time during the first decade of research in MFGs. The first major breakthroughs were achieved by Fischer [21] and Lacker [32], who established the convergence of the empirical measures associated with the NE using compactness arguments. Lacker [33] subsequently generalized these results to closed-loop controls, and Djete [20] extended them to accommodate extended MFGs.

However, none of the aforementioned works regarding convergence rates address MFGs with interactions through controls. Notably, such interactions naturally arise in many problems in finance and economics. See, for instance, [1, 11, 15, 25, 26] and [14, Sections 1.3.2 and 1.4.4] for specific applications. For general studies of extended MFGs, we refer to [9, 14, 23, 24] and [12, Section 4.6].

Laurière and Tangpi [36] were the first to derive the convergence rates for these extended games. They characterized the equilibrium via FBSDEs and generalized the propagation of chaos technique to coupled forward-backward systems. This technique originates from Sznitman [40] and was adapted to backward equations in [35]. Possamaï and Tangpi [38] followed a similar path for the non-Markovian setting using the weak formulation [14]. Instead of the SMP, they employed the dynamic programming principle to characterize the MFE via generalized MKV-BSDEs and obtained convergence rates for closed-loop equilibria. However, both approaches have a limitation. To establish convergence for an arbitrary time horizon T &gt; 0, the drift coefficient b must satisfy a dissipativity condition with a sufficiently large constant K B (see [36, Theorem 2.2] and [38, Theorem 2.10]). Furthermore, neither work covers the case of controlled volatility.

Up to now, the study of MFGs with interaction through controls, and volatility control has been limited, with the notable exception of [20]. Incorporating these features simultaneously increases the difficulty of the problem significantly. In the analytic approaches, volatility control typically complicates the Hamiltonian of the HJB equations, often resulting in the loss of semilinearity. Furthermore, in the coupled PDE framework [34], the dependence on the control distribution strengthens the coupling as in [26]. In the FBSDE approach, a major challenge lies in the regularity of the flow of distributions ( L 1 ( X t , α t )) t ∈ [0 ,T ] . Without volatility control, this flow is usually continuous. This allows for the use of Schauder's fixed point argument on the space C ([0 , T ]; P 2 ( R n × R n )) to guarantee the existence of MKV-FBSDEs, as studied in [12, Section 4.6]. The difficulty arising from the irregularity of the flow (or more precisely, the flow of the distribution of the randomized control) was also highlighted in [19, Remark 2.5] specifically for mean field control (MFC) problems. Djete [20] addressed this issue using measure-valued control rules, inspired by the relaxed controls introduced in [32], and obtained convergence results for extended MFGs with volatility control via compactness arguments under general assumptions. However, the volatility of the common noise was not controlled, nor was a rate of convergence provided.

Recently, Jackson and Tangpi [30] made significant progress on these convergence results. Building on the probabilistic framework of [36], they quantified convergence for arbitrary time horizons T &gt; 0, covering settings with controlled volatility and common noise. Key to their approach was the displacement monotonicity condition. This allowed them to dispense with the smallness condition on K b required in [36, 38]. Using this condition, they applied the method of continuation to guarantee the well-posedness of the conditional MKVFBSDEs and, consequently, the unique existence of the MFE. However, their analysis remains restricted to classical MFGs.

In this paper, we establish the convergence rate for extended MFGs in which the volatilities of both idiosyncratic and common noises are controlled. Crucial to achieving this goal is the monotonicity condition (Assumption 2.12). Various monotonicity conditions have been widely studied in the context of the method of continuation to prove the well-posedness of (MKV)-FBSDEs, as seen in [8, 27, 37], [41, Chapter 8.4], and [30, Appendix A]. As previously mentioned, Jackson and Tangpi [30] investigated several types of (displacement) monotonicity conditions for the convergence problem of classical MFGs.

Recall that our primary goal is establishing an estimate for the error | α N,i -α i ∣ ∣ 2 . In the N -player game, the optimal strategy α N,i t of the player i depends on its own state, the empirical distribution of all the players' states, plus an additional term involving the other players' actions (denoted by ζ ; see (4.1)). This term, which is specific to the extended setting, complicates the error estimation. In contrast to [36], which addressed this term by assuming a small time horizon T or a dissipativity condition, our monotonicity condition also plays a crucial role in this estimate. Consequently, under an additional smoothness condition on the coefficients with respect to the measure arguments (Assumption 2.13), we obtain the quantitative convergence rate using the propagation of chaos technique.

In our context, the primary advantage of the monotonicity condition-similar to the one in [8, (A1)]-is that it circumvents the need for flow regularity. This enables proving the well-posedness of the MKV-FBSDEs via Banach's fixed point theorem on the space of square-integrable processes, avoiding reliance on Schauder's fixed point theorem on the space of measure flows, and thus we can establish the unique existence of the MFE for extended MFGs in a strong formulation.

In addition, to demonstrate the applicability of our framework, we study a specific class of LQ-MFGs. Our setting introduces novel elements compared to the existing literature. For example, Graber [25] analyzed extended LQ-MFC problems and LQ-MFGs. He derived the unique existence of an MFE by restricting the analysis to cases where the state coefficients lack distributional dependence on either the state or the control.

This restriction ensures the equivalence of the MFC and MFG problems. Bensoussan et al. [9] addressed extended MFGs without volatility control. To obtain an MFE, they analyzed the well-posedness of linear FBODEs, derived by taking expectations of the original MKV-FBSDEs arising from the stochastic maximum principle. Crucially, the absence of volatility control ensures that the resulting FBODEs do not depend on the martingale term Z of the BSDE. In contrast, we consider a specific type of LQ-MFGs that satisfy the monotonicity condition, establishing both the unique existence of an MFE and convergence results. This setting allows for dependence on the control distribution within the state process and incorporates volatility control. However, unlike [9, 25], we do not derive the closed-loop equilibrium to align with our main focus.

## 1.2 Structure of this paper

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 formulates the N -player game and the corresponding mean field game, and states the main convergence result, Theorem 2.14. Section 3 characterizes the NE and the MFE via the associated classical and McKean-Vlasov FBSDE systems. Section 4 presents the proof of the main theorem. Section 5 analyzes a linear-quadratic example. Appendix A establishes the well-posedness of conditional MKV-FBSDEs using the method of continuation, guaranteeing the unique existence of the MFE. Appendix B constructs a conditionally i.i.d. sequence of solutions to the conditional MKV-FBSDEs, which serves as a prerequisite for the coupling technique used in the convergence analysis.

## 2 Setting and main results

## 2.1 Notation

Throughout the paper, N ∈ N denotes the number of players in the finite player game. Take k, m ∈ N . We denote by | · | and · the standard norm and inner product in the Euclidean space R k . We use the same notation for the Frobenius norm and inner product on R k × m . Specifically, A · B := tr( A ⊤ B ) and | A | := √ A · A for A,B ∈ R k × m .

We denote by P 2 ( R k ) the 2-Wasserstein space, that is, the space of all probability measures µ on the measurable space ( R k , B ( R k )) with M 2 ( µ ) &lt; ∞ , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the space P 2 ( R k ) is equipped with the Wasserstein metric,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for µ 1 , µ 2 ∈ P 2 ( R k ), where the infimum is taken over all probability measures π defined on R k × R k whose first and second marginals are µ 1 and µ 2 , respectively.

## 2.2 Probabilistic setup

We fix a finite time horizon T &gt; 0 and a measure µ 0 ∈ P 2 ( R n ) for a dimension n ∈ N . We use µ 0 as the initial distribution of the N players' states. We work on the canonical probability space and separately define the sample spaces for common noise for all players and for initial states and idiosyncratic noises for each player of the game. Specifically, let C = C ([0 , T ]; R d ), and define the sample spaces Ω 0 := C , Ω 1 ,N := ( R n ) N ×C N , and Ω N := Ω 0 × Ω 1 ,N . We consider the probability spaces (Ω 0 , ˜ F 0 , ˜ P 0 ) and (Ω 1 ,N , ˜ F 1 ,N , ˜ P 1 ,N ), where ˜ F 0 and ˜ F 1 ,N are the Borel σ -algebra on Ω 0 and Ω N, 1 , respectively, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ W denotes a Wiener measure on C . Moreover, we denote by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the completions of (Ω 0 , ˜ F 0 , ˜ P 0 ) and (Ω 1 ,N , ˜ F 1 ,N , ˜ P 1 ,N ), respectively. Now we are ready to set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as the completion of the product measure space (Ω N , F 0 ⊗F 1 ,N , P 0 ⊗ P 1 ,N ). Intuitively, Ω 0 accommodates the sample path of the common noise for all players, Ω 1 ,N the initial states and the idiosyncratic noises for each player, and Ω N combines all sources of randomness in the game.

Now, define the canonical random variables and processes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for ( ω 0 , x , ω ) = ( ω 0 , x 1 , . . . , x N , ω 1 , . . . , ω N ) ∈ Ω N . Then by definition, the collection ( X i 0 ) i ∈{ 1 ,...N } forms an i.i.d. sequence of random variables with the common law µ 0 , ( W i ) i ∈{ 0 , 1 ,...N } are independent Brownian motions on (Ω N , F N , P N ), and ( X i 0 ) i ∈{ 1 ,...N } is independent of ( W i ) i ∈{ 1 ,...N } .

For N &lt; M , we always identify the natural extension ˜ X on (Ω M , F M , P M ) of a random variable X defined on (Ω N , F N , P N ) with X itself, by setting

Let F 0 = ( F 0 t ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] and F N = ( F N t ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] be the completions with P N -null sets of the raw filtrations generated by W 0 and ( W 0 , X 1 0 , . . . , X N 0 , W 1 , . . . W N ), respectively. Automatically, F 0 and F N satisfy the usual conditions.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Furthermore, we shall not distinguish a random variable X on (Ω 0 , F 0 , P 0 ) from its natural extension ˜ X : ( ω 0 , x , ω ) ↦→ X ( ω 0 ). Similarly, for a subσ -algebra G 0 ⊂ F 0 , we often simply write G 0 for the subσ -algebra G 0 ⊗{∅ , Ω 1 ,N } ⊂ F N .

We denote by E 0 the expectation with respect to the probability measure P 0 , and use the same notation E 1 for the expectation with respect to both P 1 and P 1 ,N , as well as E for P and P N .

Next, for the mean field game, viewed as a limiting problem of the N -player game, we only require the probability space (Ω , F , F , P ) := (Ω 1 , F 1 , F 1 , P 1 ). Similarly, we write ( ω 0 , x, ω ) for a generic element of Ω and set W := W 1 .

Let ( X , G , G , Q ) be a generic filtered probability space with the filtration G = ( G t ) 0 ≤ t ≤ T . We define the following spaces:

- L 2 ( X , G , Q ; R k ) is the space of G -measurable random variables X : X → R k satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- S 2 ( G ; R k ) is the space of R k -valued G -adapted continuous processes Y satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- H 2 ( G ; R k ) is the space of R k -valued G -progressively measurable processes Z satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.1. This canonical setup plays a crucial role in the coupling technique underlying the propagation of chaos result; see Lemma B.3. Specifically, it enables the construction of a conditionally i.i.d. sequence of the solutions to the conditional MKV-FBSDEs (B.1) on (Ω N , F N , F N , P N ) from the unique solution to (3.5) on (Ω , F , F , P ). Since this is rather technical, the rigorous explanation of this technique is provided in Section B. For the possibility of the extension to the general (non-canonical) setup, see Remark B.4.

We are now ready to define the conditional law of a random variable and a process, given the realization of W 0 . The following result can be found in [13, Lemma 2.4] and [31, Lemma 1.1].

Lemma 2.2. Given X ∈ L 2 (Ω N , F N , P N ; R k ) , the mapping

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is almost surely well defined under P 0 , and forms a random variable from (Ω 0 , F 0 , P 0 ) into P 2 ( R k ) endowed with its Borel σ -field. The random variable L 1 ( X ) provides a conditional law of X given F 0 .

Finally, consider for any t ≥ 0 , a version of L 1 ( X t ) , which is well-defined as a random variable on (Ω 0 , F 0 , P 0 ) . Then, ( L 1 ( X t )) t ≥ 0 is a P N -modification of ( L ( X t |F 0 t )) t ≥ 0 .

Moreover, let ( X t ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] be an F N -progressively measurable process such that X t ∈ L 2 (Ω N , F N , P N ; R k ) for each t ∈ [0 , T ] . Then, the P 2 ( R k ) -valued process ( L ( X t |F 0 t )) t ≥ 0 is F 0 -progressively measurable.

Based on this lemma, we will always work with a F 0 -progressively measurable version of ( L 1 ( X t )) t ∈ [0 ,T ] for F N -progressively measurable process ( X t ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] .

In light of the above definitions and observations, we say that a sequence of random variables ( X i ) i ∈{ 1 ,...,N } defined on (Ω N , F N , P N ) is conditionally i.i.d. if, for almost every ω 0 ∈ Ω 0 , the collection ( X i ( ω 0 , · , · )) i ∈{ 1 ,...,N } is i.i.d. on (Ω 1 ,N , F 1 ,N , P 1 ,N ). Similarly, we say a sequence of stochastic processes (( X i t ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] ) i ∈{ 1 ,...,N } is conditionally i.i.d. if, for each t ∈ [0 , T ], ( X i t ( ω 0 , · , · )) i ∈{ 1 ,...,N } is i.i.d. on (Ω 1 ,N , F 1 ,N , P 1 ,N ) for almost every ω 0 ∈ Ω 0 .

## 2.3 The N -player game

Let us first introduce the N -player game. For α = ( α 1 , . . . , α N ) where α i denotes the strategy process of each agent i = 1 , . . . , N , the dynamics of i -th player's state are defined by the solution to the following controlled SDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Clearly, each player's state depends on the empirical distribution of all players' states and controls, and thus the superscript α is incorporated into X i, α for each i to reflect this dependence. Each player selects their strategy from the set of admissible strategies:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and aims to minimize the following cost functional, given the running and terminal cost functions, f and g , respectively, and for α ∈ ( A N ) N ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we use the shorthand notation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for β ∈ A N . As usual, we define the NE of the game.

Definition 2.3. We say that α ∈ ( A N ) N is an N -player Nash equilibrium (NE) if for all i = 1 , 2 , . . . , N , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Intuitively, this means that each player adopts the best possible strategy in response to the strategies of all other players.

Throughout the paper, we use the L -derivative to describe differentiation on the 2-Wasserstein space, which is defined as the Fréchet derivative of the lifted function on the space of square integrable random variables. See [12, Chapter 5] for the precise definition and the basic properties. For an R k -valued function φ defined on P 2 ( R n ), P 2 ( R ℓ ), and P 2 ( R n × k ), we use the notations ∂ µ φ, ∂ ν φ and ∂ ξ φ , respectively, to denote the L -derivatives of the functions on these spaces. We say that the function φ is continuously L -differentiable, when the Fréchet derivative of the liftup is continuous as a function defined on the L 2 -space of the related probability space.

To ensure that the game is well-defined and analytically tractable, we introduce the following assumptions on the coefficient of the state process and cost functions.

## Assumption 2.4. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be Borel measurable and satisfy:

- (i) For φ = b, σ, σ 0 , f , the function φ t ( x, a, ξ ) is continuously differentiable in its last three arguments, and we denote its derivatives by ∂ x φ , ∂ α φ , and ∂ ξ φ , respectively. In addition, g ( x, µ ) is continuously differentiable in all its arguments, and we write ∂ x g and ∂ µ g for its derivatives.
- (ii) The functions φ = b, σ, σ 0 , ∂ x f are Lipschitz continuous in their last three arguments, uniformly in t ; that is, there exists a constant L f &gt; 0 such that, for any ( t, x, a, ξ ) , ( t, x ′ , a ′ , ξ ′ ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R n × R ℓ ×P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, for any ( t, x, a, ξ, u ) , ( t, x ′ , a ′ , ξ ′ , u ′ ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R n × R ℓ × P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ) × R n , the following Lipschitz conditions hold:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ is the first marginal of ξ on P 2 ( R n ).

- (iii) The functions φ = b, σ, σ 0 , ∂ x f are of linear growth; that is, there exists a constant C &gt; 0 such that, for any ( t, x, a, ξ ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R n × R ℓ ×P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, the derivatives ∂ x g , ∂ ξ f , and ∂ µ g also satisfy the following linear growth condition: for any ( t, x, a, ξ, u, v ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R n × R ℓ ×P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ) × R n × R ℓ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (iv) For any ( t, x, a, ξ ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R n × R ℓ ×P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ) × R n , f and g satisfy the following quadratic growth condition,

for some constant C f , C g &gt; 0.

- (v) The L -derivative ∂ ξ b, ∂ ξ σ , and ∂ ξ σ 0 are all bounded by some positive constant C .
- (vi) The functions φ = b, σ, σ 0 , f can be decomposed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where φ (1) and φ (2) are Borel measurable functions, and µ denotes the first marginal of ξ on R n .

Remark 2.5. Let us elaborate on the assumptions. (i) is a prerequisite for applying the SMP. Specifically, the derivatives assumed here drive the adjoint equations in the FBSDEs that characterize the equilibria. (ii), (iii), and (v) are invoked repeatedly throughout the proof of the main theorem to establish moment bounds and error estimates for the FBSDE systems. (iv) ensures that the cost functional remains finite for any choice of admissible strategies. (vi) is usually referred to as the separability condition. Although this is restrictive, it is fairly standard in the literature on extended MFGs; see [11, 14, 19, 36]. In our setting, this condition decouples the optimizer Λ of the Hamiltonian (see Lemma 2.8) from the distribution of the control. In order to dispense with this condition, one might rely on an analysis of the fixed-point maps as detailed in [29, Section 3]. However, to avoid further technical complexity, we impose the condition.

Let us also impose some assumptions on the Hamiltonian H , taking values in R :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assumption 2.6. Let H be as defined in (2.1).

- (i) We assume that for all ( t, x, y, z, z 0 , a, ξ, u ) and ( t, x ′ , y ′ , z ′ , z 0 ′ , a ′ , ξ ′ , u ′ ) in

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the functions ∂ x H and ∂ µ H satisfy a Lipschitz continuity condition uniformly in t , that is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where L f is a positive constant.

- (ii) We assume that H is strongly convex with respect to a , that is, for any fixed ( t, x, y, z, z 0 , ξ ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d ×P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ) and any a, a ′ ∈ R ℓ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some γ &gt; 0.

- (iii) The functions x ↦→ g ( x, µ ) and x ↦→ H t ( x, y, z, z 0 , a, ξ ) are convex for any fixed ( t, x, y, z, z 0 , a, ξ ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d × R ℓ ×P 2 ( R n × R ℓ )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.7. It is clear that if Assumptions 2.4, (ii), (iii), and (v) are satisfied, then ∂ x H and ∂ µ H have at most linear growth. The strong convexity assumption ensures the existence of a unique minimizer of the Hamiltonian and guarantees that this minimizer is Lipschitz continuous; see the subsequent Lemma 2.8. The convexity conditions on g and H in x of (iii) are also required to establish the sufficiency part of the maximum principle in Lemma 3.2.

The next result is standard in the literature. For example, see [36, Lemma 5.3] and [12, Lemma 3.3].

Lemma 2.8. Let Assumption 2.6 hold. Then, there exists a Borel measurable map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

such that for any ζ ∈ R ℓ and any ( t, x, y, z, z 0 , ξ ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d × P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ) , Λ t ( x, y, z, z 0 , µ, ζ ) is the unique minimizer of the function a ↦→ H t ( x, y, z, z 0 , a, ξ ) + a · ζ . Equivalently, it satisfies the following first-order condition:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or more specifically,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ denotes the first marginal of ξ . Moreover, Λ is Lipschitz continuous uniformly in t and has at most linear growth.

Remark 2.9. Instead of using R ℓ as the space of the players' control values, we can consider a convex closed subset of R ℓ . In that case, the optimizer Λ of H + a · ζ still exists, but it satisfies a variational inequality instead of the first-order condition stated above.

The variable ζ accounts for interactions between players via their controls. Specifically, in the context of Lemma 3.1, ζ corresponds to the L -derivative terms appearing in the partial derivative ∂ α i H N,i of the N-player Hamiltonian (3.1) (see (4.1)). Such terms arise specifically in extended games where the coefficients b, σ, σ 0 , f depend on the distribution of controls.

## 2.4 The mean field game

We now formulate the mean field game of the N -player game introduced in the previous section. Throughout this section, we work on the filtered probability space (Ω , F , F , P ). The representative player selects a strategy α from the set of admissible controls:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Given some stochastic flow of probability measures ξ : [0 , T ] × Ω 0 → P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ), which is F 0 -progressively measurable, the player's state process is defined as the solution of the following SDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Analogously to the N -player game, we now define the cost functional for the representative player

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ T ∈ P 2 ( R n ) is the first marginal of ξ T .

Now we are ready to define the mean field equilibrium:

Definition 2.10. Given ˆ α ∈ A and an F 0 -progressively measurable process ˆ ξ : [0 , T ] × Ω →P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ) with E ∫ T 0 M 2 2 ( ˆ ξ t ) dt &lt; ∞ , we say that the pair (ˆ α, ˆ ξ ) is a mean field equilibrium (MFE) if it satisfies the optimality:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We say that the MFG admits a unique MFE if it possesses at least one MFE, and for any two MFE ( α, ξ ) and ( α ′ , ξ ′ ), we have α = α ′ in H 2 ( F ; R ℓ ) and ξ and ξ ′ are modifications of each other.

We conclude this section by establishing the existence of conditionally i.i.d. copies of the state and strategy pair in equilibrium. The construction of such copies is conducted in Appendix B.

Lemma 2.11. Suppose Assumptions 2.4 and 2.6 hold. Let ( α, ξ ) be an MFE. Then, on the space (Ω N , F N , P N ) , there exist conditionally i.i.d. copies { ( X i , α i ) } N i =1 of the process ( X α,ξ , α ) . These processes share the same joint distribution on C × L 2 ([0 , T ]) as the pair ( X α,ξ , α ) .

## 2.5 Main convergence result

Here, we present our main monotonicity assumptions and the convergence result. First, using Λ from Lemma 2.8, for θ = ( x, y, z, z 0 ) and ξ ∈ P 2 ( R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d ) →P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ), let us denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for a function φ : [0 , T ] ×P 2 ( R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d ) →P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where µ is the first marginal of ξ , and id x denotes the projection θ = ( x, y, z, z 0 ) ↦→ x .

The following is our standard assumption on the monotonicity of the coefficients. The explanation is provided in Remark 2.15.

Assumption 2.12. There exists C H , C G &gt; 0 such that for any square integrable random variables Θ = ( X,Y,Z,Z 0 ) , Θ ′ = ( X ′ , Y ′ , Z ′ , Z 0 ′ ) of appropriate dimensions,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where E (Θ , Θ ′ ) and E ( X,X ′ ) denote the expectations with respect to the joint distributions of (Θ , Θ ′ ) and ( X,X ′ ), respectively, and where we have defined

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the fixed point condition:

Next, we introduce the smoothness assumption on the L -derivatives of the coefficients. Again, the discussion is deferred to Remark 2.15.

Assumption 2.13. For Φ = B, Σ , Σ 0 , F and each fixed ( t, x, y, z, z 0 ), the map ξ ↦→ Φ t ( x, y, z, z 0 , ξ ) is twice L -differentiable. The first and second order derivatives, denoted by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

are assumed to be bounded and Lipschitz continuous in ξ , uniformly with respect to ( t, x, y, z, z 0 ). Similarly, for each fixed x , the map µ ↦→ G ( x, µ ) is twice L -differentiable. Its derivatives,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

are bounded and Lipschitz continuous in µ uniformly in x .

We are now ready to state our main convergence result.

Theorem 2.14. Suppose Assumptions 2.4, 2.6, 2.12 and 2.13 hold. Then the MFG admits a unique MFE, with the representative player's control α ∈ A and state process X ∈ S 2 ( F ; R n ) .

Furthermore, for any N ∈ N , let α N ∈ ( A N ) N be the NE of the N -player game, and denote the corresponding state processes by ( X N, 1 , . . . , X N,N ) ∈ ( S 2 ( F N ; R n )) N . Then, there exists a constant C &gt; 0 , independent of N , such that the following estimates hold:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

where { ( X i , α i ) } N i =1 denote the conditionally i.i.d. copies of the pair ( X,α ) as defined in Lemma 2.11.

Remark 2.15. Let us elaborate on Assumption 2.12 and 2.13.

Assumption 2.13 is inspired by [30, Assumption 6] and imposed solely to invoke [30, Lemma 9], which relies on the result by Chassagneux et al. [16, Theorem 2.14]; see (4.19) at the end of the proof of Theorem 2.14. If the solution Θ = ( X,Y,Z,Z 0 ) to the FBSDE (3.3) possesses a finite q -th moment E [ | Θ t | q ] &lt; ∞ for some q &gt; 2, we could effectively dispense with the smoothness assumption and instead employ the result by Fournier and Guillin [22, Theorem 1]. However, obtaining pointwise a priori estimates such as E [ | Z t | q ] &lt; ∞ and E [ | Z 0 t | q ] &lt; ∞ for the backward components is typically difficult. Even assuming E [sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | X t | 2 ] &lt; ∞ (which is itself subtle in our setting; see [30, Remark 5]), standard a priori estimates for FBSDEs typically yield bounds only on the integrated terms, such as E [( ∫ T 0 | Z t | 2 dt ) q ] and E [( ∫ T 0 | Z 0 t | 2 dt ) q ]. For this reason, we adopt this smoothness assumption.

Theorem 3.3 guarantees the unique existence of the MFE by establishing the well-posedness of the corresponding conditional MKV-FBSDE system. Notably, this result does not require the additional smoothness condition imposed by Assumption 2.13. The monotonicity condition in Assumption 2.12 is standard in the literature of the well-posedness of (MKV-)FBSDE, based on the method of continuation argument; see [8, 27], [30, Appendix A], and [41, Chapter 8.4].

Remark 2.16. If we restrict our attention to the symmetric NE α N -symmetric in the sense that the tuple ( ( X 1 0 , α N, 1 , W 0 , W 1 ) , . . . , ( X N 0 , α N,N , W 0 , W N ) ) is exchangeable-then the equality E [ ∫ T 0 | α i t -α i,N t | 2 dt ] = E [ ∫ T 0 | α j t -α j,N t | 2 dt ] holds for any i, j ∈ { 1 , . . . , N } . Consequently, the estimate above can be strengthened to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i ∈ { 1 , . . . , N } . This holds true, in particular, when the uniqueness of the N -player NE is guaranteed. Such uniqueness has been established for games without control interactions; see [30, Lemma 7]. In our setting, however, establishing uniqueness is subtle. For this reason, we rely on the average over i ∈ { 1 , . . . , N } .

## 3 Characterization of equilibria via the stochastic maximum principle

In this section, we characterize the equilibria for both the N -player game and the MFG by applying Pontryagin's maximum principle.

## 3.1 The maximum principle for the N -player game

First, let us define the Hamiltonian for the N -player game:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and introduce the notation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the N -player game, we establish the necessary condition for optimality.

Lemma 3.1. Let Assumptions 2.4 and 2.6 hold, and let ˆ α ∈ ( A N ) N be a NE. Then there exists a solution ( Y i,j , Z i,j,k , Z 0 ,i,j ) ( i,j,k ) ∈{ 1 ,...,N } 3 , where Y i,j ∈ S 2 ( F N ; R n ) , and Z i,j,k , Z 0 ,i,j ∈ H 2 ( F N ; R n × d ) , satisfying the following adjoint system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any β i ∈ A N and all i = 1 , 2 , . . . , N .

Proof. Since ˆ α is a NE, the definition of NE implies that ˆ α i satisfies the following optimality condition:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, we may apply the standard stochastic maximum principle argument; see, for example, [12, Theorem 2.15].

For later use, we compute the driver of the above adjoint equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also compute the terminal condition:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the computation of the derivative of functions of empirical measures, see [12, Proposition 5.35].

## 3.2 The maximum principle for the mean field game

Next, we provide the necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence of an MFE. The following result is standard; see, for example, [12, Theorem 2.15 and 2.16].

Lemma 3.2. Let Assumptions 2.4 and 2.6 hold, and let (ˆ α, ˆ ξ ) be an MFE such that E ∫ T 0 M 2 2 ( ˆ ξ t ) dt &lt; ∞ . Then there exists a unique solution ( X ˆ α, ˆ ξ , Y, Z, Z 0 ) , where X ˆ α, ˆ ξ ∈ S 2 ( F ; R n ) , Y ∈ S 2 ( F ; R n ) , Z ∈ H 2 ( F ; R n × d ) , and Z 0 ∈ H 2 ( F ; R n × d ) , to the FBSDE system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and it holds that for any β ∈ R ℓ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Conversely, suppose there exists a solution to the system (3.3) for ˆ α ∈ A and for an P 2 ( R n × R ℓ ) -valued, F 0 -progressively process ξ ˆ α with E ∫ T 0 M 2 2 ( ξ ˆ α t ) dt &lt; ∞ , such that ˆ α satisfies (3.4) and ξ ˆ α t = L 1 ( X ˆ α t , ˆ α t ) , P 0 -a.s. for all t ∈ [0 , T ] . Then (ˆ α, ξ ˆ α ) is an MFE.

Finally, we state the well-posedness of the MFG.

Theorem 3.3. Let Assumptions 2.4, 2.6, 2.12 hold. Then, the MFG admits a unique MFE.

Proof of this theorem is provided at the end of Section A using the well-posedness result for the following conditional MKV-FBSDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Θ = ( X,Y,Z,Z 0 ).

## 4 Proof of Theorem 2.14

Throughout this section, we adhere to the same assumptions and notation as in Theorem 2.14. In particular, we assume that Assumptions 2.4, 2.6, 2.12, and 2.13 are satisfied. Furthermore, let α N ∈ A N N be an N -player NE, which is assumed to exist. Denote the corresponding state process by ( X N, 1 , . . . , X N,N ) ∈ ( S 2 ( F N ; R n )) N . The associated adjoint system, as given in Lemma 3.1, is denoted by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, we define the process ( ζ i t ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, using the optimizer Λ from Lemma 2.8 and Proposition 3.1, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This follows from the strict convexity of the Hamiltonian H (more precisely, of H + a · ζ ) with respect to a . In light of Lemma 3.1, Θ N satisfies the following system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we denote by Θ := ( X,Y,Z,Z 0 ) the solution of the conditional MKV-FBSDE (3.5), defined on (Ω , F , P ). By (the proof of) Theorem 3.3 and A.2, the unique existence of such a solution is guaranteed, and the pair

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is the unique MFE. Therefore, as in Lemma B.3 and the preceding discussion, we can construct a sequence of stochastic processes (Θ i = ( X i , Y i , Z i , Z 0 ,i )) i ∈{ 1 ,...,N } such that, for each i , Θ i ∈ S 2 ( F N ; R n ) × S 2 ( F N ; R n ) × H 2 ( F N ; R n ) × H 2 ( F N ; R n ) is the unique solution to (3.5) on (Ω N , F N , P N ) where ( X 0 , W 0 , W ) is replaced by ( X i 0 , W 0 , W i ). Moreover, for each fixed t ∈ [0 , T ], the collection (Θ i t ( ω 0 , · , · )) i ∈{ 1 ,...,N } forms an i.i.d. sequence of random variables on (Ω 1 ,N , F 1 ,N , P 1 ,N ) for P 0 -almost all ω 0 , whose common law coincides with L 1 (Θ). We also define

and denote

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We begin with the following lemma as introduced in [30, Lemma 6].

Lemma 4.1. Let Assumption 2.12 hold. Then we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

and

Moreover

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Take random variables Θ = ( X,Y,Z,Z 0 ) and ˜ Θ = ( ˜ X, ˜ Y , ˜ Z, ˜ Z 0 ) with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all i = 1 , . . . , N . Apply Assumption 2.12 to conclude.

In the subsequent lemmas, we estimate the solution of the FBSDE systems for the N -player game.

Lemma 4.2. Let Assumption 2.4, 2.6, and 2.12 hold. Then, for sufficiently large N , there exists a constant C &gt; 0 , independent of i , j , and N , such that

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. First, applying Itô's product rule yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where M i is a P N -martingale. Thus we get 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by applying the monotonicity condition in Assumption 2.12, the boundedness of ∂ µ b , ∂ µ σ , and ∂ µ σ 0 , the Lipschitz continuity and linear growth conditions of b, σ, σ 0 , ∂ x H , together with the ε -Young inequality for an arbitrary ε &gt; 0, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, we can estimate X N,i T · Y N,i,i T by using the monotonicity of G , the linear growth condition for ∂ µ g , and ε -Young's inequality,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

1 Within the proofs, we use the shorthand notation ∑ i = ∑ N i =1 and ∑ j = i = ∑ N j = i . The constant C &gt; 0 varies line by line, unless it depends on i or N .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, combining (4.5) and (4.6), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

where we used the fact that ( X N,i 0 ) i =1 ,...,N is an i.i.d. sample from µ 0 ∈ P 2 ( R n ). Next, applying Itô's formula to ∑ i | Y N,i,i | 2 and taking expectation, we obtain

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we used the boundedness of ∂ µ b, ∂ µ σ , and ∂ µ σ 0 , the linear growth of ∂ x H,∂ µ f and Λ, and η -Young's inequality for an arbitrary η &gt; 0. Thus, taking η sufficiently small and N large, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Apply Gronwall's inequality to get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Plug this into (4.8), and then (4.7), and take ε sufficiently small and N large, to obtain

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C does not depend on i, j , and N . From this estimate, the result follows immediately.

Lemma 4.3. Let Assumption 2.4, 2.6, and 2.12 hold. Then, for sufficiently large N , we have

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some constant C &gt; 0 , which is independent of i, j, and N .

Proof. Fix i = 1, for example, and define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and for φ = b, σ, σ 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

Recall for i = j , the process Y i,j t satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and thus we can write the dynamics of Y -1 t as the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Itô's formula, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we used the boundedness of ∂ x b, ∂ x σ, ∂ x σ 0 , ∂ µ b, ∂ µ σ, and ∂ µ σ 0 , as well as the ε -Young's inequality for an arbitrary ε &gt; 0. Then take ε sufficiently small and N large, and take the expectation of the both sides to obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, by Gronwall's inequality, we obtain for any t ∈ [0 , T ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we used the definition of P , as well as the linear growth of ∂ µ f .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Plugging these into (4.11), we finally obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Analogously, we can derive the same estimates for all i = 1 , . . . , N . Summing these estimates over i , and applying Lemma 4.2, we obtain

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Again, choosing N sufficiently large and integrating from 0 to T , we conclude

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We are now ready to derive the convergence rate for ζ i , which is needed for the proof of Theorem 2.14.

Proposition 4.4. Let Assumption 2.4, 2.6, and 2.12 hold. Then, for sufficiently large N , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some constant C &gt; 0 independent of N .

Proof. Recall the definition (4.1) of ζ i . Using the linear growth condition of ∂ ν f , the boundedness of ∂ ν b , ∂ ν σ , ∂ ν σ 0 and Lemma 4.2 and 4.3,

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Take N sufficiently large to conclude.

The following proposition plays a central role in establishing the convergence of the equilibria.

Proposition 4.5. Let Assumptions 2.4, 2.6, and 2.12 hold, and let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, there exists a sufficiently large N such that the inequality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds for some constant C &gt; 0 independent of N , and for

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. First, use Itô's product rule to compute

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where M i t is a P N -martingale. Similarly, we can compute the terminal condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, using the monotonicity condition in Assumption 2.12 and the Lipschitz continuity of ∂ x H,b, σ, σ 0 , Λ, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, using the Lipschitz continuity of Λ, ∂ µ g , and ∂ µ H and the boundedness of ∂ µ b, ∂ µ σ , and ∂ µ σ 0 , and applying the ε -Young's inequality for an arbitrary ε &gt; 0, we deduce

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Next, we are estimating the difference of the backward systems. Apply Itô's formula to | ∆ Y i | 2 , and η -Young's inequality for an arbitrary η &gt; 0 to derive

where we applied Lemma 4.3 in the second inequality to estimate the terms ∑ j = i ( | Y N,i,j t | 2 + | Z N,i,j,j t | 2 + | Z 0 ,N,i,j t | 2 ), and Lemma 4.4 in the third one.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We sum this estimate over all i = 1 , . . . , N and use Lemma 4.3 and Proposition 4.4 to derive

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking η sufficiently small and N sufficiently large, and then taking the expectation of both sides, we can apply Gronwall's inequality to obtain, for any t ∈ [0 , T ],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C &gt; 0 depends on η as well. Plug this into (4.15), and choose ε sufficiently small and N sufficiently large. Then we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Plugging (4.18) back into (4.17), the statement follows immediately.

Proof of Theorem 2.14. Recall (4.14). For example, for E F,i ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our aim is to control E [ ∫ T 0 ∑ i | E F,i t | 2 dt ] by some constant C &gt; 0, which is independent of i, N . For the second term, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

Thus, it follows

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thanks to assumption 2.13, we can use [30, Lemma 9] to compute

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, from (4.19), (4.20), we get

Next, for the first term of E F,i t , we follow the same argument as in the proof of [30, Theorem 2]. Set L N, -i ( Θ t ) = 1 N -1 ∑ j = i δ Θ j t . Then, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, compute

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Likewise, it is easy to check that similar bounds also hold for E B,i , E Σ ,i , E Σ 0 ,i , and E G,i (possibly with a different constant C ). Thus, by Proposition 4.5, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We apply Burkholder-Davis-Gundy inequality to get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and sum this estimate over all i ;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We apply Lemma 4.4, (4.21), and (4.22) to conclude

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, using the Lipschitz continuity of Λ, we conclude that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we used Lemma 4.4 and (4.22) in the second line.

## 5 Linear-quadratic example

In this section, we investigate a class of linear-quadratic mean field games (LQ-MFGs) with a specific structure. We demonstrate that the unique MFE exists for this class and that the convergence result established in Theorem 2.14 holds. Given α ∈ A , µ ∈ H 2 ( F 0 ; R n ), and ν ∈ H 2 ( F 0 ; R ℓ ), consider the following state process of the representative player:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where c 1 , c 2 ∈ R . Although the process depends on α and ν , we suppress this explicit dependence for notational simplicity. In equilibrium, the consistency condition ν t = E [ α t | F 0 t ] must hold.

The player aims to minimize the following quadratic cost functional:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where M ⊤ denotes the transpose of a matrix M .

A linear-quadratic mean field equilibrium (LQ-MFE) is defined as a triplet (ˆ α, ˆ µ, ˆ ν ) ∈ A × S 2 ( F 0 ; R n ) × H 2 ( F 0 ; R ℓ ) satisfying the optimality condition:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the consistency conditions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˆ X denotes the state process corresponding to the control ˆ α .

The following is the main assumption for the LQ-MFG:

Assumption 5.1. The coefficients of the LQ-MFG satisfy the following conditions:

- (i) The functions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

are measurable and uniformly bounded in t .

- (ii) For all t ∈ [0 , T ], the matrices satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some constant λ &gt; 0. Here, I ℓ denotes the ℓ × ℓ identity matrix, and the symbols &gt; and ≥ denote the standard partial ordering for square matrices.

̸

- (iii) c 1 = 0, or ( c 1 = 0 and c 2 /c 1 ≤ 1).

Remark 5.2. The structural condition on the state process and Assumption 5.1 are sufficient to ensure that the game satisfies the monotonicity condition in Assumption 2.12.

Note that in the cost functional J , the terms α and ν are separated to align with the separability condition in Assumption 2.4 (vi). The separability condition is required primarily for the convergence result in this setting. Thus, if we were concerned solely with the well-posedness of this LQ-MFE, we could consider a running cost term of the form ( α -R t ν t ) ⊤ ¯ P t ( α -R t ν t ).

Unlike [25], this setting allows the state process to depend on the distribution of the control. The constants c 1 and c 2 characterize the nature of this interaction. For instance, when c 1 = c 2 , the player's control acts relative to the random environment ν ; effectively, the player controls the difference α t -ν t .When c 2 = -c 1 , the control and the random environment affect the state dynamics in exactly the same manner.The case c 2 = 0 corresponds to a standard single-player optimization problem.

To align with the notation in the previous sections, we introduce the following definitions before proving Proposition 5.3.

For ( t, x, a, µ, ν ) ∈ [0 , T ] × R n × R ℓ × R n × R ℓ , the coefficients of the state process and the cost functions are defined as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The Hamiltonian is defined as in (2.1):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The first-order derivatives with respect to x and a are computed as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the first-order condition ∂ a H LQ = 0, the optimizer Λ LQ of the Hamiltonian H LQ (see Lemma 2.8) is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us now define the coefficients of the Hamiltonian system. For θ = ( x, y, z, z 0 ) ∈ R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d and ξ ∈ P 2 ( R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d ), we define:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We are now ready to state the main proposition of this section.

Proposition 5.3. Let Assumption 5.1 be in force. Then:

- (i) The coefficients ( b LQ , σ LQ , σ LQ, 0 , f LQ , g LQ ) and the Hamiltonian H LQ satisfy Assumptions 2.4 and 2.6.
- (ii) The coefficients ( B LQ , Σ LQ , Σ LQ, 0 , F LQ , G LQ ) satisfy Assumptions 2.12 and 2.13.

Remark 5.4. Thanks to Proposition 5.3, Theorem 3.3 and Theorem A.2 guarantee the unique existence of the LQ-MFE, and Theorem 2.14 establishes the O ( N -1 ) convergence result.

Typically, as seen in [7, Theorem 3.2] and [9, (2.23)], the unique existence of an LQ-MFE reduces to the well-posedness of corresponding FBODEs, which is derived by taking the expectation of the FBSDE obtained via the SMP. Here, in contrast, by imposing specific structural conditions, we directly prove the well-posedness of the FBSDE.

To obtain a closed-loop equilibrium, one might employ an affine ansatz, such as Y t = K t X t + ϕ t , for the solution of the FBSDE system. This would lead to a Riccati equation, reducing the problem to the solvability of that equation. However, since such an endeavor lies beyond the scope of this paper, we focus here on establishing the unique existence of the open-loop control.

Proof of Proposition 5.3. We verify that the coefficients ( B LQ , Σ LQ , Σ LQ, 0 , F LQ , G LQ ) satisfy the monotonicity condition in Assumption 2.12. Let Θ = ( X,Y,Z,Z 0 ) and Θ ′ = ( X ′ , Y ′ , Z ′ , Z 0 ′ ) be square-integrable random variables of appropriate dimensions. We denote the differences as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

First, we compute the term involving the terminal cost G LQ : 2

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we used the condition Q T + ¯ Q T ≥ λI and ¯ Q T S T ≤ 0.

Next, compute

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last inequality follows from the conditions Q t + ¯ Q t ≥ λI and ¯ Q t S t ≤ 0, the inequality E [ | U | 2 ] ≥ | E [ U ] | 2 for any random vector U , and the assumptions on c 1 and c 2 .

## A Well-posedness of conditional McKean-Vlasov FBSDEs

In this section, we prove the well-posedness result for the following conditional McKean-Vlasov Equation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

2 Here, in this proof, the notation ⟨ x, y ⟩ (resp. ⟨ M,N ⟩ ) denotes the standard inner product on R k (resp. the Frobenius inner product defined by trace( M ⊤ N )), for x, y ∈ R k (resp. M,N ∈ R k × k ).

where W := ( W,W 0 ) is a (2 × d )-dimensional Brownian Motion, Θ = ( X,Y,Z ), and ( L 1 (Θ t )) t ∈ [0 ,T ] is a F 0 -progressively measurable version. Throughout this section, we only work with (Ω , F , F , P ), and thus we use the shorthand notation H 2 ( R k ) = H 2 ( F ; R k ).

Once we obtain the unique existence for Equation (A.1), it is easy to prove the unique existence of the MFE as stated in Theorem 3.3. Specifically, we only need to check the well-posedness of the system (3.5). The proof of the theorem is also provided at the end of this section.

## Assumption A.1. Let

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

be Borel measurable and satisfy:

- (i) The functions φ = B, Σ , F, G are Lipschitz continuous uniformly in t; that is, there exists a constant L f such that, for any ( x, y, z, ξ ) , ( x ′ , y ′ , z ′ , ξ ′ ) ∈ R n × R n × R n × 2 d ×P 2 ( R n × n × 2 d ), it holds

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (ii) There exists C f &gt; 0 such that for any square integrable random variables Θ = ( X,Y,Z ) , Θ ′ = ( X ′ , Y ′ , Z ′ ) of appropriate dimensions,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we are ready to state our well-posedness result:

Theorem A.2. Let Assumption A.1 hold. Then, there exists a unique solution ( X,Y,Z ) ∈ H 2 ( R n ) × H 2 ( R n ) × H 2 ( R 2( n × d ) ) to the equation (A.1) .

Remark A.3. Although the above theorem only guarantees that X (resp. Y ) is in H 2 ( R n ) and not necessarily in S 2 ( R n ), if the coefficients B, Σ (resp. F ) additionally satisfy the linear growth condition uniformly in t , it is straightforward to check that E sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | X t | 2 &lt; ∞ (resp. E sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | Y t | 2 &lt; ∞ ), and thus X ∈ S 2 ( R n ) (resp. Y ∈ S 2 ( R n )), as in Lemma 3.2.

Proof of Uniqueness of Theorem A.1. Let Θ and Θ ′ be two solutions, and denote for φ = B, Σ , F ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then,

Applying Itô's formula on ∆ X t ∆ Y t , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that ∆ X 0 = 0 and ∆ Y T = ∆ G . Since we know from the standard estimates for SDEs and BSDEs that E [ sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | ∆ X t | 2 +sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | ∆ Y t | 2 ] &lt; ∞ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Assumption A.1, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, from the standard estimates for BSDEs, it is straightforward to obtain E [ ∫ T 0 | ∆ Y t | 2 + | ∆ Z t | 2 dt ] = 0.

Next, we prove the existence of a solution via the method of continuation. This method was developed for classical FBSDEs in [27, 37], for MKV-FBSDEs in [8], and for conditional MKV-FBSDEs in [30] (where the flow of conditional probability is given by ( L 1 ( X t )) t ∈ [0 ,T ] , in contrast to ( L 1 (Θ t )) t ∈ [0 ,T ] considered here).

First given some δ &gt; 0, consider the following system for some ( b 0 , σ 0 , f 0 , g 0 ):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we defined the functions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for θ = ( x, y, z ) ∈ R n × R n × R 2 × ( n × d ) and ξ ∈ P 2 ( R n × R n × R 2 × ( n × d ) ).

We denote by FBSDE( δ ) the class of FBSDEs defined above. We say that FBSDE( δ ) is uniquely solvable if the equation (A.2) admits a unique solution for any b 0 , f 0 ∈ H 2 ( R n ) , σ 0 ∈ H 2 ( R 2( n × d ) ), and g 0 ∈ L 2 (Ω , F T , P ; R ). Note that FBSDE(1) corresponds exactly to (A.1). The following lemma is essential to connect the solvability of FBSDE(0) and FBSDE(1).

Lemma A.4. Let Assumption A.1 hold. If FBSDE( δ 0 ) is uniquely solvable, then there exists a constant η &gt; 0 , depending only on L f , C f in Assumption A.1, such that FBSDE( δ ) is uniquely solvable for any δ ∈ [ δ 0 , δ 0 + η ] .

With this lemma, we can now prove Theorem A.2.

Proof of Theorem A.2. It is known that FBSDE(0) is solvable (see [41, Lemma 8.4.3]). Since the step size η depends only on the structural constants and is independent of the initial point δ 0 , we can iteratively apply Lemma A.4 starting from δ = 0 to cover the interval [0 , 1] in finitely many steps. This implies that FBSDE(1) is solvable.

Now, let us prove Lemma A.4. We adapt the argument of [30, Appendix A] to our setting, where the coefficients depend on the law L 1 (Θ s ), not only its first marginal L 1 ( X s ).

Proof of Lemma A.4. For any δ ∈ [ δ 0 , δ 0 + η ] where η &gt; 0 is to be determined later, denote ε := δ -δ 0 . For arbitrary b 0 , f 0 ∈ H 2 ( R n ) , σ 0 ∈ H 2 ( R 2( n × d ) ), and g 0 ∈ L 2 (Ω , F T , P ; R ), consider the mapping Ψ : H 2 ( R n ) × H 2 ( R n ) × H 2 ( R 2 × ( n × d ) ) → H 2 ( R n ) × H 2 ( R n ) × H 2 ( R 2 × ( n × d ) ) such that Ψ( x, y, z ) = ( X,Y,Z ) with ( X,Y,Z ) satisfying the following FBSDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By our assumption, FBDSE( δ 0 ) is uniquely solvable and then, Φ is well-defined. It suffices to prove that Ψ is a contraction mapping for a suitable choice of η . Let ( x, y, z ) , ( x ′ , y ′ , z ′ ) ∈ H 2 ( R n ) × H 2 ( R n ) × H 2 ( R 2 × ( n × d ) ) and ( X,Y,Z ) = Ψ( x, y, z ) and ( X ′ , Y ′ , Z ′ ) = Ψ( x ′ , y ′ , z ′ ). Denote ∆ ϑ := ϑ -ϑ ′ , ∆Θ := Θ -Θ ′ . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for a martingale M . Since the original coefficients B,F, Σ, and G satisfy Assumption A.1, the interpolated coefficients B δ , F δ , Σ δ , and G δ naturally inherit these properties. Consequently, they also fulfill Assumption A.1, with the constant C f replaced by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since ∆ X 0 = 0, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Applying Young's inequality and the Lipschitz continuity of the coefficients B,F, Σ, and G , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for a generic constant C &gt; 0 3 . Here, we have also utilized the estimate:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also, utilizing the fact that G δ 0 fulfills Assumption A.1 (with the constant C f substituted by C δ 0 ), we derive the lower bound:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining these two estimates thus yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that the L f -Lipschitz property of B,F, Σ, and G , combined with δ 0 ≤ 1, implies that the interpolated functions B δ 0 , F δ 0 , Σ δ 0 , and G δ 0 are ( L f +2)-Lipschitz continuous. For notational simplicity, we shall continue to denote this generic Lipschitz constant by L f . Now, applying Itô's formula to the process e κt | ∆ Y t | 2 with a parameter κ &gt; 0 to be chosen later, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any a &gt; 0. Taking a sufficiently small and κ large, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Plug this into (A.4), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

3 In the proof, C may vary line by line, but it depends only on C f , L f , T and not on δ 0 .

Combining the estimate for E [ | ∆ X T | 2 ] provided by (A.4) with the property that C δ 0 ≥ ¯ C f (see (A.3)), we deduce:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Given that ¯ C f &gt; 0, we can choose parameters a and ε sufficiently small to ensure positivity of the coefficients, yielding the estimate:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This inequality demonstrates that Ψ is a contraction mapping provided ε is small enough. Consequently, we may define η as the maximum possible value for ε . Importantly, since the constant C is independent of δ 0 , the step size η is also independent of δ 0 .

Given this well-posedness result, we are ready to prove the unique existence of the MFE.

Proof of Theorem 3.3. We use the same notation as (2.2) and (2.3). To guarantee the unique existence of the solution to (3.5), we first need to check that the coefficients B, Σ , Σ 0 , and F are Lipschitz continuous uniformly in t . In fact, since we already know that b, σ, σ 0 , ∂ x H and ∂ x g are Lipschitz by assumption, we only need to show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all ξ, ξ ′ ∈ P 2 ( R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d ). To prove this, the argument in the proof of [36, Theorem 1] extends to our setting without difficulty. We begin by applying the Kantorovich duality theorem, which yields the following representation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, the supremum is taken over the class of bounded continuous functions h 1 , h 2 : R n × R ℓ → R subject to the constraint h 1 ( x, a ) -h 2 ( x ′ , a ′ ) ≤ | x -x ′ | 2 + | a -a ′ | 2 for all ( x, a ) , ( x ′ , a ′ ) ∈ R n × R ℓ . Given that Λ is Lipschitz continuous, it follows that,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This yields the estimate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the supremum is taken over all functions ˜ h 1 , ˜ h 2 subject to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Take an arbitrary transport plan Π ∈ P 2 (( R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d ) 2 ) with its first marginal ξ and the second one ξ ′ . Again, using the duality representation of the Wasserstein distance,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the choice of coupling Π is arbitrary, minimizing the right-hand side over all admissible Π gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, we conclude that B, Σ , Σ 0 , F , and G are Lipschitz continuous.

Regarding the integrability condition of ( L 1 ( X t , α t )) t ∈ [0 ,T ] , it is clear that the solution Θ of the conditional MKV-FBSDE (3.5) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for α t := Λ t (Θ t , µ,

## B Construction of conditionally i.i.d. copies of solutions to the McKeanVlasov FBSDE

In this section, we construct a conditionally independent sequence of solutions Θ i = ( X i , Y i , Z i , Z 0 ,i ) to the following conditional MKV-FBSDEs on (Ω N , F N , P N ). Each Θ i is identically distributed to the solution Θ = ( X,Y,Z,Z 0 ) defined on (Ω , F , P ).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we recall (2.2)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for a function φ : [0 , T ] ×P ( R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d ) →P ( R n × R ℓ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where id x denotes the projection ( x, y, z, z 0 ) ↦→ x . From (A.5), the map ξ ↦→ φ t ( ξ ) is continuous and, consequently, Borel measurable.

Suppose that for i = 1, the above FBSDE admits a solution Θ which is F -progressively measurable on (Ω , F , P ). Then, by [41, Proposition 1.2.1 (i)], there exists a ( σ ( W 0 s , X 0 , W s ; 0 ≤ s ≤ t ) ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] -progressively measurable version of Θ, which we again denote by Θ. From now on in this section, we will work with this version of Θ. Thus, for each t , by the measurability of Θ t with respect to σ ( W 0 s , X 0 , W s ; 0 ≤ s ≤ t ), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any ( ω 0 , x, ω ) ∈ C × R n ×C .

Furthermore, since Θ is ( σ ( W 0 s , X 0 , W s ; 0 ≤ s ≤ t ) ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] -progressively measurable, the function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is B ([0 , T ]) ⊗ σ ( W 0 , X 0 , W )-measurable, and hence Borel measurable on [0 , T ] ×C × R n ×C . Now, we define a process Θ i on (Ω N , F N , P N ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we regard Θ as a function from C × R n × C to R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d . It is clear that Θ i is F N -progressively measurable.

By this construction and Lemma 2.2, the sequence of processes (Θ i ) i =1 ,...,N is conditionally i.i.d. in the sense defined in Section 2, with the common conditional distribution given by L 1 (Θ t ). In addition, the distribution of Θ i : Ω N → L 2 ([0 , T ]) is identical for all i = 1 , . . . , N .

Furthermore, since Θ ∈ H 2 ( F ; R n ) × H 2 ( F ; R n ) × H 2 ( F ; R n × d ) × H 2 ( F ; R n × d ), it follows that Θ i ∈ H 2 ( F N ; R n ) × H 2 ( F N ; R n ) × H 2 ( F N ; R n × d ) × H 2 ( F N ; R n × d ).

In the subsequent lemmas, we show that each Θ i is a solution to equation (B.1) for i = 1 , . . . , N . We first state the following lemma, which will be used in the sequel. The proof is inspired by [39, Lemma 10.1, p. 125].

Lemma B.1. Let φ ∈ H 2 ( F ; R k ) . Then, there exists a Borel measurable function Φ : C× R n ×C → C ([0 , T ]; R k ) , such that

or more precisely, it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for P -almost all ( ω 0 , x, ω ) ∈ Ω .

Moreover, on (Ω N , F N , P N ) , it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. First, suppose that φ is a simple predictable process; that is, there exists a finite partition 0 = t 0 &lt; t 1 &lt; · · · &lt; t M = T , and F t m -measurable, bounded, R k × d -valued random variables φ m for m = 0 , . . . , M -1, such that φ is of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, we choose a version of each φ m that is measurable with respect to the the raw filtration σ ( W 0 s , X 0 , W s ; s ≤ t m ). Note that for this version of φ m , the map ( ω 0 , x, ω ) ↦→ φ m ( ω 0 , x, ω ) is Borel measurable on C × R n ×C .

It then follows from the definition of the stochastic integral that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since for any t ∈ [0 , T ], the map C ∋ ω ↦→ ω ·∧ t ∈ C is continuous with respect to the supremum norm on C , it is measurable with respect to the Borel σ -algebra on C . Therefore, together with the measurability of φ m , we deduce that there exists a measurable map Φ satisfying (B.4).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For a general process φ ∈ H 2 ( F ; R k ), there exists a sequence of simple predictable processes ( φ m ) m ∈ N such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, for the sequence of functions (Φ m ) m ∈ N , satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we define

Since the sequence (Φ m T ( W 0 , X 0 , W )) m ∈ N converges in L 2 (Ω , F , P ; R k ), the processes Φ t m ( W 0 , X 0 , W ) converge to Φ t ( W 0 , X 0 , W ) uniformly in t ∈ [0 , T ], P -a.s. Therefore, Φ · ( W 0 , X 0 , W ) ∈ C , P -a.s. It then follows from the definition of the stochastic integral that (B.4) holds.

The final statement also holds if we take the same approximating sequence.

Remark B.2. From the above proof, a similar result holds if we replace W in (B.4) by W 0 . This fact will also be used in the next lemma.

We are finally ready to state the following coupling result. The proof is similar to [39, Theorem 10.4, p.126].

Lemma B.3. Assume that the conditional MKV-FBSDE (B.1) admits a solution Θ ∈ H 2 ( F ; R n ) × H 2 ( F ; R n ) × H 2 ( F ; R n × d ) × H 2 ( F ; R n × d ) for i = 1 on the probability space (Ω , F , P ) , and that Assumption 2.4 (i),(ii) hold. Let (Θ i ) i =1 ,...N be the conditionally i.i.d. sequence of F N -progressively measurable version of the stochastic processes as constructed above.

Then, for each i , the process Θ i ∈ H 2 ( F N ; R n ) × H 2 ( F N ; R n ) × H 2 ( F N ; R n × d ) × H 2 ( F N ; R n × d ) is a solution to equation (B.1) on the probability space (Ω N , F N , P N ) .

Proof. Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by Lemma 2.2, the process φ B is F N -progressively measurable. Hence, we can select a ( σ ( W 0 s , X 0 , W s ; s ≤ t ) ) t ∈ [0 ,T ] -progressively measurable version of φ B . Thus, if we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then, by Fubini's theorem, the map ( ω 0 , x, ω ) ↦→ Φ B t ( ω 0 , x, ω ) is Borel measurable on C × R n ×C . Moreover, from previous Lemma B.1 and the subsequent Remark B.2, there exist Borel measurable functions Φ Σ , Φ Σ 0 , Φ Z , and Φ Z 0 from C × R n ×C to C ([0 , T ]; R n × d ), such that the following equalities hold P -a.s.:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In addition, we can find a Borel measurable map Φ G such that Φ G ( W 0 , X 0 , W ) = G ( X T , L ( X T )), P -a.s. Next, define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where for any ( x, y, z, z 0 ) ∈ R n × R n × R n × d × R n × d ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

are projections. Note also that for each t ∈ [0 , T ], Φ X t , Φ Y t , Φ Z t , and Φ Z 0 t are Borel measurable maps from C × R n ×C into the corresponding Euclidean spaces, each equipped with its Borel σ -algebra.

Therefore, from equation (B.1) with i = 1, it follows that for any t ∈ [0 , T ], the following equalities hold P -a.s.:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since the law of ( W 0 , X 0 , W ) and ( W 0 , X i 0 , W i ) is the same, it follows that for any t ∈ [0 , T ], the following equalities hold P N -a.s.:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, using the estimate (A.5), the Lipschitz continuity of b and Λ, and the fact that for any t ∈ [0 , T ], L 1 (Θ t ) = L 1 (Θ i t ), P 0 -a.s. for all t ∈ [0 , T ], we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A similar dt ⊗ P N -equivalence also holds for Σ, Σ 0 , F , and G , using the Lipschitz continuity of σ , σ 0 , ∂ x H , ∂ x g , and Λ. Therefore, we conclude that Θ i satisfies equation (B.1) for all i = 1 , . . . , N .

Remark B.4. It might be possible to work within a general (non-canonical) probability setup by employing a type of Yamada-Watanabe theorem for FBSDEs (see [13, Theorem 1.33]). Simply put, if the strong uniqueness holds for (B.1), with i = 1, then ( X,Y, ∫ ( Z s , Z 0 s ) ds ) can be represented via a function Φ depending on the X,W , and W 0 . Accordingly, by defining ( X i , Y i , ∫ ( Z i s , Z 0 ,i s ) ds ) := Φ( W 0 , X i 0 , W i ), ( X i , Y i , ∫ ( Z i s , Z 0 ,i s ) ds ) i ∈{ 1 ,...,N } is conditionally i.i.d. and solves (B.1). However, the result is stated only for ∫ · 0 ( Z s , Z 0 s ) ds , not for Z and Z 0 themselves. In the proof of Theorem 2.14, we specifically need ( Z i , Z 0 ,i ) i ∈{ 1 ,...,N } to be conditionally i.i.d. and since the space accommodating these processes are less regular than that of ∫ · 0 ( Z s , Z 0 s ) ds , the argument becomes more delicate. This is why we have chosen to work in the canonical setup, where establishing conditional i.i.d.ness is more straightforward.

## References

- [1] Clémence Alasseur, Imen Ben Taher, and Anis Matoussi. An extended mean field game for storage in smart grids. J. Optim. Theory Appl. , 184(2):644-670, 2020.
- [2] Erhan Bayraktar, Alekos Cecchin, Asaf Cohen, and Fran¸cois Delarue. Finite state mean field games with Wright-Fisher common noise. J. Math. Pures Appl. (9) , 147:98-162, 2021.
- [3] Erhan Bayraktar, Alekos Cecchin, Asaf Cohen, and Fran¸cois Delarue. Finite state mean field games with Wright-Fisher common noise as limits of N -player weighted games. Math. Oper. Res. , 47(4):2840-2890, 2022.

- [4] Erhan Bayraktar and Asaf Cohen. Analysis of a finite state many player game using its master equation. SIAM J. Control Optim. , 56(5):3538-3568, 2018.
- [5] Erhan Bayraktar and Nikolaos Kolliopoulos. On the mean-field limit of diffusive games through the master equation: extreme value analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18869 , 2024.
- [6] Erhan Bayraktar, Ruoyu Wu, and Xin Zhang. Propagation of chaos of forward-backward stochastic differential equations with graphon interactions. Appl. Math. Optim. , 88(1):Paper No. 25, 44, 2023.
- [7] A. Bensoussan, K. C. J. Sung, S. C. P. Yam, and S. P. Yung. Linear-quadratic mean field games. J. Optim. Theory Appl. , 169(2):496-529, 2016.
- [8] A. Bensoussan, S. C. P. Yam, and Z. Zhang. Well-posedness of mean-field type forward-backward stochastic differential equations. Stochastic Process. Appl. , 125(9):3327-3354, 2015.
- [9] Alain Bensoussan, Joohyun Kim, Bohan Li, and Sheung Chi Phillip Yam. Linear quadratic extended mean field games and control problems. J. Optim. Theory Appl. , 206(2):Paper No. 50, 47, 2025.
- [10] Pierre Cardaliaguet, Fran¸cois Delarue, Jean-Michel Lasry, and Pierre-Louis Lions. The master equation and the convergence problem in mean field games , volume 201 of Annals of Mathematics Studies . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2019.
- [11] Pierre Cardaliaguet and Charles-Albert Lehalle. Mean field game of controls and an application to trade crowding. Math. Financ. Econ. , 12(3):335-363, 2018.
- [12] René Carmona and Fran¸cois Delarue. Probabilistic theory of mean field games with applications. I , volume 83 of Probability Theory and Stochastic Modelling . Springer, Cham, 2018. Mean field FBSDEs, control, and games.
- [13] René Carmona and Fran¸cois Delarue. Probabilistic theory of mean field games with applications. II , volume 84 of Probability Theory and Stochastic Modelling . Springer, Cham, 2018. Mean field games with common noise and master equations.
- [14] René Carmona and Daniel Lacker. A probabilistic weak formulation of mean field games and applications. Ann. Appl. Probab. , 25(3):1189-1231, 2015.
- [15] Patrick Chan and Ronnie Sircar. Bertrand and Cournot mean field games. Appl. Math. Optim. , 71(3):533569, 2015.
- [16] Jean-Fran¸cois Chassagneux, Lukasz Szpruch, and Alvin Tse. Weak quantitative propagation of chaos via differential calculus on the space of measures. Ann. Appl. Probab. , 32(3):1929-1969, 2022.
- [17] Fran¸cois Delarue, Daniel Lacker, and Kavita Ramanan. From the master equation to mean field game limit theory: a central limit theorem. Electron. J. Probab. , 24:Paper No. 51, 54, 2019.
- [18] Fran¸cois Delarue, Daniel Lacker, and Kavita Ramanan. From the master equation to mean field game limit theory: large deviations and concentration of measure. Ann. Probab. , 48(1):211-263, 2020.
- [19] Mao Fabrice Djete. Extended mean field control problem: a propagation of chaos result. Electron. J. Probab. , 27:Paper No. 20, 53, 2022.
- [20] Mao Fabrice Djete. Mean field games of controls: on the convergence of Nash equilibria. Ann. Appl. Probab. , 33(4):2824-2862, 2023.
- [21] Markus Fischer. On the connection between symmetric N -player games and mean field games. Ann. Appl. Probab. , 27(2):757-810, 2017.

- [22] Nicolas Fournier and Arnaud Guillin. On the rate of convergence in Wasserstein distance of the empirical measure. Probab. Theory Related Fields , 162(3-4):707-738, 2015.
- [23] Diogo A. Gomes, Stefania Patrizi, and Vardan Voskanyan. On the existence of classical solutions for stationary extended mean field games. Nonlinear Anal. , 99:49-79, 2014.
- [24] Diogo A. Gomes and Vardan K. Voskanyan. Extended deterministic mean-field games. SIAM J. Control Optim. , 54(2):1030-1055, 2016.
- [25] P. Jameson Graber. Linear quadratic mean field type control and mean field games with common noise, with application to production of an exhaustible resource. Appl. Math. Optim. , 74(3):459-486, 2016.
- [26] P. Jameson Graber and Alain Bensoussan. Existence and uniqueness of solutions for Bertrand and Cournot mean field games. Appl. Math. Optim. , 77(1):47-71, 2018.
- [27] Y. Hu and S. Peng. Solution of forward-backward stochastic differential equations. Probab. Theory Related Fields , 103(2):273-283, 1995.
- [28] Minyi Huang, Roland P. Malhamé, and Peter E. Caines. Large population stochastic dynamic games: closed-loop McKean-Vlasov systems and the Nash certainty equivalence principle. Commun. Inf. Syst. , 6(3):221-251, 2006.
- [29] Joe Jackson and Alpár R. Mészáros. Quantitative convergence for displacement monotone mean field games of control, 2025.
- [30] Joe Jackson and Ludovic Tangpi. Quantitative convergence for displacement monotone mean field games with controlled volatility. Math. Oper. Res. , 49(4):2527-2564, 2024.
- [31] T. G. Kurtz and D. L. Ocone. Unique characterization of conditional distributions in nonlinear filtering. Ann. Probab. , 16(1):80-107, 1988.
- [32] Daniel Lacker. A general characterization of the mean field limit for stochastic differential games. Probab. Theory Related Fields , 165(3-4):581-648, 2016.
- [33] Daniel Lacker. On the convergence of closed-loop Nash equilibria to the mean field game limit. Ann. Appl. Probab. , 30(4):1693-1761, 2020.
- [34] Jean-Michel Lasry and Pierre-Louis Lions. Mean field games. Jpn. J. Math. , 2(1):229-260, 2007.
- [35] Mathieu Laurière and Ludovic Tangpi. Backward propagation of chaos. Electron. J. Probab. , 27:Paper No. 69, 30, 2022.
- [36] Mathieu Laurière and Ludovic Tangpi. Convergence of large population games to mean field games with interaction through the controls. SIAM J. Math. Anal. , 54(3):3535-3574, 2022.
- [37] Shige Peng and Zhen Wu. Fully coupled forward-backward stochastic differential equations and applications to optimal control. SIAM J. Control Optim. , 37(3):825-843, 1999.
- [38] Dylan Possamaï and Ludovic Tangpi. Non-asymptotic convergence rates for mean-field games: weak formulation and McKean-Vlasov BSDEs. Appl. Math. Optim. , 91(3):Paper No. 58, 73, 2025.
- [39] L. C. G. Rogers and David Williams. Diffusions, Markov processes, and martingales. Vol. 2 . Cambridge Mathematical Library. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000. Itô calculus, Reprint of the second (1994) edition.
- [40] Alain-Sol Sznitman. Topics in propagation of chaos. In École d'Été de Probabilités de Saint-Flour XIX1989 , volume 1464 of Lecture Notes in Math. , pages 165-251. Springer, Berlin, 1991.
- [41] Jianfeng Zhang. Backward stochastic differential equations , volume 86 of Probability Theory and Stochastic Modelling . Springer, New York, 2017. From linear to fully nonlinear theory.