## On the Capacity Region of the Two-User Interference Channel

Reza K. Farsani 1

Email: reza\_khosravi@alum.sharif.ir

Abstract: One  of  the  key  open  problems  in  network  information  theory  is  to  obtain  the  capacity  region  for  the  two-user  Interference Channel (IC). In this paper, new results are derived for this channel. As a first result, a noisy interference regime is given for the general IC where the sum-rate capacity is achieved by treating interference as noise at the receivers. To obtain this result, a single-letter outer bound in terms of some auxiliary random variables is first established for  the sum-rate capacity of  the general IC and then those conditions under which this outer bound is reduced to the achievable sum-rate given by the simple treating interference as noise strategy are specified. The main  benefit  of  this  approach  is  that  it  is  applicable  for  any  two-user  IC  (potentially  non-Gaussian).  For  the  special  case  of  Gaussian channel,  our result  is  reduced  to  the  noisy  interference  regime  that  was  previously  obtained.  Next,  some  results  are  given  on  the  HanKobayashi (HK) achievable rate region. The evaluation of this rate region is in general difficult. In this paper, a simple characterization of the HK rate region is derived for some special cases, specifically, for a novel very weak interference regime. As a remarkable characteristic, it is shown that for this very weak interference regime, the achievable sum-rate due to the HK region is identical to the one given by the simple treating interference as noise strategy.

## I. INTRODUCTION

One of the key open problems in network information is to obtain the capacity region for the two-user Interference Channel (IC). This channel  is  a  simple  communication  scenario  where  two  transmitters  separately send  independent  messages  to  their  corresponding receivers  while  causing  interference  to  the  other  receiver.  In  recent  years,  numerous  papers  have  studied  capacity  limits  for  this channel and related scenarios. For a comprehensive review of the existing results, please refer to [1] and literature therein. See also [17] for recent results.

In this paper, we derive new results for the two-user IC. As a first result, we obtain a noisy interference regime for the general IC (potentially non-Gaussian). Recall that in concurrent papers [8, 9, 10], it was shown that for  the Gaussian IC when the interference level  is  below  a  certain  threshold,  the  sum-rate  capacity is  achieved  by treating  interference  as  noise  at  both  receivers. A  natural question is that how one can adapt this result for the discrete IC? In this paper, by a new approach we re-derive the result of [8, 9, 10] to be applicable not only for the Gaussian channel but also for any two-user IC. In our approach, a single-letter outer bound in terms of some auxiliary random variables is first established for the sum-rate capacity of the general IC and then those conditions under which this outer bound is reduced to the achievable sum-rate due to the simple treating interference as noise strategy are specified.

Next, we present some results on the Han-Kobayashi achievable rate region [11]. This is the best known capacity inner bound for the two-user  IC  which  was  derived  in  1981.  A  compact  characterization  of  the  HK  rate  region  was  derived  in  [12].  However,  the evaluation of the HK rate region for the general case is still difficult due to numerous degrees of freedom involved in the problem [8]. In this paper, we propose a new decoding scheme for the two-user IC named the semi-joint decoding and demonstrate that, despite its simple structure, it has the same performance as the HK scheme for a novel very weak interference regime and also for the strong interference regime. Consequently,  we derive  a simple  characterization of the HK region  for the identified very weak interference regime. As a remarkable characteristic, we also show that for this regime, the achievable sum-rate due to the HK region is identical to the one given by the simple treating interference as noise strategy. We simplify the HK region for the IC with strong interference at one receiver and the one-sided IC, as well.

In the following section, we present the channel model. Our main results are given in section III.

1 Reza K. Farsani was with the department of electrical engineering, Sharif University of Technology. He is by now with the school of cognitive sciences, Institute for Research in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), Tehran, Iran.

## II. CHANNEL MODEL

In this paper, we use the same notations as those in [1], most of them are by now standard.

The Two-User IC: In  this  channel,  two  transmitters  send  independent messages to their respective receivers via a common media. Figure 1 depicts the channel model.

Figure 1. The two-user IC: The transmitter ܺ ௜ sends the message ܯ ௜ to its respective receiver ܻ ௜ , = ݅ 1,2 .

<!-- image -->

The two-user IC is given by the input signals ܺ ଵ ࣲ א ଵ and ܺ ଶ ࣲ א ଶ ,  the  outputs ܻ ଵ ࣳ א ଵ and ܻ ଶ ࣳ א ଶ and the transition probability function Զ( ݕ ଵ ǡ ݕ ଶ ݔ| ଵ ǡ ݔ ଶ ) that describes the relation between the inputs and the outputs of the channel. The channel is assumed to be memoryless. The Gaussian IC is usually formulated in the following standard form:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܼ ଵ ǡ ܼ ଶ are zero-mean unit-variance Gaussian random variables (RVs), ܽ and ܾ are fixed real numbers, and ॱ[ ܺ ௜ ଶ ] ൑ ܲ ௜ ǡ = ݅ 1,2 . A two-user IC is said to be one-sided if either one of the following conditions holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In other words, for a one-sided IC, the signal of one receiver does not depend on the signal of the non-respective transmitter. The Gaussian  one-sided  IC  is  also  derived  by  setting  either = ܽ 0 or = ܾ 0 in  (2).  In  this  paper,  without  loss  of  generality,  we  only consider the one-sided ICs that satisfy the condition (2-a).

## III. MAIN RESULTS

## III.A ) A Noisy Interference Regime for the General IC

Our first result is to identify a noisy interference regime for any two-user IC. Let us first present a new lemma which is critical in our future derivation.

Lemma 1) Given an integer ݊ , let ܻ ଵ ௡ and ܻ ଶ ௡ be two arbitrary random vector of length ݊ . For any arbitrary random variable ܣ , we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܷ ௧ = ൫ ܻ ଵ ௧ିଵ ǡ ܻ ଶǡ௧ାଵ ௡ ൯ǡ = ݐ 1,2,… , ݊

Proof of Lemma 1) We can write:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where equality (a) is due to the Csiszar-Korner identity. ሁ

In general, the above lemma is a very useful tool for single-letterization while establishing capacity outer bounds for different network scenarios. This lemma holds for both discrete and continuous random variables.

Now, we can derive the main result.

Theorem 1) Consider the two-user IC in Fig. 1. Let Զ ෩ ( ݕ ෤ ଵ ǡ ݕ ෤ ଶ ݔ| ଵ ǡ ݔ ଶ ) be any virtual memoryless IC with:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume that the following conditions hold:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܲ ொ כ ܲ ௑భ|ொ כ ܲ ௑మ|ொ כ is a solution to the following maximization:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Theorem 1) The achievability of (8) is immediately derived by treating interference as noise at the receivers. Let prove the converse part. Consider a length-݊ code with vanishing average error probability for transmitting the messages ܯ ଵ and ܯ ଶ uniformly distributed over the sets [1: 2 ௡ோభ ] and [1: 2 ௡ோమ ] , respectively. Define the new random variables ܷ ଵǡ௧ ǡ ܷ ଶǡ௧ , = ݐ 1,…, ݊ , as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and,

The sum-rate capacity is given by:

Based on the Fano's inequality, we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  equality  (a)  holds  because ܻ ෨ ଵ ௡ is  independent  of ൫ ܺ ଶ ௡ ǡ ܻ ෨ ଶ ௡ ൯ and ܻ ෨ ଶ ௡ is  independent  of ൫ ܺ ଵ ௡ ǡ ܻ ෨ ଵ ௡ ൯ ,  and  equality  (b)  is  given  by Lemma 1. Applying a standard time-sharing argument to (10), we deduce that the sum-rate capacity of the channel is bounded by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, if the conditions (5) hold, we have (note that (5) can readily be extended to include the time-sharing variable):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By substituting (12) in (11), we derive that the sum-rate capacity is bounded above by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is clear that if (6) hold, then (13) is reduced to (8). ሁ

Now let consider the Gaussian IC (1). Define a virtual IC as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܼ ෨ ଵ and ܼ ෨ ଶ are independent Gaussian random variables with zero mean and unit variances. It is assumed that ܼ ෨ ௜ is correlated to ܼ ௜ with correlation coefficient ߩ ௜ , = ݅ 1,2 . One can verify that if the following hold:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then, the inequalities (5) are satisfied. Moreover, using the entropy power inequality (or the worst case additive noise lemma [13]), one can  show that under  the  conditions (15),  Gaussian  inputs without time-sharing  are  the  optimal solution  for  the  maximization (7). Accordingly, the conditions (6) are equivalent to the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then, the parameters ߟ ଵ ǡ ߟ ଶ ǡ ߩ ଵ and ߩ ଶ can be definitely chosen to satisfy both (15) and (16). Therefore, for the Gaussian IC satisfying (17),  the  sum-rate  capacity  is  achieved  by treating  interference  as  noise  at  the  receivers,  as  derived  in  [8,  9,  10].  The  difference between our approach and that of [9] is actually in the single-letterization steps. In [9], using the worst case additive noise lemma [13], it is directly shown that the expression on the left side of equation (a) in (10) is bounded by (13) if the conditions (15) are satisfied for the Gaussian IC. But by our approach, using Lemma 1, first a single-letter outer bound in terms of some auxiliary random variables is derived for the general IC. Then, those conditions under which this outer bound is reduced to (13) are specified. The main benefit of our approach is that it is applicable for any two-user IC (potentially non-Gaussian).

## III.B) On Capacity Inner Bounds for the IC

In this subsection, we present some new results on capacity inner bounds for the two-user IC. The best known achievable rate region for this channel is the well-known HK region [11] in the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  rate  region Ը௜ ு௄೎ given  in  (18)  has  a  compact  description  compared  to  the  initial  HK  characterization  [11].  This  compact characterization is due to [12]. In the initial HK scheme for the two-user IC, each encoder splits its message into two parts named the common  part and  the private  part ,  and  then  these  two  parts  are  encoded  using  independent  codewords.  The  encoders  send  a deterministic  function  of these  two  independent  codewords  over  the  channel. By incorporating  a  jointly decoding  technique,  each receiver decodes the common part of the messages of both transmitters as well as the private part of its respective transmitter. The rate region due to this simple scheme, if the time-sharing is employed, is equivalent to (18); see [12] for details. The characterization (18), although is a compact version of the initial HK region, its evaluation is still difficult even for the special case of Gaussian channel [8].

In what follows, we present a new decoding scheme for the two-user IC named the semi-joint decoding and discuss its performance versus the HK scheme. Moreover, we simplify the HK region (18) for certain classes of ICs.

First, let us introduce a novel class of ICs with very weak interference.

As given in [9], if the following holds:

Definition: The two-user IC is said to have very weak interference provided that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all joint PDFs ܲ ௐభ ܲ ௐమ ܲ ௑భȁௐ భ ܲ ௑మȁௐ మ .

By examining the conditions (19) for the Gaussian channel (1) with Gaussian input distributions, we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These conditions can be viewed as the very weak interference regime for the Gaussian IC (1). Nonetheless, it should be mentioned that  (20)  is  not  equivalent  to  (19),  in  general.  Also,  it  is  worth  noting  that  the regime  (20)  strictly includes  the  noisy  interference regime (17) as a special case.

In the following theorem, we present our new achievability scheme for the two-user IC. For the very weak interference regime (19), our scheme yields the same achievable rate region as the HK scheme. As a byproduct, the HK region (18) is also simplified for the very weak interference regime (17).

Theorem 2) Define the rate region Ը௜ ூ஼ as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The set Ը௜ ூ஼ is  an achievable rate region for the two-user IC. Moreover, for any two-user IC satisfying the very weak interference conditions (19), the HK achievable rate region (18) is equivalent to Ը௜ ூ஼ .

Proof of Theorem 2) First,  we  prove  the  achievability  of  (21)  for  the  general  IC  using  a  random  coding  argument  in  which  the superposition encoding technique is  exploited  at the transmitters and the semi-joint decoding is  applied at  the receivers. Precisely speaking, each message is split into two parts and then these sub-messages are encoded at transmitters in a superposition fashion. At each receiver, the decoding is performed in two steps:

1. First, the cloud center of the desired message is detected using joint decoding.
2. After decoding the cloud center, the satellite of the desired message is decoded by treating interference (i.e., both the cloud center and the satellite of the non-desired message) as noise.

Note  that  the  parameter ܳ in  the  rate  region Ը௜ ூ஼ is  a  time-sharing  RV.  Therefore,  for  simplicity  of  exposition  we  derive  the achievability of (21) for  the  case of ׎ ؠ ܳ .  The coding scheme can be readily extended to a time-shared one. Fix the joint PDFs ܲ ௐభ ݓ( ଵ )ǡ ܲ ௐమ ݓ( ଶ )ǡ ܲ ௑భȁௐ భ ݔ( ଵ ݓ| ଵ ) , and ܲ ௑మȁௐ మ ݔ( ଶ ݓ| ଶ ) . For a given ܴ( ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ א ) Թା ଶ , split the rates ܴ ଵ and ܴ ଶ as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The messages ܯ ଵ and ܯ ଶ are expressed  as: ܯ ௜ = ( ܯ ௜଴ ǡ ܯ ௜௜ [ א ) 1:2 ௡ோ೔బ ] × [1: 2 ௡ோ೔೔ ] , = ݅ 1,2 .  The  random  codebook is generated as follows.

Encoding: At the ݅ ௧௛ transmitter, = ݅ 1,2, the messages ܯ ௜଴ and ܯ ௜௜ are encoded in a superposition structure:

1. Generate  at  random 2 ௡ோ೔బ i.i.d.  codewords ܹ ௜ ௡ according  to ݓ(ݎܲ ௜ ௡ ) = ς ܲ ௐ೔ ൫ ݓ ௜ǡ௧ ൯ ௡ ௧ୀଵ .  Label  these  codewords ܹ ௜ ௡ ݉( ௜଴ ) , where ݉ ௜଴ [ א 1: 2 ௡ோ೔బ ] .
2. For each ܹ ௜ ௡ ݉( ௜଴ ) , where ݉ ௜଴ [ א 1: 2 ௡ோ೔బ ] , generate 2 ௡ோ೔೔ i.i.d. codewords ܺ ௜ ௡ according to ݔ(ݎܲ ௜ ௡ ) = ς ܲ ௑೔ȁௐ೔ ቀ ݔ ௜ǡ௧ ቚ ݓ ௜ǡ௧ ݉( ௜଴ )ቁ ௡ ௧ୀଵ . Label these codewords ܺ ௜ ௡ ݉( ௜଴ ǡ ݉ ௜௜ ) , where ݉ ௜௜ [ א 1: 2 ௡ோ೔೔ ] .

This codebook is revealed at both transmitters and also both receivers. Assuming ܯ( ௜଴ ǡ ܯ ௜௜ ) = ( ݉ ௜଴ ǡ ݉ ௜௜ ) , the ݅ ௧௛ transmitter, = ݅ 1,2, sends ܺ ௜ ௡ ݉( ௜଴ ǡ ݉ ௜௜ ) over the channel.

Decoding: The receivers applied the semi-joint decoding; this type of decoding is performed in two steps, as follows:

At receiver 1, assume that the sequence ܻ ଵ ௡ has been received:

1. At the first step, the receiver tries to find a unique ݉ ෝଵ଴ for which there exist some ݉ ഥଶ଴ and ݉ ഥଵଵ , such that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If  there  exists  such ݉ ෝଵ଴ ,  the  receiver  estimates  the  transmitted  message ݉ ଵ଴ as  the corresponding ݉ ෝଵ଴ .  If  there  is  no  such ݉ ෝଵ଴ or there is more than one, the decoder sets ݉ ෝଵ଴ = 1 and declares an error. Therefore, in this step the receiver decodes the message ݉ ଵ଴ . By a standard analysis of error probability, one can show that this message can be decoded successfully (with arbitrary small probability of error) provided that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where equality (a) and (b) hold because ܹ ଵ ՜ ( ܺ ଵ ǡ ܹ ଶ) ՜ ܻ ଵ forms a Markov chain.

2. Assuming  that  decoding  at  previous  step  has  been  performed  successfully,  at  the  second  step  the  receiver  decodes  the transmitted message ݉ ଵଵ using the sequence ܹ( ଵ ௡ ݉( ଵ଴ כ )ǡ ܻ ଵ ௡ ) , where ݉ ଵ଴ כ is the decoded message at previous step; it tries to find a unique ݉ ෝଵଵ , such that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If there is no such ݉ ෝଵଵ or there is more than one, the receiver sets ݉ ෝଵଵ = 1 , and declares an error. The decoding at this step can be performed successfully provided that:

ܴ

ଵଵ ൏

ܺ(ܫ

ଵ

Ǣ

ܻ

ଵ

ܹ|

ଵ

)

(26)

The decoding procedure at receiver 2 is similar to receiver 1, expect the indices 1 and 2 should be exchanged everywhere. Therefore, decoding at receiver 2 can be successfully performed provided that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now by considering (24), (26), and (27), and then applying a simple Fourier-Motzkin elimination to remove ܴ ଵ଴ ǡ ܴ ଵଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ଴ ǡ ܴ ଶଶ , we obtain the desired rate region.

Then, we show that the HK rate region (18) under the conditions (19) is equivalent to Ը௜ ூ஼ in (21). Note that, the conditions (19) can be readily extended as:

Now, suppose ܴ( ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ א ) Ը௜ ு௄೎ . We have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the equality (a) holds because ܹ ଵ ՜ ܺ ଵ ܹ ଶ ܳ ՜ ܻ ଵ , ܹ ଶ ՜ ܺ ଶ ܳ ՜ ܻ ଶ and also ܹ ଶ ՜ ܺ ଶ ܹ ଵ ܳ ՜ ܻ ଶ form Markov chains, and the inequality (b) is due to first condition of (28). Similarly, one can derive:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, ܴ( ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ א ) Ը௜ ூ஼ which demonstrates that Ը௜ ு௄೎ ك Ը௜ ூ஼ . Conversely, suppose ܴ( ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ א ) Ը௜ ூ஼ . Then, we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where inequality (a) is due to the second condition of (28). Therefore, at least one of the following inequalities holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Without  loss  of  generality  assume  that: ܴ ଵ ൑ ܺ(ܫ ଵ Ǣ ܻ ଵ )ܳ| .  Thereby, ܴ( ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ ) belongs  to  the  following  subset  of Ը௜ ு௄೎ which  is extracted in consideration of ܹ ଶ ׎ ؠ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which demonstrates that Ը௜ ூ஼ ك Ը௜ ு௄೎ . ሁ

## Remarks 1:

1. It is remarkable to know that the achievable rate region Ը௜ ூ஼ is optimal in the strong interference regime [14] which yields the capacity region. In fact, the rate region resulting by setting ܹ ଵ ܺ ؠ ଵ and ܹ ଶ ܺ ؠ ଶ in (21) is identical to the capacity region of the channel with strong interference [14]. This demonstrates that the semi-joint decoding scheme is useful not only in the very weak interference regime (19) but also in the strong interference regime.
2. For the Gaussian IC (1) in the very weak interference regime (19), the HK rate region (18) and the region (21) for Gaussian input distributions without time-sharing are equivalent. On the one hand, for the HK scheme in the weak interference regime (| |ܽ ൑ 1 and |ܾ| ൑ 1 ), time-sharing and concavification result in the same region [8, Th. 7]. Therefore, in the regime (19), the two regions (18) and (21) for Gaussian input distributions with time-sharing are also equivalent.

Using Theorem 2, one can deduce the following interesting result for the ICs in the very weak interference regime (19).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Corollary 1) For the two-user discrete IC with very weak interference (19), the maximum achievable sum-rate due to the HK region (18) is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Corollary 1) According to Theorem 2, in the very weak interference regime (19), the HK region is equivalent to Ը௜ ூ஼ in (21). For the region Ը௜ ூ஼ in (21), the sum-rate is bounded as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where inequality (a) is due to the second condition of (28). ሁ

Remark 2: Corollary 1  indicates that in  the very weak  interference regime (19), the maximum achievable sum-rate due to the HK region is identical to the one given by the simple treating interference as noise strategy.

Next, we consider a two-user IC with strong interference at one receiver. Specifically, let examine the case where the second receiver perceives strong interference. For such a channel, the following holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the next theorem, we simplify the HK rate region (18) for this channel.

Theorem 3) Define the rate region Ը௜ ு௄ೄ಺՜ೊ మ as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For any two-user IC with strong interference at the receiver ܻ ଶ , where the condition (36) is satisfied, the HK achievable rate region (18) is equivalent to Ը௜ ு௄ೄ಺՜ೊ మ .

Proof of Theorem 3) First, suppose that ܴ( ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ א ) Ը௜ ு௄೎ . First note that the condition (36) can be extended as follows (see [3, Sec. II, Lemma 1]):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, we have:

Now, we can write:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where inequality (a) holds because ܺ ଶ is independent of ܺ ଵ ǡ ܹ ଵ , conditioned on ܳ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where inequality (a) holds because ܺ ଵ ǡ ܹ ଵ are independent of ܺ ଶ ǡ ܹ ଶ , conditioned on ܳ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where inequality (a) holds because ܺ ଶ ǡ ܹ ଶ are independent of ܺ ଵ ǡ ܹ ଵ , conditioned on ܳ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, ܴ( ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ א ) Ը௜ ு௄೎ , which demonstrates that Ը௜ ு௄೎ ك Ը௜ ு௄ೄ಺՜ೊ మ . Conversely, suppose that ܴ( ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ א ) Ը௜ ு௄ೄ಺՜ೊ మ .  We consider two different cases:

Case 1) ܴ ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ also satisfy both the following constraints:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this case, ܴ( ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ ) belongs to the rate region Ը௜ ு௄೎ in consideration of ܹ ଵ ܺ ؠ ଵ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all joint PDFs ܲ ொௐభௐమ௑భ௑మ ݍ( ǡ ݓ ଵ ǡ ݓ ଶ ǡ ݔ ଵ ǡ ݔ ଶ ) , specifically, for the joint PDFs that correspond to the HK rate region (18). Also, in the following, we repeatedly use the following Markov relations:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Case 2) ܴ ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ violate  at  least  one  of  the  constraints  in  (45).  In  this  case,  one  can  verify that ܴ ଵ ൑ ܺ(ܫ ଵ Ǣ ܻ ଵ )ܳ| .  Thereby, ܴ( ଵ ǡ ܴ ଶ ) belongs to the rate region Ը௜ ு௄೎ in consideration of ܹ ଵ ܺ ؠ ଵ and ܹ ଶ ׎ ؠ . This completes the proof. ሁ

Let consider the Gaussian IC (1) with mixed interference |ܽ| ൑ͳ ൑ | |ܾ where the condition (36) is satisfied. For this channel, the HK achievable rate region (18) for Gaussian input distributions was explicitly characterized in [8, Sec. VI.C]. One can readily verify that the characterization (37) also leads to that of [8, Sec. VI.C].

Finally, we simplify the HK rate region for the two-user one-sided IC in (2-a).

Proposition 1) For the two-user one-sided IC in (2-a), the HK achievable rate region (18) is equivalent to the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Proposition 1) First note that for the one-sided IC, the joint PDFs that correspond to the rate region Ը௜ ு௄೎ in (18) are given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the distribution (47), it is readily derived that ܻ ଶ is indepednt of ܹ ଵ , conditioned on ܳ . By this observation, it is not difficult to show that for the one-sided IC (2-a), the rate region Ը௜ ு௄೎ in (18) is optimized in consideration of ܹ ଵ ׎ ؠ . Thus, it is equal to (46). ሁ

For the special case of the one-sided Gaussian IC, the characterization (46) straightforwardly yields the one derived in [8, Sec. V.C].

## REFERENCES

- [1] R.  K.  Farsani,  'Fundamental  limits  of  communications  in  interference  networks-Part  I:  Basic  structures,' IEEE  Trans.  Information  Theory,  Submitted  for Publication, 2012, available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.3018.
- [2] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,  'Fundamental  limits  of  communications  in  interference  networks-Part  II:  Information  flow  in  degraded  networks,' IEEE  Trans.  Information Theory, Submitted for Publication, 2012, available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.3027.
- [3] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,  'Fundamental  limits  of  communications  in  interference  networks-Part  III:  Information  flow  in  strong  interference  regime,' IEEE  Trans. Information Theory, Submitted for Publication, 2012, available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.3035 .
- [4] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_,  'Fundamental  limits  of  communications  in  interference  networks-Part  IV:  Networks  with  a  sequence  of  less-noisy  receivers,' IEEE  Trans. Information Theory, Submitted for Publication, 2012, available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1207.3040 .
- [5] \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, 'Fundamental limits of  communications in  interference networks-Part  V:  A random coding  scheme  for transmission of general  message sets,' IEEE Trans. Information Theory, To be submitted, preprint available at http://arxiv.org/abs/1107.1839.
- [6] R. K. Farsani and F. Marvasti, 'Interference networks with general message sets: A random coding scheme', 49 th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing ., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2011.
- [7] R. K. Farsani, 'How much rate splitting is required for a random coding scheme? A new achievable rate region for the broadcast channel with cognitive relays,' 50 th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing ., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2012.
- [8] A. S. Motahari and A. K. Khandani, 'Capacity bounds for the Gaussian interference channel,' IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory , vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 620-643, Feb 2009.
- [9] V. S. Annapureddy and V. V. Veeravalli, 'Gaussian interference networks: Sum capacity in the low-interference regime and new outer bounds on the capacity region,' in IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory , vol. 55(7), July 2009, pp. 3032 - 3050.
10. [10]X. Shang, G. Kramer, and B. Chen, 'A new outer bound and the noisy interference sumrate capacity for Gaussian interference channels,' in IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory , vol. 55(2), 2009, pp. 689 - 699.
11. [11]T. S. Han and K. Kobayashi, 'A new achievable rate region for the interference channel,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. IT-27, no. 1, pp. 49-6o, Jan. 1981.

- [12]H. F. Chong, M. Motani, H. K. Garg, and H. El Gamal, 'On the Han-Kobayashi region for the interference channel,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 3188-3195, Jul. 2008.
- [13]S. Diggavi and T. M. Cover, 'Worst additive noise under covariance constraints, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory , vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 3072-3081, Nov. 2001.
- [14]M. H. M. Costa and A. E. Gamal, 'The capacity region of the discrete memoryless interference channel with strong interference,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory ,  vol. 33, pp. 710-711, Sep. 1987.