

Abstract -In this paper we use fuzzy systems theory to convert the technical trading rules commonly used by stock practitioners into  excess  demand  functions  which  are  then  used  to  drive  the price  dynamics.  The  technical  trading  rules  are  recorded  in natural  languages  where  fuzzy  words  and  vague  expressions abound. In Part I of this paper, we will show the details of how to transform the technical trading heuristics into nonlinear dynamic equations. First, we define fuzzy sets to represent the fuzzy terms in the technical trading rules; second, we translate each technical trading heuristic into a group of fuzzy IF-THEN rules; third, we combine the fuzzy IF-THEN rules in a group into a fuzzy system; and finally, the linear combination of these fuzzy systems is used as the excess demand function in the price dynamic equation. We transform  a  wide  variety  of  technical  trading  rules  into  fuzzy systems, including moving average rules, support and resistance rules, trend line rules, big buyer, big seller and manipulator rules, band  and  stop  rules,  and  volume  and  relative  strength  rules. Simulation results show that the price dynamics driven by these technical  trading  rules  are  complex  and  chaotic,  and  some common phenomena in real stock prices such as jumps, trending and self-fulfilling appear naturally.

## Dynamical Models of Stock Prices Based on Technical Trading Rules Part I: The Models

Li-Xin Wang

agent-based models (Tesfatsion and Judd, 2006), and technical analysis (Kirkpatrick and Dahlquist, 2011).

Index Terms -Fuzzy systems; stock markets; technical analysis; chaos; agent-based models.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Understanding  the  dynamics  of  stock  prices  is  one  of  the hardest  challenges  to  human  intelligence 1 .  There  are  mainly three  approaches  to  studying  the dynamic changes  of  stock prices 2 : the random  walk  model  (Bachelier,  1900),  the

Manuscript  received  January  11,  2014;  revised  March  4,  2014;  accepted April 21, 2014.

Li-Xin Wang  is with the Department of Automation Science and Technology, Xian Jiaotong University, Xian, P.R. China (e-mail: lxwang@mail.xjtu.edu.cn).

1 Quoting  Newton's  famous  saying:  'I  can  predict  the  motions  of  the heavenly bodies, but not the madness of people.' (Wikiquote: Isaac Newton.)

2 Fundamental  analysis  (Graham  and  Dodd,  1940)  studies  the  static  or equilibrium values of stock prices and therefore will not be discussed here.

The random walk model is the benchmark and starting point of  the  mainstream  academic  research  on  stock  dynamics  in finance and economy. At least two Nobel Prizes were awarded to  the  researches  that  used  the  random  walk  model  as  the starting point: the 1997 Nobel Prize of Economics to the option pricing model of Black and Scholes (Black and Scholes, 1973), and the 2003 Nobel Prize of Economics to the ARCH model of Engle (Engle, 1982). The basic assumption of the random walk model is that price changes (returns) are random and independent,  so  that  past  prices  are  useless  in  predicting  the future price changes. The advantage of the random walk model is that it is a good first-approximation to real stock markets and provides  a  simple  model  based  on  which  other  important problems in finance and economy, such as option pricing (Hull, 2009) and volatility modeling (Engle, 1982; Bollerslev, Chou and  Kroner,  1992;  Fouque,  Papanicolaou  and  Sircar,  2000; Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold, 2010), can be studied in a mathematically  rigorous  fashion.  A  problem  of  the  random walk model is that it does not provide a framework to study the microstructures of the price formation mechanism.

The agent-based models overcome this problem by following a bottom-up approach to model directly the operations of different types of traders such as fundamentalists and  chartists  (Hommes,  2006).  There  is  a  large  literature  of agent-based  models  for  stock  prices  (Tesfatsion  and  Judd, 2006), ranging from simple heuristic models (e.g., Kyle, 1985) to sophisticated switching among different types of traders (e.g., Lux, 1998). The advantage of the agent-based computational approach is that different types of traders and various trading details  can  be  incorporated  into  the  models  and  extensive simulations  can  be  performed  to  study  the  resulting  price dynamics.  The  main  problem  of  the  existing  agent-based models  is  that  there  are  too  many  parameters  and  too  many degrees  of  freedom  such  that  it  is  difficult  to  determine  the causes  for  the  price  features  observed.  This  complexity  also makes it very hard to calibrate the models to real stock prices. As  concluded  in  Hommes  2006:  'Simple  and  parsimonious heterogeneous  agent  models  can  thus  help  to  discipline  the wilderness of agent-based modeling.'

The third approach to studying the dynamic changes of stock prices is technical analysis that summarizes the trading heuristics  from  stock  practitioners  over  hundreds  of  years  of real  stock  trading  experiences  in  human  civilization  (Lo  and Hasanhodzic, 2010). The foundation of technical analysis is the belief that prices follow trends so that past price information is useful  in  predicting  the  future  price  values.  The  mainstream academics do not view technical analysis as a serious scientific discipline and claim that 'chart-reading must share a pedestal with alchemy' (Malkiel, 2012). While the academics stand firm on the Efficient Markets Hypothesis (Fama, 1970) and believe that stock prices are unpredictable, the practitioners are using technical  trading  rules  to  'ride  the  trends'  to  make  a  lot  of money  (Lo  and  Hasanhodzic,  2009).  Some  open-minded academics studied the performance of some technical trading rules and gave positive conclusions (e.g., Brock, Lakonishok and LeBaron, 1992; Gencay, 1998; Sullivan, Timmermann and White,  1999;  Lo,  Mamaysky  and  Wang,  2000).  A  main criticism  of  technical  analysis  is  that  most  technical  rules require subjective judgment because the rules are expressed in terms  of  natural  languages  where  fuzzy  words  and  vague descriptions  are  everywhere.  For  example,  one  such  trading rule might be: 'If the momentum of the uptrend is too strong, over-bought may have occurred so that a trailing stop should be placed  somewhere  below  the  current  price  to  secure  some profits.' How strong is 'too strong'? Where is 'somewhere'? What  amount  should  be  placed  at  the  trailing  stop?  This  is where the academics leave the practitioners (Gigerenzer, 1996; Gigerenzer  and  Gaissmaier,  2011),  and  this  is  where  fuzzy systems theory (Zadeh, 1971) comes to play, as we will do in this paper.

The basic idea of this paper is to use fuzzy systems theory to convert the technical trading rules into excess demand (demand minus supply) functions which are then used to drive the price dynamics.  Specifically,  consider  a  stock  whose  price  at  time point t is , where t=0,1,2,…. Suppose there are M groups of traders who are trading this stock from t to t+1 , and the traders in  a  group  are  using  the  same  technical  trading  rules.  By converting the technical trading rules for a group, say group , into  a  single  excess  demand  function ,  we  obtain  the price dynamical model as follows:

where  the  coefficient accounts  for  the  strength  of  the traders in group for the relative change of price from t to t+1, and the denotes variables computed from the past prices and other information available at time t (the 's will be precisely defined in the following sections of this paper). The 's are time-varying  coefficients  (representing  the  evolving  market reality (Lo,  2004)),  and means  the i 'th  excess demand is  not  present  at  time t .  The 's  can  be determined  based  on  stock  price  data ,  and we will show the details in Part III of this paper. To convert the technical trading rules into excess demand functions, we first define fuzzy sets to characterize the words used in the technical trading  rules  so  that  these  technical  rules  become  fuzzy IF-THEN rules in the framework of fuzzy systems theory. Then, standard fuzzy logic principles are employed to combine these fuzzy IF-THEN rules into fuzzy systems which are the excess demands in the price dynamic equation (1).

Part I of this paper is organized as follows. In Sections II, III, IV, VI and VII, we will convert a number of popular technical trading rules into excess demand functions, including moving average  rules,  support  and  resistance  rules,  trend  line  rules, band and stop rules, and volume and relative strength rules. To make  the  picture  more  complete,  in  Section  V  we  will formulate the typical actions of the big buyers and big sellers (the institutional traders who manage large sums of money) and the manipulators in terms of fuzzy IF-THEN rules. Simulations will be performed in these sections to illustrate the typical price trajectories of these models. Some concluding remarks will be drawn in Section VIII.

In Part II of this paper, we will analyze the price dynamic model  (1)  with  moving-average  rules  in  details  to  show  the stability, volatility, short-term predictability, return independency, fat-tailed return distribution and other properties of  the  model.  In  Part  III  of  this  paper,  we  will  show  how  to detect big buyers and big sellers in Hong Kong stock market based on the price dynamic model (1) and develop two trading strategies  (called  follow-the-big-buyer  and  ride-the-mood)  to beat the benchmark buy-and-hold strategy.

## II. MOVING AVERAGE RULES

The most commonly-used trading rules by technical traders are based on price moving averages of different lengths. The basic philosophy behind these rules is that the price may be on a trend if a shorter moving average is crossing a longer moving average. More specifically, one such trading heuristic is as follows.

Heuristic  1: A  buy  (sell)  signal  is  generated  if  a  shorter moving  average  of  the  price  is  crossing  a  longer  moving average of the price from below (above). Usually, the larger the difference between the two moving averages, the stronger the buy (sell) signal. But, if the difference between the two moving averages is too large, the stock may be over-bought (over-sold), so a small sell (buy) order should be placed to safeguard the investment.

We  now  translate  this  heuristic  into  an  excess  demand function using  fuzzy systems theory. The moving average of the stock price with length n is defined as

and

is the log-ratio (relative change) of the price moving average of lengthm to the price moving average of lengthn where m&lt;n . The common choices of ( m,n ) are (1,5), (1,10), (5,20), (5,50) , etc. (when m=1 , is the current price ).  A positive implies a rising mode of the stock, whereas a negative signals the weakness of the stock price.

To translate Heuristic 1 into the language of fuzzy systems theory, we first define fuzzy sets to clarify the meaning of the linguistic  descriptions  for  the  price  percentage  change such as ' is positive and large', ' is negative and small', etc. Specifically, on the universe of (all values can  possibly  take,  which  we  assume  to  be ), define  seven  fuzzy  sets:  'Positive  Small  (PS)',  'Positive Medium (PM)', 'Positive Large (PL)', 'Negative Small (NS)', 'Negative  Medium  (NM)',  'Negative Large (NL)', and 'Around Zero (AZ)', whose membership functions are given in Fig. 1. For example, the membership function of fuzzy set PS (Positive Small) is

and for PL (Positive Large), the membership function is

where w is a positive constant. The value of w determines how small is small, how medium is medium, and how large is large when we use these words to describe the price changes. For example, w =0.01 means that a change somewhere around 1% from to (n&gt;m)  means  'small'  in  the  trader's  mind, and, 'medium' means around 2%, 'large' means around and above 3%. We will see later that w is an important parameter to shape the dynamics of the price changes.

Next,  we  define  fuzzy  sets  to  specify  the  meaning  of  the linguistic descriptions about the buy (sell) signals. Let ed be the strength of the buy or sell signal, where ed stands for excess demand (demand minus supply) and it can be positive (demand &gt; supply) or negative (demand &lt; supply). Define seven fuzzy sets 'Buy  Small  (BS)',  'Buy  Medium  (BM)',  'Buy  Big  (BB)', 'Sell Small (SS)', 'Sell Medium (SM)', 'Sell Big (SB)' and 'Neutral (N)' for ed with membership functions shown in Fig. 2. For example, the membership function of BM (Buy Medium) is

The numbers 0.1, 0.2 and 0.4 in Fig. 2 indicate, respectively, 10%,  20%  and  40%  of  the  buying  or  selling  power  of  the traders who use Heuristic 1 as their trading strategy.  So 'Buy Small',  'Buy  Medium'  and  'Buy  Big'  means  using  around 10%,  20%  and  40%  of  the  buying  power,  respectively.  The sell-side is just the mirror of the buy-side. You can of course choose  other  numbers  to  reflect  the  preference  of  different traders.

Fig.  1:  Membership  functions  of  fuzzy  sets  Positive  Small  (PS),  Positive Medium (PM), Positive Large (PL), Negative Small (NS), Negative Medium (NM), Negative Large (NL) and Around Zero (AZ).

<!-- image -->

Fig.  2:  Membership  functions  of  fuzzy  sets  Buy  Small  (BS),  Buy  Medium (BM), Buy Big (BB), Sell Small (SS), Sell Medium (SM), Sell Big (SB) and Neutral (N) for excess demand ed .

<!-- image -->

With the  fuzzy  sets  defined  in  Figs.  1  and  2,  we  can  now convert Heuristic 1 into the  following  seven  fuzzy IF-THEN rules which we call Rule 1 Group :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The meaning of these rules is explained as follows: Rule 11 and Rule 12 (Rule 14 and Rule 15 ) follow the uptrend (downtrend), Rule 13  (Rule 1 5 ) exits (enters) the stock when it is over-bought (over-sold),  and  Rule  1 7 takes  no  action  if  the  price  is oscillating horizontally. Clearly, these rules do what Heuristic 1 suggests.

With Heuristic 1 being transformed into the fuzzy IF-THEN rules in Rule 1 Group, our final task is to convert these rules into the excess demand function. Using  fuzzy logic principles (Zadeh, 1973) and fuzzy systems theory (Zadeh , 1971; Wang, 1997), we combine the seven fuzzy IF-THEN rules in Rule 1 Group (7) into the following standard fuzzy system:

where , , , , , , are the fuzzy sets shown in Fig. 1, and , , , , , , are the centers of the fuzzy sets BS, BB, SM, SS, SB, BM and N shown in Fig. 2, respectively. Substituting (8) into (1), we obtain the price dynamic equation:

that shows how the price evolves if considering only the traders who use Heuristic 1 (Rule 1 Group) as their trading strategy.

We  now  simulate  the  price  dynamic  equation  (9)  with (m,n)=(1,5),  w=0.01  (1%) and ;  three  simulation runs  were  performed  and  the  resulting  price  series are shown  in  Fig.  3,  where  the  first  100 (t=1  to  t=100)  were generated by the random walk model:

with being independent Gaussian random variables of mean 0  and  variance  1, and ;  the  remaining

(t=101 to t=500) were generated by the price dynamical model (9). We see from Fig. 3 that although there is only one group of traders who were using the same trading rules (7), the resulting price  dynamics  were  complex  and  chaotic.  Comparing  the random  walk  prices to with  the  fuzzy-rule-driven prices to ,  we  see  that  the  big  pictures  look  quite similar  for  these  two  fundamentally  different  models:  one  is random and the other is deterministic.

Fig. 3: Three simulation runs of price generated by the random walk model (10)  (t=1  to  t=100)  and  the  Rule-1-Group-driven  price  dynamic  model  (9) (t=101  to  t=500)  with (m,n)=(1,5),  w=0.01  (1%) , , and .

<!-- image -->

We now make a few remarks about what to look for from the simulated price curves (Figs. 3 to 12). Why is technical analysis so popular among traders? One explanation is that we humans have a very good vision system, and price curves provide a very convenient  framework  for  our  vision  system.  'A  picture  is worth  a  thousand  words.'  The  trading-heuristic-driven  price dynamic models proposed in this paper produce very complex and chaotic price trajectories. In fact, whenever we made a new simulation of the price dynamic model with randomly chosen initial condition, we got a totally different price series (the three price trajectories in each Figs. 3 to 12 were chosen randomly from  the  simulations).  This  is  consistent  with  the  evolving market reality (Lo, 2004). Therefore, revealing specific characters of the models is not the main purpose of illustrating these simulated price trajectories; rather, we would like to give the reader the 'big picture' or some 'feeling' about what price series the models would produce. This is quite different from our  usual  simulations  for  engineering  systems  where  some fixed phenomenon occurs whenever and wherever we do the experiment.  The  detailed  properties  of  the  model  will  be analyzed  in  Part  II  of  this  paper,  where  we  will  make  some concrete conclusions.

## III. SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE RULES

Support and resistance are important reference points of past prices that the technical traders are looking at when they make buy  or  sell  decisions.  We  first  define  support  and  resistance points.  A peak is the price such that and , that is, a peak is a price point that is larger than its two neighbors. A resistance point , defined as:

is the highest peak in the time interval . Similarly, a trough is  the  price such  that and , and a support point , defined as:

is  the  lowest  trough  in  the  time  interval .  When the n in  (11)  and  (12)  are  set  equal  to  the  current  time t ,  the resistance (support) point is the highest peak (lowest trough) in the entire history of the price.

The basic philosophy of the technical trading rules based on support  and  resistance  points  is  that  the  support  (resistance) point is the lowest (highest) price in recent history where the buyers (sellers) were  becoming  stronger  than  the sellers (buyers), so that if this support (resistance) price is broken, then a downtrend (uptrend) might be establishing. So we have the following heuristic:

Heuristic  2: A  buy  (sell)  signal  is  generated  if  the  current price breaks the resistance (support) point from  below  (above).  The  buy  (sell)  signal  is  weak  if  the breakup (breakdown) is small because a small breakup (breakdown) often ends up with a throwback (pullback). When the breakup (breakdown) becomes reasonably large, the trend is more or less confirmed so that a strong buy (sell) is recommended.  If  the  breakup  (breakdown)  is  too  large,  the stock  may  be  over-bought  (over-sold),  so  a  small  sell  (buy) order should be placed to prepare for a possible reversal.

We  now  convert  this  trading  heuristic  into  excess  demand function using  fuzzy  systems  theory,  similar  to  what  we did in the last section. Define the log-ratios of the current price to the resistance point and the support point as and

respectively. Since we are only interested in breakup ( ) and breakdown ( ) in Heuristic 2, we define fuzzy sets Positive Small (PS), Positive Medium (PM) and Positive Large (PL) as shown in Fig. 1 for , and fuzzy sets Negative Small (NS), Negative Medium (NM) and Negative Large (NL), also shown  in  Fig.  1,  for .  With  these  fuzzy  sets  and  those defined  in  Fig.  2  for  the  buy  (sell)  actions,  we  translate Heuristics 2 into the following six fuzzy IF-THEN rules which we call Rule 2 Group :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining these rules into a standard fuzzy system we get

where , , , , , , are the fuzzy sets shown in Fig.  1,  and , , , , , are the centers of the fuzzy sets BS, BB, SM, SS, SB, BM shown in Fig. 2, respectively. This is the excess demand function from all traders who use Heuristic 2 (Rule 2 Group) as their trading strategy.

Substituting of  (8)  and of  (16) into  the  general  model  (1),  we  obtain  the  price  dynamic equation

which shows how the price changes when two groups of traders are  trading  in  the  time  interval (t,t+1) ,  where  one  group  of traders use Rule 1 Group (7) and the other use Rule 2 Group (15). Fig. 4 shows the price for three simulation runs with parameters (m,n)=(1,5),  n*=100,  w=0.01 , and , where the first 100 (t=1 to t=100) were generated by the random walk model (10) with and , and the remaining (t=101 to t=500) were generated by the price dynamic model (17).

Comparing the price trajectories in Figs. 3 and 4 we see that there  were  some  big  jumps  when  Rule  2  Group  was  added. These jumps occurred when the prices crossed the support or resistance lines.

Fig. 4: Three simulation runs of price generated by the random walk model (10)  (t=1  to  t=100)  and  the  Rule-1-plus-Rule-2-Group-driven price dynamic model (17) (t=101 to t=500) with (m,n)=(1,5), n*=100, w=0.01 , , , and .

<!-- image -->

We  know  that  the  real  stock  prices  exhibit  jumps  that  the random walk model cannot capture. The mathematical finance literature  dealt  with  this  problem  by  adding  a  jump  random process to the random walk model (10) (e.g. Merton, 1976) or by modeling  the volatility as a random  variable  (e.g. Bollerslev,  Chou  and  Kroner,  1992;  Bouchaud  and  Potters, 2003; Fouque, Papanicolaou and Sircar, 2000). The problem of these random approaches is that they cannot explain why the jumps  occurred  at  those  particular  locations.  So  it  will  be interesting if we can show that jumps occur when we add the excess demand of Rule 2 Group to the random walk model (10),  because  in  so  doing  we  can  explain  why  the  jumps occurred  at  those  particular  locations:  the  reason  is  that  the previous support or resistance lines were broken at these time points and traders were jumped in to catch up the trends, which caused the jumps in price. Fig. 5 shows three simulation runs of the price dynamic equation:

with  parameters n*=100, w=0.01 , , and , where the first 100 prices come from the pure random walk model (10) and the remaining prices are generated by (18). From Fig. 5 we see that there are indeed many jumps in the prices and these jumps are caused by the in (18).

Fig. 5: Three simulation runs of price generated by the random walk model (10) (t=1 to t=100) and the random walk plus Rule-2-Group  model (18) (t=101 to t=500) with n*=100, w=0.01 , , and .

<!-- image -->

Another  trading  heuristic  related  to  support  and  resistance points  concerns  the  traders  who  missed  the  buying  (selling) opportunity at the last low (high) price. These traders have a strong tendency to buy (sell) when the price is getting around the  support  (resistance)  point  once  again;  this  gives  us  the following heuristic:

Heuristic  3: For  those  traders  who  felt  regret  to  miss  the buying (sell) opportunity at the last low (high) price, the chance comes  again  when  the  price  is  getting  around  the  support (resistance) point one more time, so buy (sell) medium (not big because the price may break across the support (resistance) line this  time,  and  not small because  you don't  want to  miss this opportunity too much).

This  heuristic  is  transformed  into  the  following Rule  3 Group :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the excess demand function from the Rule-3-Group traders is the following fuzzy system:

where ( , are  defined  in  (13), (14)), and AZ, SM and BM are shown in Figs. 1 and 2 (0.2 and -0.2 in (20) are the centers of BM and SM, respectively).

Adding all three excess demand functions (8), (16) and (20)  to  the  general  model  (1)  and  simulating  the resulting  price  dynamic  equation,  we  got  Fig.  6  where  the parameters were chosen as: (m,n)=(1,5) in , the n 's in and equal n*=100 , w=0.01 , and , and here again the first 100 were generated by the random walk model (10) with and , and the remaining (t=101-500) were generated by the price dynamic equation (1) with M=3 .

Fig. 6: Three simulation runs of price generated by the random walk model (10) (t=1 to t=100) and the price dynamic model (1) (t=101 to t=500) with the three excess demand functions , and from Rule 1, Rule 2 and Rule 3 Groups.

<!-- image -->

## IV. TREND LINE RULES

Trend lines are lines that connect peaks or troughs and extend into the future. There are two types of trend lines: uptrend line and downtrend line. An uptrend (downtrend) line is established if the line connecting the troughs (peaks) is pointing upwards (downwards). More specifically, let and ( and )  be the two lowest (highest) troughs (peaks) in the time interval [ t-n, t-1 ] with t1&lt;t2 , i.e.,

where min2 ( max2 )  means  'take  the  two  smallest  (largest)', and t1, t2 ( t1&lt;t2 ) are the time points at which these two lowest (highest) prices are located. If , then  the  line  connecting and ( and )    is pointing upwards (downwards), so an uptrend line is constructed as

where , and a downtrend line is

where , time t is the horizontal-axis and price is the vertical-axis.

The basic logic behind the trading heuristics related to trend lines is that it is usually difficult to break through a trend line because  the  existence  of  a  trend  line  means  that  a  trend  has already  been  in  place,  so  a  breakdown  (breakup)  across  the uptrend  (downtrend)  line  will  most  likely  end  up  with  a pullback (throwback). This gives the following heuristic:

Heuristic  4 :  If  the  current  price is  getting  closer  to  an uptrend  (downtrend)  line from  above

(below),  a  buy  (sell)  order  should  be  placed  to  bet  on  the continuation of the uptrend (downtrend).

Define

and Heuristic 4 becomes the following Rule 4 Group :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The excess demand function from the Rule-4-Group traders is the following fuzzy system:

where , and are the membership functions of the fuzzy sets PS and NS shown in Fig. 1, and 0.2 and -0.2 are the centers of the fuzzy sets BM and SM shown in Fig. 2.

Fig. 7 shows three simulation runs of the Rule-1+4-Groups case  with  parameters (m,n)=(1,5), n*=100,  w=0.01 , , and ,  where  the  first  100 prices  came  from  the  pure  random  walk  model  (10)  and  the remaining prices were generated by (1) with all other 's except and equal  to  zero.  Comparing  Fig.  7  with Fig. 3, we  see that more  trending happened when  the Rule-4-Group traders were added. Originally the Rule-4-Group traders  just  anticipate  that  a  trend  may  be  coming  and  act according  to  their  guess,  but  their  actions  cause  the  trend  to really  happen;  this  is self-fulfilling ,  a  typical  phenomenon  in real markets.

Another trading heuristic related to trend lines is about trend reversal. Experience has shown that if an established trend line was broken by a relatively large amount, then the trend might have been reversed.  This gives the following trading heuristic:

Heuristic 5: If the current price is under (above) the uptrend (downtrend) line for a medium to large amount, then a trend reversal may have been happening so that a small to large sell (buy) order is recommended.

Fig. 7: Three simulation runs of price generated by the random walk model (10) (t=1 to t=100) and the price dynamic model (1) (t=101 to t=500) with the two excess demand functions and from Rule 1 and Rule 4 Groups.

<!-- image -->

This  heuristic  is  transformed  into  the  following Rule  5 Group :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the excess demand function from the Rule-5-Group traders is the following fuzzy system:

where or ( and are  defined  in (25) and (26)), PM, PL, NM and NL are fuzzy sets shown in Fig. 1, and 0.1, 0.4, -0.1 and -0.4 are the centers of fuzzy sets BS, BB, SS and SB shown in Fig. 2, respectively.

Fig. 8 shows three simulation runs of the Rule-1+5-Groups case  with  parameters (m,n)=(1,5), n*=100,  w=0.01 , , and ,  where  the  first  100

prices  came  from  the  pure  random  walk  model  (10)  and  the remaining prices were generated by (1) with all other 's except and equal to zero. Again we see self-fulfilling  phenomenon  in  Fig.  8:  the  big  jumps  in  prices were generated by the Rule-5-group traders who took actions to anticipate the end of the old trends and these actions ended the old trends.

Fig. 8: Three simulation runs for the case of Rule-1-Group plus Rule-5-Group.

<!-- image -->

## V. BIG BUYER, BIG SELLER AND MANIPULATOR RULES

Big buyers and big sellers are institutional traders who manage large  sums of  money and usually want to buy or sell a large amount of stocks. Since the amount of stocks offered  or asked around the trading price is usually very small, the large buy or sell  order  has  to  be  cut  into  small  pieces  and  implemented incrementally over a long period of time (Bouchaud, Farmer and Lillo, 2008; Aldridge, 2013). A reasonable strategy for a big  buyer  (seller)  is  to  buy  (sell)  if  the  price  is  decreasing (increasing); this gives us the following heuristics: Heuristic 6 for big sellers, and Heuristic 7 for big buyers:

Heuristic  6: For  a  big  seller,  sell  if  the  price  of  the  stock  is increasing: the stronger the increase, the larger the sell order. Keep neutral if the price is decreasing or moving horizontally.

Heuristic 7: For  a  big buyer, buy if the price of the stock is decreasing:  the  larger  the  decrease,  the  larger  the  buy  order. Keep neutral if the price is increasing or moving horizontally.

With defined in (3) and the fuzzy sets in Figs. 1 and 2, we translate Heuristic 6 into the following Rule 6 Group:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and Heuristic 7 into the following Rule 7 Group:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The excess demands and from Rule 6 Group and Rule 7 Group are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ,  respectively.  Figs.  9  and  10  show  three simulation runs of the Rule-1+6-Groups and Rule-1+7-Groups cases, respectively, with  parameters (m,n)=(1,5),  w=0.01 , , and , where the  first  100  prices  came  from  the  pure  random  walk model  (10)  and  the  remaining  prices  were  generated  by  (1). From Fig. 9 (Fig. 10) we see that the prices are in a general declining  (rising)  mode  when  the  big  sellers  (buyers)  are presented,  although  the  big  sellers  (buyers)  sell  (buy)  only when the price is increasing (decreasing).

The  study  of  trading  behavior  cannot  be  complete  without considering a  very important  market force: the  manipulators. Manipulators are big capitalized traders who use pump-and-dump  (Bradshaw,  Richardson  and  Sloan,  2003), spoofing 3 , layering 3 (Kirilenko and Lo, 2013) or other strategies (Leinweber and Madhavan, 2001; Fan, 2010; Jiang, 2013) to move the price up or down very quickly to create a mood of optimistic or fear as a trap for other traders. Fig. 11 illustrates  a  typical  working  cycle  of  the  pump-and-dump process: in Phase 1 the manipulator trades like a big buyer using Heuristic 7, i.e., collecting a large sum of stocks at relatively low prices; in Phase 2 the  manipulator uses strong capital to push the stock price up very quickly (by clearing the ask-side of the order book) to attract the attention of trend-followers; and in Phase 3 the manipulator trades like a big seller using Heuristic 6, i.e.,  selling  the  stocks  collected  in  Phase  1  around  the  new higher  prices.  Although  manipulation  is  illegal  in  all  stock markets (Kyle and Viswanathan, 2008), it is common practice in almost all markets around the world for hundreds of years (Leinweber and Madhavan, 2001).

3 'Spoofing' involves intentionally manipulating prices by placing an order and then canceling it shortly thereafter, at which point the spoofer consummates a trade in the opposite direction of the canceled order. 'Layering' involves placing a successive sequence of limit orders to give the appearance of a change in demand or supply; after a trade is consummated at the manipulated price, the layered limit orders are canceled.

Fig. 9: Three simulation runs for the case of Rule-1-Group plus Rule-6-Group (big sellers).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 10: Three simulation runs for the case of Rule-1-Group plus Rule-7-Group (big buyers).

<!-- image -->

Fig.  11:  A  typical  operation  cycle  of  manipulators:  the  pump-and-dump process.

<!-- image -->

Since the manipulator trades like a big buyer (seller) in Phase 1  (Phase  3),  the  excess  demand  function  equals ( )  in these phases. For Phase 2 (the pushing-up phase), the strategy is the following treading heuristic:

Heuristic 8: Buy the stock with big money within very short time to clear the ask (sell) side of the order book quickly.

which, when expressed in terms of fuzzy IF-THEN rules, is the following Rule 8 Group :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Putting  these  three  phases  together,  we  obtain  the  following excess demand function for the manipulator:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in Phase 1 and in Phase 3. Fig. 11 is in fact a simulation run of (1) with and , where Phase 2 is from t=200 to t=220 .

## VI. BAND AND STOP RULES

Bands are envelopes around  a  moving average  with  variable size. The basic idea of using bands is that since most prices are contained within the band, a breakout across the boundaries of the band is an indication of the start of a new trend. The most widely used band is the Bollinger Band (Bollinger, 2002) that adds  and  subtracts  the  moving  estimate  of  two  standard deviations of returns to a moving average. Specifically, let

be the return and assume the returns are zero-mean; the moving estimate of the standard deviation of the returns is

The  upper  and  lower  boundaries  of  the  Bollinger  Band  are and ,  respectively,  where is  the price  moving  average  defined  in  (2).  The  trading  heuristic based on the Bollinger Band is the following:

Heuristic 9: When the price is moving out of the Bollinger Band ,  it  is  a  sign  of  the  start  of  a new trend, so a buy (if the price is above the Band) or sell (if the price is below the Band) order should be in place.

Define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then Heuristic 9 becomes the following Rule 9 Group :

Rule 91: IF is Positive Small (PS), THEN

Rule 92: IF is Positive Medium (PM), THEN

Rule 93: IF is Negative Small (NS), THEN

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Rule 94: IF is Negative Medium (NM), THEN

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which, when combined into a fuzzy system, give the following excess demand function:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where or .  Fig.  12  shows three simulation runs of the random walk plus Rule-9-Group model:

with n=5, w=0.01 , , and , where the first 100 prices came from the random walk model (10) and the remaining  prices  were  generated  by  (43).  We  see  again  the self-fulfilling  phenomenon:  more  trending  occurred  in  the model (43) part than in the pure random walk part in Fig. 12, due to the actions for the anticipation of the new trends after the price broke out the band and these actions themselves caused the trends.

Fig. 12: Three simulation runs of random walk plus Rule-9-Group model (43).

<!-- image -->

If you asked an investment expert what is the most important element in an investment system, the answer would very likely be: stops. Indeed, making profits is not harmful, whether it is big or small, but you must protect your portfolio from large losses. There are usually two types of stops people use to protect their capital: protective stops that set hard limits to the maximum losses allowed and clear the position when the hard limits are reached, and trailing stops that protect profits from deteriorating  back  into  a  loss.  There  are  many  types  of protective  and  trailing  stops,  such  as  Hard  Money  Stops, Breakeven  Stops,  Technical  Point  Stops,  Volatility  Stops, Trend Line Stops, Adaptive Stops, Time Stops, Signal Stops, etc. (Kirkpatrick and Dahlquist, 2011). The following heuristic summarizes a typical protective stop and a typical trailing stop:

Heuristic 10: Protective Stop: If a position has a loss approaching 20% and more, it means something was seriously wrong in our previous analysis when we purchased the stock, so the position should be quit as soon as possible. Trailing Stop: If a  position  has  accumulated  good  profits  and  the  price  has dropped around 10% or more from the recent high, then  the position should be quit gradually to cash out the profits.

To translate Heuristic 10 into fuzzy IF-THEN rules, let be  the  amount  of  a  stock  in  the  portfolio  purchased  at  price ( )  and max be  the maximum of the last n prices of the stock. Then Heuristic 10 becomes the following Rule 10 Group :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P is the union of PS, PM and PL, is the complement of , and the parameter w in the NL's (see Fig. 1) of Rule 10 1 and Rule 102 are set to 10% and 5%, respectively. Combining the three rules of (44), we obtain the following excess demand function for the stocks purchased at price :

If  the  denominator  of  (45)  equals  zero,  then .  The final  excess  demand  function  from  Rule-10-Group  is  the weighted average of the 's with weights :

where meaning that the amount of this stock in the portfolio is non-zero.

## VII. VOLUME AND STRENGTH RULES

The  rules  in  the  last  five  sections  used  only  the  past  price information of the same stock. In this section we consider the trading rules that use not only its own past prices but also other information such as volume and the prices of other stocks in the market. Since the key of technical trading is 'follow the trend', the indicators considered in this section are used to confirm a trend or to give early warning for a possible trend reversal.

We  start  with  volume.  A  useful  volume  indicator  is  the on-balance volume defined as follows:

where is  the  traded  volume  of  the  stock  from t-1 to t and is  the  sign  function  that  equals  1  if ,  equals  -1  if and  equals  0  if .  The  on-balance  volume is  a  measure  of  the accumulated  money  inflow  into  the  stock.  Therefore  it  is  an early warning of trend reversal if the trend of price and the trend of are in opposite directions; this gives the following trading heuristic:

Heuristic 11: If the price is in an uptrend (downtrend) but the on-balance volume is in a downtrend (uptrend), then as soon  as the price shows  a  small  sign of  decreasing (increasing), a sell (buy) is recommended to bet on the reversal of the price trend.

Similar  to  the  variables  defined  in  constructing  the  price trend lines in (21)-(24), we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to be the two lowest (highest) troughs (peaks) of the in the  time  interval  [ t-n,  t-1 ],  where t1,  t2 ( t1&lt;t2 )  are  the  time points at which these two lowest (highest) are located. Let

be  the  slopes  of  the  lines  connecting to and to , respectively, we can  now transform Heuristic 11 into the following Rule 11 Group :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the fuzzy set Negative (Positive) is the union of the fuzzy sets  NS,  NM  and  NL  (PS,  PM  and  PL)  with  membership function ( ). Recalling  the  definition  of and in  (25)  and  (26),  we see  that  ' is  NS'  means  'the  price  has  just  broken  the uptrend line from above' and ' is PS' means 'the price has just  broken  the  downtrend  line  from  below'.  Furthermore, ' is N' (' is P') confirms the breakdown (breakup) so that  Sell  Medium  (Buy  Medium)  is  executed.    The  excess demand  function from the Rule-11-Group  traders is the following fuzzy system:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If the denominator of (53) equals zero, then .

Since volume data are not available for our price models (it is our  current  research  topic  to  build  dynamical  models  for volumes based on technical trading rules), we will not perform simulations for Rule 11 Group. For real stocks where volume data are available, the Rule-11-Group rules can be incorporated into  the  price  dynamic  model  (1)  in  the  same  manner  as  the rules in other groups.

Lastly, we consider the trading heuristics concerning how a stock performs comparing to the whole market. Let be some  index  that  measures  the  overall  performance  of  the market, e.g., it could be the S&amp;P500 for the US stock market or the  Shanghai&amp;Shenzhen  300  for  China  stock  market.  The relative strength of a stock with price is defined as

If is  rising  (declining),  it  means  the  stock  outperforms (underperforms) the market average. Since the market has the tendency  of  stronger  getting  stronger  and  weaker  getting weaker (Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993), a breakup (breakdown) of  the  downtrend  (uptrend)  line,  if  accompanied  by  a  rising (declining) , is a strong sign of trend reversal. This gives us the following trading heuristic:

Heuristic 12: If the price is in an uptrend (downtrend) but its relative strength is in a downtrend (uptrend), then as soon as the price shows a small sign of decreasing (increasing), a sell (buy) is recommended to leave (enter) this weak (strong) stock.

Define the log-ratio of to its n -leg moving average as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Heuristic 12 gives the following Rule 12 Group :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and its excess demand function is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where if  the  denominator  of  (57)  equals  zero.  The price dynamics driven by can be simulated if we consider a  multi-stock simulation  model; however,  we  will leave it to another  paper  concentrating  on  this  very  important  topic: interactions among multiple stocks.

## VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Stock prices are generated by the actions of stock traders, and according to a survey of 692 fund managers in five countries

(Menkhoff, 2010), the vast majority of the fund managers rely on technical analysis 4 . The main contribution of this paper is to build a bridge between the fuzzy, linguistic world of technical analysis  and  the  rigorous,  mathematical  world  of  nonlinear dynamic equations, as illustrated  in  Fig.  13.  In  Part  I  of  this paper, we  developed the details of transforming twelve common trading heuristics into nonlinear dynamical equations and simulated these models to illustrate how simple technical trading rules can produce complex price patterns. There have been  a  huge  number  of  technical  trading  rules  accumulated during the long history of technical analysis (Lo and Hasanhodzic, 2010) and  more rules are being proposed constantly to adapt to the evolving market conditions 5 ; by using the  methods  of  this  paper  we  can  transform  these  linguistic descriptions of trading wisdoms into dynamical equations and observe  exactly  what  price  trajectories  and  patterns  these heuristic  rules  can  produce.  Furthermore,  these  dynamical equations allowed us to study the price dynamics generated by the technical trading rules in a mathematically rigorous fashion (as  we  will  do  in  Part  II  of  this  paper)  and  push  technical analysis  forward  in  the  direction  from  an  art  to  a  science. Practically, these models provide us a framework to detect the hidden operations in the market so that trading strategies can be developed to beat the benchmark Buy-and-Hold strategy (as we will do in Part III of this paper).

Fig. 13: The 'main story' this paper is trying to tell: A bridge  is being built across the gulf between the fuzzy, linguistic world of technical analysis which is rich in trading wisdom on one side and the precise, mathematical world of dynamical systems theory which is rich in rigorous tools on the other side.

<!-- image -->

4 More  specifically,  for  the  forecasting  horizon  of  weeks,  the  relative importance is 29.4 for Technical Analysis, 28.4 for Order Flow, and 1.4 for Fundamental  Analysis    for  US  fund  managers;  for  German  fund  managers, these numbers are 60 for Technical Analysis, 22.6 for Order Flow, and 6.7 for Fundamental Analysis; see Fig. 2 in Menkhoff 2010 for more data.

5 According to Schmidt 2011, a search on Amazon.com using the key words technical analysis for new books that were printed between January 2001 and September 2010 yielded 468 entries ---  roughly one new book every week.

The  price  dynamical  models  proposed  in  this  paper  are totally deterministic, so a natural question is how these models compare with the  mainstream stochastic  models that  provide measures  of  unpredictable  uncertainties 6 ?  To  answer  this question,  let's  see  how  the  mainstream  stochastic  models handle  the  unpredictable  uncertainties:  these  models  usually have  a  simple  deterministic  part  (linear  or  simple  ad-hoc nonlinear  functions  of  state  variables),  and  leave  the  real important  part  of  the  (unknown)  dynamics  to  the  noise  term (representing  unpredictable  uncertainties);  then,  they  assume that  the  noise  term  is  zero-mean  and  i.i.d.  (or  make  other comparable assumptions in order for the mathematics to march forward beautifully). We know a key characteristic of financial systems is evolving (time-varying, non-stationary 7 ; Lo, 2004). How  can  one  faithfully  assume  a  key  part  of  an  evolving, non-stationary dynamics (the unpredictable uncertainties) to be zero-mean (a time-invariant constant)? Furthermore, the i.i.d. assumption  implies  that  the  traders  are  drunkards  (Malkiel, 2012) --- the move in one step has no relation to the moves of the previous steps. Real traders are betting in real money, they are serious, they are watching the evolving markets closely and making decisions accordingly, they are socially connected and influence each other, and they are not some random noise from the background as in an electronic circuit model. So, we will ultimately have to roll up our sleeves to dig deep into the origin of  the  price  formation  machine 8 to  build  a  deterministic, cause-effect model for the key dynamics; the models proposed in this paper are a trial in this direction.

The  main  difference  between  Natural  Sciences  and  Social Sciences is that we know the basic laws governing the motions of the objects in Natural Sciences such as the Newton's Laws, whereas the basic objects in Social Sciences are human beings and we do not have the 'Newton's Laws for human subjects.' That  is,  we  lack  a  deep  underpinning  for  understanding  the mechanisms at the origin of the dynamical behavior of financial markets  (Mirowski,  1989;  Kirman,  1989;  Malevergne  and Sornette,  2006).  Our  current  stage  of  understanding  social systems  is  quite  similar  to  'the  blind  monks  touching  the elephant'. In our pursuit for the basic laws of stock markets, we should listen carefully to what the real traders say about their crafts (e.g.  Livermore,  1940;  Lynch,  1989;  Soros,  2003; Lindsey  and  Schachter,  2007;  Lo  and  Hasanhodzic,  2009), because human traders  are the 'atoms of stock  markets.'  As one  of  the  most  successful  speculators  in  modern  finance, George Soros has a Theory of Reflexivity which, in his own words (page 2 of Soros, 2003), is described as follows:

6 'The human brain is wonderful at spotting patterns. It's an ability that is one of the foundation stones of science. When we notice a pattern, we try to pin it down mathematically, and then use the maths to help us understand the world around us. And if we can't spot a pattern, we don't put its absence down to ignorance.  Instead  we  fall  back  on  our  favourite  alternative.  We  call  it randomness.' --- Ian Stewart (Stewart, 2004).

7 Traders come and go (Foucault, Pagano and Roell, 2013), and different traders use different trading strategies, which results in different price patterns at different time points, meaning that the returns are non-stationary.

8 By  which  we  mean  both  the  mechanical  setup  of  the  limit  order  book dynamics  (Gould,  Porter,  Williams,  McDonald,  Fenn  and  Howison,  2013; Bouchaud, Farmer and Lillo, 2008; Cont, Kukannov and Stoikov, 2014) and the investors' mindset (Keynes, 1935; Graham, 1973; Lynch, 1989; Soros, 2003; etc.) including their 'obstinate passion' for technical analysis (Menkhoff and Taylor, 2007).

The  concept  of  reflexivity  is  very  simple.  In situations that have thinking participants, there is a two-way  interaction between  the  participant's thinking and the situation in which they participate. On the one hand, participants seek to understand reality; on the other hand, they seek to bring about a desired outcome. The two functions work  in  opposite  directions:  in  the  cognitive function  reality  is  the  given;  in  the  participating function,  the  participants'  understanding  is  the constant.  The  two  functions  can  interfere  with each  other  by  rendering  what  is  supposed  to  be given, contingent. I call the interference between the two functions 'reflexivity.'

To represent our price dynamical model (1) in the framework of  Soros's  Reflexivity  Theory,  we  plot  the  block  diagram  of model (1) in Fig. 14, where we view the excess demand of each trader group as the cognitive function in Soros's reflexivity theory and the time-varying relative strength as  the  participating  function.  According  to  the  concept  of reflexivity cited above, the input to the cognitive function is the reality --- the price history and other information, and the output is which can be viewed as the dollar amount to trade the  stock:  a  positive means  to  buy  the  stock  with dollars, and a negative means to sell the stock to cash out | | dollars. The impact of the dollar amount on the price dynamics  is  through  the  participating  function whose exact  value  cannot  be  specified  by  the  Rulei -Group  traders alone,  because  the  impact  depends  on  the  actions  of  other traders that are beyond the control of the Rulei -Group traders. In this framework, reflexivity means the interference between and the internal  mechanism of ---  the  fuzzy  trading rules and their parameters m, n and w ; this gives us some hints for possible directions of future research.

Indeed, in Part III of this paper we will develop two trading strategies  ---  Follow-the-Big-Buyer  and  Ride-the-Mood  --based  on  the  estimation  of  the 's  and  test  the  strategies over  the  top  20  blue-chip  stocks  in  the  Hong  Kong  Stock Exchange to show the superior performance of these trading strategies over the benchmark Buy-and-Hold strategy (Part III can be found at arXiv:1401.1892). But before we do this, we would  better  first  analyze  the  price  dynamical  model  (1)  in detail to get a basic understanding for the key properties of the price dynamics, which is what we are going to do in Part II of this paper (Part II can be found at arXiv:1401.1891), next.

Fig.  14:  The block diagram representation of the price dynamical model (1) with interpretation of the function blocks in terms of George Soros's Theory of Reflexivity.

<!-- image -->

## ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The author would like thank the anonymous reviewers for their  very  insightful  and  inspiring  comments  that  helped  to improve the paper.

## REFERENCES

- [1] Aldridge, I., High-Frequency Trading: A Practical Guide to Algorithmic Strategies and Trading Systems (2 nd Edition), John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., New Jersey, 2013.
- [2]  Andersen,  T.G.,  T.  Bollerslev  and  F.X.  Diebold,  'Parametric  and Nonparametric  Volatility  Measurement,'  in  Y.  Ait-Sahalia  and  L.P. Hansen (ed.), Handbook of Financial Econometrics: Tools and Techniques , Vol. 1, pp. 67-138, Elsevier: North-Holland, 2010.
- [3]  Atsalakis,  G.  and  K.  Valavanis,  'Surveying  Stock  Market  Forecasting Techniques  -  Part  II:  Soft  Computing  Methods,' Expert  Systems  with Applications 36: 5932-5941, 2008.
4. [ ] Bachelier, L., 'Theorie de la speculation.' Thesis. Annales Scientifiques de  l'Ecole  Normale  Superieure,  1990.  III-17,  21-86.  Translated  by Cootner (ed.) as 'Random character of Stock Market Prices.' (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1964: 17-78).
- [5]  Black,  F.  and  M.  Scholes,  'The  Pricing  of  Options  and  Corporate Liabilities,' Journal of Political Economy 81: 637-659, 1973.

- [6] Bollerslev, T., R.Y. Chou and K.F. Kroner, 'ARCH Modeling in Finance: A Review of the Theory and Empirical Evidence,' Journal of Econometrics 52: 5-59, 1992.
- [7]  Bollinger,  J., Bollinger  on  Bollinger  Bands ,  McGraw-Hill,  New  York, 2002.
- [8]  Bouchaud,  J.P.,  D.  Farmer  and  F.  Lillo,  'How  Markets  Slowly  Digest Changes in Supply and Demand,' in T. Hens, K. Schenk-Hoppe, eds., Handbook  of  Financial  Market:  Dynamics  and  Evolution ,  Elsevier: Academic Press: 57-160 , 2008.
- [9] Bouchaud, J.P. and M. Potters, Theory of Financial Risks: From Statistical Physics to Risk Management (2 nd Edition) , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2003.
- [10] Bradshaw, M.T., S.A. Richardson and R.G. Sloan, 'Pump and Dump: An Empirical Analysis of the Relation Between  Corporate Financing Activities and Sell-side Analyst Research,' SSNR 410521 , 2003.
- [11] Brock, W.A. J. Lakonishok and B. LeBaron, 'Simple Technical Trading Rules and the Stochastic Properties of Stock Returns,' Journal of Finance 47: 1731-1764, 1992.
- [12] Cont, R., A. Kukannov and S. Stoikov, 'The Price Impact of Order Book Events,' J. Financial Econometrics 12: 47-88, 2014.
- [13]  Elton,  E.J.,  M.J.  Gruber,  S.J.  Brown  and  W.N.  Goetzmann, Modern Portfolio  Theory  and  Investment  Analysis  (7 th Edition) ,  John  Wiley  &amp; Sons, Inc., 2007.
- [14] Engle, R.F., 'Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity with Estimates of the Variance of U.K. Inflation,' Econometrica 50: 987-1008, 1982.
- [15] Fama, E., 'Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work,' Journal of Finance 25: 383-417, 1970.
- [16] Fan, J.J., Follow the Banker (in Chinese), China Machine Press, Beijing, 2010.
- [17]  Foucault,  T.,  M.  Pagano  and  A.  Roell, Market  Liquidity:  Theory, Evidence, and Policy , Oxford University Press, 2013.
- [18] Fouque, J.P., G. Papanicolaou and K.R. Sircar, Derivatives in Financial Markets with Stochastic Volatility , Cambridge University Press, 2000.
- [19]  Gencay,  R.,  'The  Predictability  of  Security  Returns  with  Simple Technical  Trading  Rules,' Journal  of  Empirical  Finances 5:  347-359, 1998.
- [20] Gigerenzer, G., 'On Narrow Norms and Vague Heuristics: A Reply to Kahneman  and  Tversky  (1996),' Psychological  Review 103:  592-596, 1996.
- [21] Gigerenzer, G. and W. Gaissmaier, 'Heuristic Decision Making,' Annual Review of Psychology 62: 451-482, 2011.
- [22] Gould, M.D., M.A. Porter, S. Williams, M. McDonald, D.J. Fenn and S.D. Howison,  'Limit  Order  Books,' Quantitative  Finance 13:  1709-1742, 2013.
- [23] Graham, B., The Intelligent Investor (Revised Edition), Harper Business, 1973.
- [24] Graham, B. and D. Dodd, Security Analysis (6 th Edition), (McGraw-Hill, New York, 2009), 1940.
- [25]  Hommes,  C.H.,  'Heterogeneous  Agent  Models  in  Economics  and Finance,' in L. Tesfatsion and K.L. Judd, eds., Handbook of Computational Economics Vol. 2: Agent-Based Computational Economics , Elsevier B.V.: 1109-1186, 2006.
- [26] Hull, J.C., Options, Futures, and Other Derivatives (7 th Edition) , Pearson Education, Inc., 2009.
- [27] Jegadeesh, N and S. Titman, 'Returns to Buying  Winners and Selling Losers: Implications for Stock Market Efficiency,' Journal of Finance 48: 65-91, 1993.
- [28] Jiang, X.S., Reveal the Secrets of Main Force Manipulation (in Chinese), Tsinghua University Press, 2013.
- [29] Keynes, J.M., The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, (BN Publishing, 2009), 1935.
- [30]  Kirman,  A.,  'The  Intrinsic  Limits  of  Modern  Economic  Theory:  The Emperor Has  No Clothes,' Economic Journal 99:126-139, 1989.
- [31]  Kirilenko,  A.A.  and  A.W.  Lo,  'Moore's  Law  versus  Murphy's  Law: Algorithmic Trading and Its Discontents,' Journal of Economic Perspectives , 27: 51-72, 2013.
- [32] Kirkpatrick, C.D. and J. Dahlquist, Technical Analysis: The Complete Resource  for  Financial  market  Technicians  (Second  Edition), Pearson Education, New Jersey, 2011.
- [33] Kirkpatrick, C.D. and J. Dahlquist, Study Guide for the Second Edition of Technical  Analysis:  The  Complete  Resource  for  Financial  market Technicians, Pearson Education, New Jersey, 2013.
- [34] Kyle, A.S., 'Continuous Auction and Insider Trading,' Econometrica 53: 1315-1335, 1985.
- [35]  Kyle,  A.S.  and  S.  Viswanathan,  'Price  Manipulation  in  Financial Markets: How to Define Illegal Price Manipulation,' American Economic Review 98:2, 274-279, 2008.
- [36]  LeBaron,  B.,  S.H.  Chen  and  S.  Sunder,  'The  Future  of  Agent-Based Research in Economics: A Panel Discussion,' Eastern Economic Journal 34: 550-565, 2008.
- [37] Leinweber, D.J. and A.N. Madhavan, 'Three Hundred Years of Stock Market Manipulations,' The Journal of Investing 10: 7-16, 2001.
- [38] Lindsey, R.R. and B. Schachter, How I Became a Quant: Insights From 25 of Wall Street's Elite , John Wiley &amp; Sons, New Jersey, 2007.
- [39] Livermore, J., How to Trade in Stocks , (McGraw-Hill, 2001), 1940.
- [40] Lo, A.W., 'The Adaptive Market Hypothesis: Market Efficiency from an Evolutionary  Perspective,' The  Journal  of  Portfolio  Management 30: 15-29, 2004.
- [41] Lo, A.W. and J. Hasanhodzic, The Heretics of Finance: Conversations with Leading Practitioners of Technical Analysis , Bloomberg Press, New York, 2009.
- [42]  Lo,  A.W.  and  J.  Hasanhodzic, The  Evolution  of  Technical  Analysis: Financial Prediction from Babylonian Tablets to Bloomberg Terminals , John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., New Jersey, 2010.
- [43]  Lo,  A.W.,  H.  Mamaysky  and  J.  Wang,  'Foundations  of  Technical Analysis: Computational Algorithms, Statistical Inference, and Empirical Implementation,' Journal of Finance 55: 1705-1765, 2000.
- [44]  Lux,  T.,  'The  Socio-Economic  Dynamics  of  Speculative  Markets: Interacting  Agents,  chaos,  and  the  Fat  Tails  of  Return  Distribution,' Journal of Economic Behavior &amp; Organizations 33: 143-165, 1998.
- [45]  Lux,  T.  and  M.  Marchesi,  'Scaling  and  Criticality  in  A  Stochastic Multi-Agent Model of A Financial Market,' Nature 397: 498-500, 1999.
- [46] Lynch, P., One Up on Wall Street: How to Use What You Already Know to Make Money in the Market , Simon &amp; Schuster Paperbacks, New York, 1989.
- [47]  Malevergne,  Y.  and  D.  Sornette, Extreme  Financial  Risks:  From Dependence  to  Risk  Management ,  Springer-Verlag  Berlin  Heidelberg, 2006.
- [48] Malkiel, B.G., A Random Walk Down Wall Street (10 th Edition) , W.W. Norton &amp; Co., New York, 2012.
- [49]  Menkhoff,  L.,  'The  Use  of  Technical  Analysis  by  Fund  Managers: International Evidence,' Journal of Banking &amp; Finance 34: 2573-2586, 2010.
- [50]  Menkhoff,  L.  and  M.P.  Taylor,  'The  Obstinate  Passion  of  Foreign Exchange  Professionals:  Technical  Analysis,' Journal  of  Economic Literature XLV: 936-972, 2007.
- [51]  Merton,  R.C.,  'Option  Pricing  When  Underlying  Stock  Returns  Are Discontinuous,' Journal of Financial Economics 3: 125-144, 1976.
- [52]  Mirowski,  P., More  Heat  Than  Light:  Economics  as  Social  Physics, Physics as Nature's Economics , Cambridge University Press, 1989.
- [53]  Schmidt,  A.B., Financial  Markets  and  Trading:  An  Introduction  to Market Microstructure and Trading Strategies , John Wiley &amp; Sons, New Jersey, 2011.
- [54] Soros, G., The Alchemy of Finance ,  John  Wiley  &amp;  Sons,  New Jersey, 2003.
- [55] Stewart, I., 'In the Lap of the Gods,' NewScientist , 25 Sept. 2004.

- [56] Sullivan, R., A. Timmermann and H. White, 'Data-Snooping, Technical Trading Rule Performance, and the Bootstrap,' The Journal of Finance 54: 1647-1691, 1999.
- [57] Tesfatsion, T. and  K.L.  Judd,  eds., Handbook  of  Computational Economics Vol. 2: Agent-Based Computational Economics , Elsevier B.V., 2006.
- [58] Wang, L.X., A Course in Fuzzy Systems and Control , Prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 1997.
- [59]  Zadeh,  L.A.,  'Toward  a  Theory  of  Fuzzy  Systems,'  in Aspects  of Network and System Theory , eds. R.E. Kalman and N. DeClaris, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1971.
- [60] Zadeh, L.A., 'Outline of a New Approach to the Analysis of Complex Systems  and  Decision  Processes,' IEEE Trans. on  Systems,  Man,  and Cybern. 3: 28-44, 1973.

<!-- image -->

Li-Xin  Wang received  the  Ph.D.  degree  in  1992 from  the  Department  of  Electrical  Engineering  Systems,  University  of  Southern  California  (won USC's Phi Kappa Phi's highest Student Recognition Award). From 1992 to 1993 he was a Postdoc Fellow with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California at Berkeley. From 1993 to 2007 he was on the faculty of the Department of Electronic and

Computer  Engineering,  The  Hong  Kong  University  of  Science  and Technology. In 2007 he resigned from his tenured position at HKUST to become an independent researcher and investor in the stock and real estate markets in Hong Kong and China. He returned to academia in Fall 2013 by joining the faculty of the Department  of Automation  Science and Technology,  Xian  Jiaotong  University,  after  a  fruitful  hunting  journey across  the  wild  land  of  investment  to  achieve  financial  freedom.  His research interests are dynamical models of asset prices, market microstructure, trading strategies, fuzzy systems, and opinion networks.