FINDING INFORMED TRADERS IN FUTURES AND THEIR UNDERLYING

ASSETS IN INTRADAY TRADING a

Lyudmila A. Glik b , Oleg L. Kritski c ,

Tomsk Polytechnic University, Russia

## Abstract

We propose a mathematical procedure for finding informed traders in ultra-high frequency

trading. We wrote it as Vector ARMA and found condition of its stationarity. For the price exposure

complied  with  ARMA(1,2)  we  proved  that  underlying  asset  price  difference  can  be  derived  as

ARMA(1,1)  process.  For  validation  of  the  model,  we  test  an  influence  of  informed  traders  in

EUR/USD, GBP/USD, USD/RUB pairs and futures, in gold and futures prices, in Russian Trade

System share index (RTS) and futures trading. We found some evidence of such influence in gold

and currency pair USD/RUB pricing, in RTS index in the period from Dec 16 till Dec 20, 2013 and

from Jan 28 till Jan 30.

Keywords:

informed traders

,

intraday  ultra-high  frequency  trading,  ARMA  consistency,  futures,

underlying assets, price disclosure, mixed strategy.

JEL classification:

G13, G14, G15, D82.

1.

Introduction

Identifying of insider traders, defined here as large institutional investors (such as pension or

hedge  funds,  market  makers,  dealers  and  etc.),  is  an  actual  and  complex  problem.  They  play  an

important role in maintaining the operating performance of the stock market by providing it with a

high liquidity, by keeping up some level of prices and trading volumes of financial instruments and

by smoothing a significant price volatility. Besides the special functions, they use privileges which

are not accessible to individual investors and speculators (Scholtus et al. (2014); Lepone and Yang

(2013);

Dey and Radhakrishna

(2013)):

they may obtain information about important

macroeconomic indicators faster, they may also possess nonpublic information about firms before it is  officially  published  in  the  quarterly  or  annual  financial  reports.  For  example,  Scholtus  et  al. (2014)  determine  the  statistical  significance  of  return  changes  and  show  an  increase  in  trading activity before the official announcement time of such important economic indicators as Chicago PMI and UMich Sentiment. It appears that subscribers receive information 3 and 5 minutes earlier than others. And, at the time of the announcement published data is already included in the price and significant spikes disappear.

a This work was financially supported by Russian Scientific Fund.

b Tomsk Polytechnic University, 36 Lenin Ave., Tomsk, Tomsk reg., Russia, 634050.

c Corresponding  author.  Tomsk  Polytechnic  University,  30  Lenin  Ave.,  Tomsk,  Tomsk  reg.,  Russia,  634050. Tel:+73822 418913. Fax: +73822 529658.

E-mail address: olegkol@tpu.ru

We intentionally did not determine the impact of insiders on the trading activity. First, we assume that the number of insiders is low in comparison to large traders. Second, their activity is regulated, for example, by Securities Exchange Act (USA) or by Federal Law no. 224-FZ (Russia). Third, the insider may benefit from the disclosure of private information to informed traders (see, e.g.,  Grégoire  and  Huang  (2012);  Liu  and  Zhang (2011)),  because  it  facilitates  the  increase  of market activity and stock prices, therefore profit of the insider increases too.

The  literature  on  the  detection  of  insider  and  informed  traders  is  large.  Even  so,  special attention is devoted to the classic paper of Kyle (1985). It employs basic ideas and an original twoperiod Kyle model for insider trading using a linear price disclosure function and existence of the equilibrium  strategy  with  no  public  disclosure,  considering  the  market  efficiency  and  profit maximization  by  the  monopolistic  insider.  Later,  the  approach  was  commonly  accepted  and developed in many works (Grégoire and Huang (2012); Liu and Zhang (2011); Wang et al. (2009); Daher  et.  al.  (2012)).  So,  Grégoire  and  Huang  (2012);  Liu  and  Zhang (2011)  developed mathematical  models  of  interaction  between  one  insider, N institutional  investors,  a  number  of individual  ('noise')  traders  and  one  market  maker.  In  Daher  et.  al.  (2012)  authors  implied  the Cournot  competition  (duopoly)  in  the  Kyle  model  and,  by  analogy  with  Wang  et  al.  (2009), examined  the  Stackelberg  competition  where  insiders  are  the  owner  of  the  company  and  top manager subordinated to him.

Ideas of Kyle influenced the papers of Deb et al. (2014); Zhou (2012); Vitale (2012); Piccione and Spiegler (2014); Yang and Li (2014)). So, Deb et al. (2014) examines the competition among informed traders and a market maker in the presence of a noise trader. The authors establish a threeperiod rational expectations equilibrium (REE) model where informed traders receive and verify a noisy signal, and trade by their own.

In  Zhou  (2012)  the  original  two-period  Kyle  model  is  generalized  for  the  case  of  a  single insider,  who  has  some  confidence  degree,  multiple  market  makers  and  multiple  noise  traders. Authors find the optimal trading strategies for such insider, based on the information available to him and his belief level (confident or pessimistic). Using the same initial assumptions Vitale (2012) presumes that such insider is risk-averse, implying a multi-security version of Kyle's model with Markovian linear sequential equilibrium.

Lastly, papers of Piccione and Spiegler (2014); Yang and Li (2014)) suggest a trading model with investor sentiment that extends the original Kyle model. In this model, there are an informed rational investor, who maximizes his expected profits, and uninformed 'noise' sentiment speculator, who trades on sentiment shocks. Authors derive an analytical solution to the sentiment equilibrium prices and describe a dynamic price path.

There exists a significant disadvantage in all the foregoing papers - they employ the linearity of the risky asset price exposure, which in our opinion, limits the scope of their applicability.

The paper of Park and Lee (2010) presents a nonlinear model of the dynamics of risky asset returns in the presence of insider trading. The authors disclose the dependence of risky asset returns on  the  amount  of  insider  transactions  and  denote  it  in  the  form  of  an  ARMA(1,1)  model. Furthermore, they obtain the detection criteria of insider trading which proved to be closely related with stability conditions of the ARMA(1,1) process.

Along with the identification of insiders and informed traders only by changes in underlying asset prices there exist methods that involve its derivatives, notably options (Popescu and Kumar (2013); Hu (2013); Muravyev et al. (2013)). Thus, Popescu and Kumar (2013) verify the put-call parity for American options with two different strikes for different market agents and compute the probability of informed trading (PIN). And, Hu (2013) found an order imbalance in trades of the underlying asset and its three options, i.e. in-the-money (ITM), at-the-money (ATM) и out-of-themoney (OTM) options, that enables to compute the probability of informed traders. Muravyev et al. (2013) combine those two approaches.

The possibility of addressing futures prices for detection of informed traders was first noted in Yi-Tsung  (2013),  where  it  is  shown  that  the  enhancement  of  the  trading  activity  in  the  futures market anticipates an increased activity in the spot-market, but in most cases the direction of trade (to sell or to buy) remains unclear, even if using the non-public information.

The purpose of this study is to develop the methodology for identification of the impact of informed traders on the trading activity  considered in Park and Lee (2010). Hence, we present a Vector ARMA model for tick prices of futures and its underlying asset and estimate limits of its instability.  Furthermore,  we  formulate  relevant  decisive  criteria.  The  computational  algorithm  is applied  for  the  analysis  of  high  frequency  data  for  the  period  that  precedes  announcements  of important  macroeconomic  information  about  phasing  out  the  program  of  "quantitative  easing' (QE3) and U.S. GDP growth for the third quarter of 2013, as well as in the period following this news.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we construct a mixed multi-period model of informed trading in terms of stock and futures  return series  and investigate its characteristics.  In Section 3 we analyze the effectiveness of detection criteria through a simulation and apply it to FX

pairs,  spot  gold  prices,  developing  country  share  index  and  their  futures  in  time    of  QE3  ending announcements. Finally, Section 4 presents our conclusions.

## 2. Model

Let's assume that number of all players on the stock market, trading an underlying asset and its  futures  contract,  are  divided  into  informed  traders  and  ordinary  'noise'  traders. Let  a macroeconomic announcement affecting the price, be publicly known at a future time T, while the informed  trader  has  obtained  the  data  at  time t &lt; T .  We  assume  that  he  decides  to  buy  (sell)  the underlying asset or futures in equal installments at regular intervals, i.e. at time t , ( t +1), …, T . Then the effect of changes in the underlying asset price could be defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where   2 0, ~ u t N u  -  addition to the price, offered by uninformed traders, t v -  surcharge to the price that an informed trader is willing to pay.

Let t v obey the relation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where β - coefficient of proportionality, t  - value of trading transaction of informed trader.

We suppose that t  satisfies AR(1) model, which is explained by the desire of the informed trader to hide his activity and, for instance, to reduce his contribution t v at  low  levels  of  market activity:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  - average value of trading transaction price per time unit,   2 0, ~ z t N z  - price noise.

Let St be a quote of the underlying asset at time t . Since a trader buys a large quantity of the underlying asset, we assume that St will vary proportionally to the change of prices:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where       1 1 , cov      t t t t t v D X v X - market depth variation coefficient.

It follows from equation (2) that the coefficient t  defines a price exposure with respect to all market participants. Moreover in our case it is easy to verify that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If noise processes t t u z , are independent of one another.

Using an analytical representation of t X and substituting t  defined by (1), equation (2) can be written as an ARMA (1,1) model from Park and Lee (2010):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where   2 0, ~    N t is a noise process,       1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1                u z ,           1 2 2 1             1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1                     u z u z u z ,   T S S T 0 1      .

Representation of equation (2) in the form of (3) allows us to entail the following conditions from Park and Lee (2010): 1) if ρ&lt;0, then 0&lt;δ&lt;-ρ; 2) if ρ&gt;0, then -1&lt;δ&lt;-ρ. We could, therefore, formulate the following criterion:

Criterion :  coefficients  of  the  AR(1)  and  MA(1)  parts  of  model  (3)  (ρ  and  δ,  respectively)  must have opposite signs. If 0   , then based on the stability conditions,    . If 0  , then    .

Let T t S t 0,1 ,.., ,  ,  be  a  data  set  that  is  available  for  analysis.  Let m &lt; T be  a  time  window length, which allows us to calculate the initial estimates of coefficients               m S S m 0 1 1 1 1    ,

1   and 1   with quotes m S S S S ,..., , , 2 1 0 in model (3). Moving the time window to the right per unit until  we reach time T, by known s m s s S S S   ,..., , 1 we  estimate s   , s   and s   ,   m T s   0,1 ,.., . Furthermore,  we  use  empirical  values  of  the  coefficients  found  to  formulate  a  decision  rule. Accordingly, we write the criterion:

Decisive criterion : subject to non-zero price movements 0   k  ,   m T k   0,1 ,.., , we assume that the informed transaction is detected if one of the following inequalities holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, let t F be a futures price of the underlying asset priced at t S .  It  is  well  known that there exists a relation (Alexander and Barbosa (2008)):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r -  risk-free  interest  rate, T expiry time for a futures contract, t - current time, one can write the analogue of equation (3) for returns 1   t F .

Now we state our main results of this paper.

Theorem 1 . Let's suppose         1 exp 1 0 1         t r T S e e A r r t ,     1 exp ~      t r T t t is a Gaussian noise process,       1 exp 1 1        t r T e e C r r t . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof of theorem 1 is listed in Appendix A .

Theorem 2 . System  of  equalities  (3)  and  (5)  can  be  written  in  the  form  of  the  Vector  ARMA model :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where   1 1 1 ;       t t t S F X ,     ; ~ 1 t A A -vectors,              1 2 0 ~ t r C e B ,           0 0 0 ~ 1 t C C -  square

matrices 2×2.

The proof of Theorem 2 is obvious.

We note that representing the process in the form of (6) allow us to determine the conditions of its stationarity (see, e.g., Wei (2006) for getting conditions and estimation of the stationarity of Vector ARMA processes). From the results we can formulate Theorem 3:

Theorem 3. Process 1  t X in equation (6) is stationary, if 1   .

The proof of theorem 3 is listed in Appendix A .

Theorem 3 enables us to write the necessary generalized criterion of the presence of informed traders when trading futures contracts and the underlying asset on them:

Generalized criterion : 1) if -1&lt;ρ&lt;0, then 0&lt;δ&lt;-ρ; 2) if 1&gt;ρ&gt;0, then -1&lt;δ&lt;-ρ.

The decisive criterion will barely change and can be rewritten easily.

At the end of this section we notice that if unlike equation (1) we choose the price exposure process t  as ARMA(1,2), i.e.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then equation (3) for underlying asset price should be rewritten under the following theorem.

Theorem 4. In case an informed trader implements a mixed strategy (2) with 2 2 2 4 4 u z z      as

the information exposure strategy in a multi-period model, underlying asset price difference follows the ARMA(1,1) process below.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof is listed in the Appendix A .

## 3. Numerical simulation results

## 3.1. Data

We use  ultra-high  frequency  tick  data  for  EUR/USD,  GBR/USD  and  USD/RUB  currency pairs and spot gold prices, their March, 2014 futures, 1 min data for Russian Trade System share index (RTS) and its futures (ticker RIH4) in the period Dec 17 - Dec 20, 2013 and Jan 28 - Jan 30, 2014. The data were obtained from FINAM holding (www.finam.ru) and CME Group.

The  choice  of  financial  instruments  for  analysis  is  due  to  macroeconomic  statistics,  its information is disclosed in certain periods of time: it is news about phasing out the U.S. monetary stimulus, i.e. QE3, and final data on U.S. GDP for the III quarter of 2013, and preliminary - for the IV quarter of 2013, from which the termination time of QE3 was depended on.

## 3.2. Results

While three incentive programs were functioning, the first one was launched in March, 2009, the role of regional currencies (Australian and New Zealand dollar, Brazilian and Mexican peso, Chinese yuan, South African rand, Russian ruble, Turkish lira and Indonesian rupiah) significantly increased  (Triennial  Central  Bank  Survey  Report  (2013)):  for  example,  the  percentage  share  of rouble in 'net-net' turnover in the FX market increased from 0,9% to 1,6% for last three years. And this situation is not unique: the share of RMB increased over the same period from 0.9% to 2.2%, the Mexican peso - from 1.3% to 2.5%, the Turkish lira - from 0.7% to 1.3 %. These facts indicate that  there  was  a  free  cash  flow  from  developed  countries  to  developing  ones  over  the  past  three years. On the one hand, it stimulated their economies and strengthened regional currencies up to a certain  point  of  time.  On  the  other  hand,  imbalances  increased  and  overheating  of  economies occurred at the first threat of collapse of the incentive programs, which led to a sharp devaluation of the local currency and the stock market crashes. All of these help to identify large informed traders and fix their activity, for example, in the Russian or any other emerging markets.

The possible existence of relationship between FX market and gold prices during the crisis is discussed  in  the  paper  by  Pukthuanthong  and  Roll  (2011),  where  strong  positive  correlations between gold prices and Dollar, Euro, Yen and Pound were found and investigated.  Therefore, we investigate the activity of traders in trading of gold futures and examine the gold spot prices.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let's define the impact of informed traders in intraday trading of currency pairs EUR/USD, GBR/USD, USD/RUB and March, 2014 futures.

The results of calculations with the time window length m =1 hour, are presented in Table 1, Panel A -C .

## [Table 1 is here]

According to the results of calculations, given in Table 1, Panel A-C we conclude that there is no significant impact of informed traders in trading of highly liquid currency pairs EUR/USD and GBR/USD, while for emerging market currencies USD/RUB we traced it on January 29, 2014, due to the observed capital flight from emerging to developed markets while phasing out QE3.

Because of the relationship  of  FX  market  and  gold  prices  discussed  in  Pukthuanthong  and Roll (2011), it is interesting to investigate the activity of traders in the gold trade at the beginning of the global structural changes.

We analyze the tick retail price of gold and futures on it.  It  is  known that  these  prices  are closely  associated  with  capital  inflows  to  developing  countries  and  affect  their  foreign  exchange rates (Apergis (2014)), inflation and FX reserves. The results of calculations with the width of the time window m = 1h present in Tables. 2. The results of calculations with the time window length m =1 hour, are presented in Table 2.

## [Table 2 is here]

According to the results of calculations, given in Table 2 we found the impact of informed traders  in  gold  trading  in  days  following  announcements  of  phasing  out  the  program  QE3.  It  is predictable since the termination of QE3 has a direct impact on expectations of large players about the reduction of supply of dollar in the world and, as a consequence, the decrease of precious metal prices.

In our opinion, such reason is based on the drop of indices in developing countries. We show it on the example of an emerging stock market, such as Russia.

We  analyze  1-minute  data  of  March,  2014  futures  on  RTS  index  (ticker  RIH4)  priced  in rouble and 1-minute data of RTS index priced in dollar. These index assets have a rouble-dollar nature and the quotes depend directly on EUR/USD rate associated with processes of capital flight.

The results of calculations with the time window length m =1 hour, are presented in Table 3.

[Table 3 is here]

Thus, our calculations identify two different stages after the announcement of the termination of QE3. At the first stage (Dec 18 - Dec 20, 2013) informed traders showed high activity in gold trading and futures on it, but closer to the end of the stage they switched to index assets of emerging markets that our calculations revealed. At the second stage (Jan 28 - Jan 30, 2014) operations with currencies of developing countries (e.g., RUB) were added to the trading activity that is correlated to  the  capital  flight  to  developed  markets.  At  the  same  time  suspicious  transactions  with  highly liquid pairs EUR/USD, GBR/USD were not detected in the FX market, despite the high volatility of their prices throughout the first stage.

## 4. Conclusion

Our analysis shows that the proposed generalized and decisive criteria allow to identify the activity  of  informed  traders  in  intraday  trading  in  global  markets.  Further,  it  is  shown  that  such traders while are unable to even in the short term to set their movement trajectory prices on all stock markets,  i.e.  principles  of  fair  and  honest  trading  are  fulfilled.  Further,  we  reveal  the  current inability of such traders to determine price trajectories in all stock markets, i.e. principles of fair and honest trading are fulfilled. At the same time, informed trading in the emerging market of Russia is detected easier while using a wide range of financial instruments.

## APPENDIX A . Proofs.

To prove Theorem 1, we first state and prove an auxiliary Lemma 1.

Lemma 1 : If Ft holds equality (4), then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Theorem 1. According to (3), 1 1        t t t t S S , or, in terms of prices,

  1 1 1 1          t t t t t S S S . We apply this expression to the results in the proof of Lemma 1. Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let's use Lemma 1 once again: t r t t r t t t t t e F F F F e S S S S 1 1 1 1 1 1                         

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let's form the difference 1   t F in the left side of the equation, then we subtract and add t r F e :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We proceed similarly with the last term on the right side of the equation:

now,

then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let's transform Ft . substituting the price equation in (4) with 0 1 2 1 1 ... S S S S S S S S t j j t t t t t t                 , where S 0 -known initial price of the

underlying asset, and dividing both sides of the equation by e r , considering notions of the theorem we obtain equation (5).

Proof  of    Theorem  3 .  According  to  the  general  theory  of  stationary  of  Vector  ARMA  processes (Wei (2006)), 1  t X is stationary if and only if all eigenvalues of B ~  and C ~  in (6) lie inside the unit circle in the complex plane. Clearly, matrix B ~  has two real eigenvalues: r e 2   and ρ, and matrix C ~ - zero eigenvalue of multiplicity 2. Since 1 2      r e by condition of the theorem, then 1  t X is stationary.

Proof  of  Theorem  4. After  double  substitution  of  equation  1  into  equation  2  with  different t we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We modify (A.2) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote the autocovariance of some auxiliar expression

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as Vj , so V 0 and V 1 can be easily computed as follows:

So, it is proved that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These coefficients, obviously, define our auxiliar expression in the form (8) needed.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If we compute similar autocovariances of (A.3) directly and equate them to (A.4) and (A.5), we can find unknown  and 2   . The system of such equations is as written below:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## References

- Alexander,  C.,  Barbosa,  A.,  2008.  Hedging  index  exchange  traded  funds.  Journal  of  Banking  &amp; Finance 32 (2), 326-337.
- Apergis, N., 2014. Can gold prices forecast the Australian dollar movements? International Review of Economics &amp; Finance 29, 75-82.
- Daher,  W.,  Karam,  F.,  Mirman,  L.J.,  2012.  Insider  trading  with  different  market  structures. International Review of Economics &amp; Finance 24, 143-154.
- Deb, P., Koo, B., Liu, Z., 2014. Competition, premature trading and excess volatility. Journal of Banking &amp; Finance 41, 178-193.
- Dey, M.K., Radhakrishna, B., 2013. Informed trading, institutional trading, and spread. Journal of Economics and Finance, 1-20.
- Grégoire, P., Huang, H., 2012. Information disclosure with leakages. Economic Modelling 29 (5), 2005-2010.
- Hu, J., 2014. Does option trading convey stock price information? Journal of Financial Economics. 111 (3), 625-645.
- Kyle, A.S., 1985. Continuous Auctions and Insider Trading. Econometrica 53 (6), 1315-1335.
- Lepone, A., Yang, J.Y., 2013. Informational role of market makers: The case of exchange traded CFDs. Journal of Empirical Finance 23, 84-92.
- Liu, H., Zhang, Z., 2011. Insider trading with public and shared information. Economic Modelling 28 (4), 1756-1762.
- Muravyev,  D.,  Pearson,  N.D.,  Broussard,  J.P.,  2013.  Is  there  price  discovery  in  equity  options? Journal of Financial Economics 107(2), 259-283.
- Park, Y.S., Lee, J., 2010. Detecting insider trading: The theory and validation in Korea Exchange. Journal of Banking &amp; Finance 34 (9), 2110-2120.
- Piccione, M., Spiegler, R., 2014. Manipulating market sentiment. Economics Letters, 122 (2), 370373.
- Popescu, M., Kumar, R., 2013. The implied intra-day probability of informed trading. Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting, 1-15.
- Pukthuanthong, K., Roll, R., 2011. Gold and the Dollar (and the Euro, Pound, and Yen). Journal of Banking &amp; Finance 35 (8), 2070-2083.
- Scholtus,  M.,  Dick,  van  Dijk,  Frijns,  B.,  2014.  Speed,  algorithmic  trading,  and  market  quality around macroeconomic news announcements. Journal of Banking &amp; Finance 38, 89-105.
- Triennial Central Bank Survey Report on Global Foreign Exchange, 2013. Bank for International Settlements Communications, Switzerland, Basel, 74 p.

- Vitale, P., 2012. Risk-averse insider trading in multi-asset sequential auction markets. Economics Letters 117 (3), 673-675.
- Wang, L.F.S., Wang, Y.C., Ren, S., 2009. Stackelberg financial leader in insider trading  model. International Review of Economics and Finance 18, 123-131.
- William  W.S.,  Wei,  2006.  Time  Series  Analysis:  Univariate  and  Multivariate  Methods.  Pearson Education Inc 2 nd edition, 614 p.
- Yang,  C.,  Li,  J.,  2014.  Two-period  trading  sentiment  asset  pricing  model  with  information. Economic Modelling 36, 1-7.
- Yi-Tsung, Lee, Wei-Shao, Wu, Yang, Y.H., 2013. Informed Futures Trading and Price Discovery: Evidence from Taiwan Futures and Stock Markets. Asia-Pacific Financial Markets 20 (3), 219242.
- Zhou, D., 2012. Overconfidence, public disclosure and long-lived information. Economics Letters 116 (3), 626-630.

Table 1 Impact of informed traders on trading process in the analysis of EUR/USD, GBR/USD, USD/RUB and their March, 2014 futures tick prices at different dates

Panel A. EUR/USD

| Date  Underlying asset  Futures  Presence of impact                  17.12.2013  0,176  0,327  0,168  0,277  declined  18.12.2013  0,769  0,836  0,309  0,679  declined  19.12.2013  0,344  0,443  0,869  0,908  declined  20.12.2013  0,244  0,350  -0,639  -0,667  declined  28.01.2014  0,008  0,219  0,507  0,559  declined  29.01.2014  -0,079  0,082  0,058  0,152  declined  30.01.2014  0,788  0,848  -0,894  -0,866  declined  Panel B. GBR/USD  17.12.2013  0,740  0,769  -0,091  -0,196  declined  18.12.2013  0,034  0,099  0,278  0,374  declined  19.12.2013  -0,007  0,089  -0,643  -0,689  declined  20.12.2013  -0,457  -0,403  0,347  0,286  declined  28.01.2014  0,782  0,808  0,361  0,713  declined  29.01.2014  0,057  0,206  0,361  0,662  declined  30.01.2014  0,598  0,656  -0,090  -0,208  declined  Panel C. USD/RUB  17.12.2013  -0,120  0,746  -0,112  -0,193  declined  18.12.2013  0,090  0,700  0,380  0,394  declined  19.12.2013  -0,020  0,781  -0,503  -0,619  declined  20.12.2013  -0,065  0.789  0,247  0,295  declined  28.01.2014  -0,104  0,581  -0,211  -0,312  declined  29.01.2014  -0,696  0,196  -0,582  0,275  accepted  30.01.2014  -0,232  0,431  -0,210  0,331  declined   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2 Impact of informed traders on trading process in the analysis of tick spot gold prices and March, 2014 futures tick prices at different dates

| Date  Gold  Futures  Presence of impact   |
|-------------------------------------------|



|         17.12.2013  -0,115  0,231  -0,055  0,138  declined  18.12.2013  -0,315  0,166  -0,298  0,061  accepted  19.12.2013  -0,077  0,289  -0,086  0,233  declined  20.12.2013  -0,087  0,244  -0,013  0,202  declined  28.01.2014  -0,034  0,279  0,462  0,782  declined  29.01.2014  -0,251  0,050  0,334  0,709  accepted  30.01.2014  0,144  0,299  0,454  0,763  declined   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|







Table 3 Impact of informed traders on trading process in the analysis of 1-minute data of RTS index and prices of RIH4 futures at different dates

| Date  RTS Index  Futures on RTS  Index  Presence of impact                  17.12.2013  -0,655  -0,695  0,251  0,352  declined  18.12.2013  -0,853  -0,756  0,178  0,299  declined  19.12.2013  -0,633  -0,688  -0,114  -0,039  declined  20.12.2013  0,808  0,773  -0,146  0,017  accepted  28.01.2014  0,874  0,845  -0,306  -0,295  declined  29.01.2014  0,205  0,043  0,769  0,724  declined  30.01.2014  0,258  0,046  -0,431  -0,439  declined   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|