## A New Covert Channel over Cellular Voice Channel in Smartphones

Bushra Aloraini, Daryl Johnson, Bill Stackpole, and Sumita Mishra Golisano College of Computing and Information Sciences Rochester Institute of Technology Rochester, NY, USA

Abstract -Investigating network covert channels in smartphones has become increasingly important as smartphones have recently replaced the role of traditional computers. Smartphones are subject to traditional computer network covert channel techniques. Smartphones also introduce new sets of covert channel  techniques  as  they  add  more  capabilities  and  multiple network connections. This work presents a new network covert channel in smartphones. The research studies the ability to leak information from the smartphones' applications by reaching the cellular  voice  stream,  and  it  examines  the  ability  to  employ  the cellular  voice  channel  to  be  a  potential  medium  of  information leakage through carrying modulated 'speech-like' data covertly. To  validate  the  theory,  an  Android  software  audio  modem  has been developed and it was able to leak data successfully through the cellular voice channel stream by carrying modulated data with a  throughput  of  13  bps  with  0.018%  BER.  Moreover,  Android security policies are investigated and broken in order to implement a user-mode rootkit that opens the voice channels by stealthily answering an incoming voice call. Multiple scenarios are conducted  to  verify  the  effectiveness  of  the  proposed  covert channel.  This study identifies a new potential smartphone covert channel, and discusses some security vulnerabilities in Android OS that allow the use of this channel demonstrating the need to set countermeasures against this kind of breach.

Index  Terms -  Android  security,  cellular  network  security, covert channel, data exfiltration, rootkit.

## INTRODUCTION

Network covert channels represent a significant problem due to their security implications. Thus many research efforts have been focused on their identification, detection, and prevention. Covert  channel  identification  is  the  process  of  discovering  a shared resource that might be utilized for covert communication. This  research  contributes  to  the  field  by  identifying  a  new network covert channel in smartphones.

Smartphones are always connected to the cellular network; however, little effort has been directed at investigating potential security threats with its covert communication. Previously, the cellular  voice  channel  had  never  been  used  to  launch  such attacks to the best of our knowledge. This service was designed to  carry  audio  only.  Thus  cellular  service  providers  have  not applied  any  information  security  protection  systems,  such  as firewalls or intrusion detection systems, to guard cellular voice channel traffic in the cellular network core. Thus these channels are a prime choice over which to attempt a covert channel.

Theoretically, this channel could be employed in smartphones  to  conduct  multiple  covert  malicious  activities, such  as  sending  commands,  or  even  leaking  information.  As there are some past research that studied modulating data to be

'speech-like'  and  transmitting it through  a  cellular voice channel using a GSM modem and a computer [1-3]. In addition to the fact that smartphone hardware designers introduced a new smartphone design that provides higher-quality audio and video performance and longer battery life [4-5], this research discovered that, the new design allows smartphone applications to  reach  the  cellular  voice  stream.    Thus  information  in  the application could be intentionally or unintentionally leaked, or malware could be spread through the cellular voice stream. This could be accomplished by implementing a simple audio modem that  is  able  modulate  date  to  be  'speech-like'  and  access  the cellular  voice  stream  to  inject  information  to  smartphones' cellular voice cannel.

This covert channel could be accompanied with rootkit that alters phone services to hide the covert communication channels.  To  investigate  the  potential  threats  with  this  covert channel, Android security mechanisms were tested and it was demonstrated that it is possible to build an Android persistent user-mode rootkit to intercept Android telephony API calls to answer  incoming calls without the user or the system's knowledge.  The  developed  modem  along  with  the  rootkit successfully leaked data from the smartphone's application and through  cellular  voice  channel  stream  by  carrying  modulated data with a throughput of 13 bps with 0.018% BER.

## I. LITERATURE REVIEW

The covert channel concept was first presented by Lampson in 1973 as a communication channel that was neither designed nor  intended  for  carrying  information.  [6].  A  covert  channel utilizes  mechanisms  that  are  not  intended  for  communication purposes,  thereby  violating  the  network's  security  policy  [7]. Three key conditions were introduced that help in the emergence of  a  covert  channel:  1)  a  global  shared  resource  between  the sender and the receiver must be present, 2) the ability to alter the shared  resource,  and  3)  a  way  to  accomplish  synchronization between  the  sender  and  the  receiver  [8].  The  cellular  voice channel has all three conditions, making it an ideal channel for implementing a covert channel.  Network covert channel field research currently focuses on exploiting weaknesses in common Internet protocols such as TCP/IP [9], HTTP [10], VoIP [11], &amp; SSH [12]  to  embed    a  covert  communication.  In  the  cellular network field, it has been demonstrated that high capacity covert channels in SMS can be embedded and used as a data exfiltration channel by  composing  the  SMS  in  Protocol  Description  Unit (PDU) mode [13]. In [14] the authors introduced stenographic algorithms to hide data in the context of MMS to be used in ontime password and key communication. Cellular voice channel in smartphones has never been attempted before to the best of our knowledge.

## BACKGROUND INFORMATION

## A. Smartphone Architecture

Smartphones consist of two main processors, the baseband processor  (BP)  and  the  application  processor  (AP).  AP  is responsible  for  the  user  interface  and  applications.  BP  has  a Real-Time  Operating  System  (RTOS),  such  as  Nucleus  and ThreadX, while AP is controlled by Smartphone OS  such as Android. BP handles radio access to the cellular network, and provides  communication  protocols  such  as  GSM,  GPRS, UMTS,  etc.  AP  is  responsible  for  the  user  interface  and applications. These two processors communicate  through shared-memory  or  a  dedicated  serial  channel.  Cellular  voice call routing and control are achieved typically by the BP only, whereas the AP handles all other multimedia functions. Thus, end users and applications are not able to access the cellular voice stream. However, as users spend more time using mobile phones  for  more  media-rich  applications,  most  smartphone hardware designers wanted to provide higher-quality audio and video performance and longer battery life. Therefore, they first introduced  a  separate  dedicated  processor  for  audio/video decoding to meet these increasing needs [4]. Then, hardware designers merged the audio digital signal processor (DSP) into the AP [5].

As has been discovered in this research, this new design has resulted in the audio routing functionalities, including cellular voice  calling,  being  controlled  by  the  AP  (Figure  1)  adapted from [4]. This feature introduced a new security vulnerability. The audio path to the cellular voice channel could be reached and controlled from the AP and potentially the end user.

Figure 1    Cirrus Logic Audio Subsystem Architecture show that the DSP, adapted from [4]

<!-- image -->

## B. Cellular Voice traffic Overview

In  digital  cellular  systems,  like  GSM  and  CDMA,  when someone  makes  a  phone  call,  the  voice  first  passes  to  the microphone. It would then pass through the analog-to-digital converter  (ADC) that converts the analog  stream into digital data using Pulse Code Modulation (PCM) to be understood by the  cell  phone.  The  PCM  method  is  utilized  to  represent sampled analog signals in digital  form by recording a binary representation of the magnitude of the audio sample, and then the  sample is encoded as an integer. The data stream then is processed and transmitted through the cellular core network in digital form.

The audio data stream, traveling among the cellular channels, is compressed to allow greater channel capacity. The cellular channels  are  band-limited  channels,  so  audio  signals  should have  frequencies  within  the  telephone  voice  band  which  is between 300 and 3400 Hz. In order to reduce the bandwidth of the voice call and save the power of the cellphone, Discontinuous  Transmission  (DTX)  is  used  to  allow  the  cell phone transmitter to be turned off when the user is not talking. To do so and detect silence, DTX uses Voice Activity Detection (VAD) which is a unit that determines whether the speech frame includes speech or a speech pause to reduce the transmission to only speech and to reject noise and silence. Once the frame has been  labeled  as  non-speech,  it  is  dismissed  instead  of  being transmitted. When the data stream is received on the other side, it is restored to the original source signal format and the digitalto-analog (DAC) module converts the bit stream back to audio wave.

## C. Android OS Overview

Android  is  an  open  source  operating  system  based  on the Linux kernel. The Android operating system consists of five software  components  within  four  main  layers:  Linux  kernel, libraries, Android runtime, application framework, and applications (Figure 2). The first layer is the Linux kernel layer that provides main system functionalities, such as networking and  device  driver  management  as  it  communicates  with  the hardware and the BP.

The second layer includes two components: a set of libraries to provide multiple system services, such playing and recording audio and video, and an Android Runtime environment which has a main component, Dalvik Virtual Machine (DVM). DVM allows  every  Android  application  to  run  in  its  own  process under a unique UNIX UID, and it is responsible for executing binaries of all applications located in the application layer. The third layer is the application framework that offers Application Programming  Interfaces (API) to third party application developers.  The fourth layer is the applications layer that is written fully in Java, and represents the installed user application. Applications are written in Java and compiled to the Dalvik Executable (DEX)  byte-code  format. Every application executes within its own instance of  DVM interpreter.

Figure 2   Android Architecture Layer

<!-- image -->

## D. Android Telephony Framework

Android telephony stack is responsible for the communication between BP and AP. Android telephony stack consists  of  four  main  layers:    applications,  framework,  radio interface  layer,  and  BP  (Figure  3).    The  application  layer involves  all  the  smartphone  telephony  applications,  such  as Dialer,  SMS,  etc.  Phone  applications  in  the  application  layer communicate directly  with  the  internal  API  in  the  telephony framework  to  place  and  tear  down  phone  calls. Android telephony framework provides APIs for the phone application; however, APIs cannot be entered from any other applications that are not part of the Android system. The telephony requests are passed to the BP. BP replies to the application through the Telephony framework.

The communications between the telephony framework and the BP are handled by the Radio Interface Layer (RIL).  The RIL communicates with the BP by utilizing a single serial line. RIL has two main components: a RIL Daemon and a Vendor RIL. The RIL Daemon connects the telephony framework to the Vendor  RIL,  initiates  the  modem,  and  reads  the  system properties to locate the proper library for the Vendor RIL. The Vendor  RIL  is  the  BP  driver.  There  are  various  vendors, therefore,  each  vendor  has  a  different  implementation  of  the vendor RIL.

Figure 3 Android Telephony Architecture

<!-- image -->

## E. Android Media Framework

Since it is important to understand how smartphone cellular voice  calls  take  place,  it  is  essential  to  comprehend  how Android handles audio streams which forms an important part in  carrying  out  a  cellular  voice  call.    Android  Application Framework takes care of Android's multimedia system; it uses the Android media APIs to call media native code to contact the audio hardware (Figure 4). The Android audio libraries include two native layers dealing with audio software: Audio Flinger and Audio Hardware Interface (HAL).

Audio  Flinger  communicates  with  the  HAL  layer  which represents  the  hardware  abstraction  layer  that  hides  audio drivers from the Android platform. Audio Flinger is the audio server  that  provides  some  required  audio  functions,  such  as audio stream routing and mixing, since the audio stream can be either input or output to/from multiple microphones, speakers, and  applications.  Audio  Flinger  performs  audio  routing  by setting a routing mode, such as MODE\_IN\_CALL, MODE\_IN\_COMMUNICATION, or MODE\_NORMAL, which  is  then  passed  into  audio.h  interface  in  Audio  HAL which, in turn, determines the routing path.

When some applications use  Audio Flinger  to redirect the audio  stream  as  STREAM\_VOICE\_CALL,  some  vendorspecific  audio  HAL  implementations  redirect  the  stream  that comes from/to an application from/to the actual stream voice call  by  default.  In  other  smartphones,  redirecting  voice  call stream from/to an application from/to the actual cellular voice stream  is  also  possible,  since  the  audio  routing  is  currently accomplished  using  the  application  processor,  not  the  BP  as mentioned earlier. This is achieved by making some modifications to audio HAL and some application framework components,  such  as  Audio  Service  and  Audio  System  in smartphones  that  cannot  redirect  the  required  audio  path  by default.

Figure 4 Android Audio System

<!-- image -->

## F. Android Phone Calls

In Android,  phone calls are achieved using both the telephony and media frameworks. The phone application runs inside the com.android.phone process, which is comprised of multiple components such as SIP, SMS, and phone application. All of these components utilize the telephony framework APIs to communicate to the BP through an RIL socket. Hence, the phone  application  communicates  to  the  BP  by  calling  the framework APIs to initiate and receive voice calls.  When an incoming call reaches the destination  cell phone, BP sends a request to RIL, which communicates to the phone application as  a  ringing  call.  Once  the  user  answers  the  call,  the  phone application  sends  a  message  to  the  RIL  to  open  the  voice channel, and the Android media system switches on the voice call channel.

## G. Android Security

Android framework involves multiple security mechanisms, such as application sandboxing, application signing, and Android  permission  framework.  The  application  sandboxing mechanism is employed to isolate an application from system resources,  actual  hardware,  and  from  the  other  application resources. Sandboxing is performed by assigning a unique user ID to each application to ensure that it has its own sandboxed execution environment.  Application signing is a key security mechanism  in  Android.  All  Android  applications  must  be signed independently with a self-created key using public key infrastructure. Applications that are signed with the same key could share the same UID and play in the same sandbox.

The  Android  permission  framework  is  utilized  to  control access  to  sensitive  system  resources  by  applying  Mandatory Access  Control  (MAC)  on  Inter  Component  Communication (ICC). Therefore, each application defines a list of permissions that are approved during the installation process.

## MATERIALS AND METHODS

## H. Audio Modem Design

The modem design consists of an encoder and decoder pair which  works  entirely  in  software.  The  encoder  converts  raw data  into  'speech-like'  waveforms  to  be  injected  into  the microphone of the downlink voice stream. The audio signals then travel among the cellular voice channel as speech in digital form, and reach the second cell phone to be played over uplink voice stream's speaker. They  are then  demodulated  and converted back into the original data.    The  designed  modem utilizes  Morse  code  combined  with  Frequency  Shift-Keying modulation (Figure 5).

Figure 5 Audio Modem Design

<!-- image -->

## I. The Encoder

The encoder encodes text information into Morse code as a series of dots and dashes. Then it generates pure sine waves of two frequencies using FSK modulation: one frequency represents  a  dot  and  a  different  frequency  represents  a  dash using the following equation for each sample in the buffer:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Where:

-  Amplitude: the amplitude of the wave. It is a constant value for all waves.
-  f:  the  frequency  of  the  wave.  This  is  a  variable  and  it depends on if the current code is a dot or a dash.
-  Sample: the current sample in the buffer.
-  SampleRate: the modem sampling rate which is 8000 KHz.
-  Sample / sampleRate: represents the current time.

The audio modem works as following:

- 1) Map each character to its corresponding Morse code.
- 2) Play a hail tone to indicate the beginning of the audio data.
- 3) For every code:
4.  Play a tone with high frequency if the code is a dash.
5.  Play a tone with low frequency if the code is a dot.
- 4) Play a silence to separate each character.
- 5) Play a long silence to separate each word.
- 6) Form each code to be a 'speech-like' waveform of 200 ms frame length.

The frequencies that were chosen with the modem are 600 and 1000 to satisfy the demands of the cellular network voice channel  bandwidth  (300Hz  and  3400Hz).  In  addition,  the sampling rate was selected to be 8000 kHz to suit the telephony system sampling rate that carries speech signals. Each 200 ms voice  frame  is  injected  into  the  GSM  encoder  to  avoid  the distortion that could be issued from the VAD.

## J. The Decoder

The decoder does the reverse function of the encoder. The decoder  performs  spectral  analysis  to  analyze  each  received sample and estimates its frequency to retrieve the original data. Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) algorithm was used to analyze the spectrum and detect the frequency pitch. Therefore, when the decoder receives an audio wave sample, the following steps are accomplished:

- 1) Low-pass filter is applied to the audio signal to get rid of noise and enhance the reliability of the pitch detection.
- 2) Hann  window  function  is  applied  to  the  input  data  to increase  detection  quality  by  examining  the  important details of the signal rather than analyzing the entire signal, and to avoid signal leakage in both sides of the wave.
- 3) FFT is performed on the input data, which is an algorithm that quickly computes the frequency of a given signal.  The output of the FFT is an array of N complex numbers that has real and imaginary parts.
- 4) Normalize the FFT bins to bring the peak amplitude to a normal  level,  and  hence  making  all  the  received  audio signal the same volume so as not to affect the quality of frequency detection.
- 5) Calculate the magnitude values of each FFT bin, using the following formula:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 6) Get the bin of the maximum magnitude value in the FFT data.
- 7) Calculate  the  frequency  of  the  index  of  the  maximum magnitude  value  to  detect  the  signal  frequency.  The frequency is calculated by this equation:

## Where:

-  i = index of magnitude
-  SampleRate =  the modem sampling rate
-  N = size of  FFT data
- 8) Finally compare the received frequency to the dot and dash frequencies value with a minor tolerance.

## K. Modem Design Constraints and Challenges

To  develop  a  modem  that  copes  with  cellular  network channel characteristics, some  constraints on audio signal needed to be taken into consideration.

- 1) The generated audio frequencies must fit into bandwidth between  300Hz  and  3400Hz.  Otherwise,  an  ultrasonic signal is generated that can't be heard by the human ear and is not suitable for this channel.
- 2) The generated audio signals should pass through the voice channel without being omitted by VAD which is primarily used to stop frame transmission at silence.
- 3) Cellular networks employ speech compression codeces in order to save bandwidth and enhance sound quality. As a result, these speech compression techniques could significantly  distort  audio  signals  that  are  not  'speechlike',  so  the  generated  signal  must  retain  typical  speech characteristics.

In addition to the constraints mentioned above, there are a number of challenges in implementing such a modem. One of the challenges of the cellular voice channel is that a voice call between two cell phones is achieved in real time. Hence, there are  no  retransmissions  in  case  of  a  missing  voice  frame. Sometimes, a voice frame could not be received by the other cell phone due to radio interference or the voice frame could be dropped intentionally by the core network when frame stealing scenario happens. Frame stealing usually happens during calls where a user receives an incoming waiting call request and the network drops the current voice frame in the conversation to send a notification to the user. On the other hand, smartphone capabilities, such as the processor and battery life, as well as the quality  of  audio  hardware  varies  among  cell  phones;  for example  one  cell  phone  speaker  that  sounds  clear  and  loud could be low or unclear in another, as there are no standardizations in cell phone speaker and microphone specifications.

## L. Audio Modem Implementation

The modem  works  as  follows:  When  there  is  an  ongoing cellular voice call, the receiver presses on the receive button to obtain the required data. At the sender side, a text message is encoded into Morse code, then an Integer array containing the dots and dash frequencies is composed. This array is sent to the encoder,  sampled  as  sine  waves  to  generate  audio  tones  and injected into the cellular voice stream using AudioManager.STREAM\_VOICE\_CALL audio track stream.

At the other  end,  after  Receive  button  was  pressed,  it constantly records the uplink call stream to detect the hail key which refers to the beginning of the real incoming audio data. The hail key has a different frequency from the dots and dashes. It is generated once at the encoder to indicate the beginning of the audio data to be recorded. If the key was found, the Decoder decodes the audio waves using FFT algorithm and other signal processing functions to process the incoming signals and detect the frequencies. Once the audio signal frequencies have been determined, the decoder creates an Integer array of the detected frequencies which is then sent to the Morse decoder to retrieve the original data.

## M. Rootkit Design

Besides an audio modem, it was necessary to employ another system  that  compromises  smartphone  operating  systems  and open cellular voice channels by stealthily answering voice calls and  performing  data  exchange.  This  was  accomplished  by utilizing a rootkit that hides its presence in the operating system and quietly allows continuous privileged access.

## N. Bypassing Android Security Mechanisms

To help the rootkit to catch the incoming calls before being delivered to Phone app, it was necessary to find a way to allow the rootkit to reach the RIL socket to listen to the BP messages. RIL socket is a Linux socket that is owned by com.android.phone process only, and it cannot be entered from outside the phone process. Thus, building the rootkit inside the com.android.phone process to communicate to the socket was the selected method to secretly communicate to the BP and to intercept its messages.

Designing a rootkit to work inside the Phone process requires overcoming  the  Android  application  sandboxing  mechanism. Sandboxing is achieved by assigning a unique User ID for each application so the other applications cannot access its data and resources unless they have shared User ID, process, and their certificate match. The rootkit takes advantages of 'android:sharedUserId' and 'android:process' attributes in the manifest to play inside the com.android.phone process sandbox. The android:sharedUserId attribute allows two applications to

share the same User ID so it can reach the other ' s application data and resources. The android:process sets the process where all the application's components should run.

Setting sharedUserId and process attributes on the manifest allows  the  rootkit  to  run  in  the  com.android.phone  process; however, it also requires the rootkit's certificate to match the Phone App's certificate unless the signature verification process in Android is bypassed during the installation time.

The Phone App application is signed by the system platform certificate and runs in the shared system sandbox as a system user.  Therefore,  it  has  more  privileges  to  access  the  system resources. Signing the rootkit with the platform signature was obtained with custom ROMs, such as Cyanogenmod, because they  are  using  the  default  certificate  which  is  known  as  it  is released publically.

Another method also used in this research is bypassing the signature  verification  method  in  order  to  infect  the  rooted Android official ROMs. That was achieved by modifying the Services.jar. The Services.jar has multiple java classes. One of these classes is PackageManagerService class responsible for matching the signature of the application during the installation time.  The  method  in  the  PackageManagerService  is  called CompareSignatures, a Boolean method that returns true if the signature match and false if not. The method was modified to always  return  true which  means  the  signature  is  always matched. This approach could be used by an attacker with any rooted Android easily.

After  overcoming  the  security  obstacles,  the  rootkit  was successfully constructed inside the phone process. Yet it needs to go further to intercept the telephony framework APIs calls and  take  control  of  answering  the  incoming  voice  calls.  To discover  a  process  to  intercept  the  telephony  APIs  calls  and control the system call flow, it was necessary to understand how telephony applications really work to understand their weaknesses  and  vulnerabilities. However,  as  there is no documentation about the telephony applications, it was essential to analyze the phone app and the internal telephony framework source code. Therefore, in the following section a discussion  about  Android  application  architecture  and  the Phone App incoming call data flow are provided in order to discover any vulnerability that helps in achieve the task.

## O. Android Application Architecture

In this section, an overview of how an Android application generally works is highlighted. When an Android application is not  running,  and  one  of  its  components  starts,  the  Android system initiates a new Linux process with a single main thread of execution for the application. Then, when another component of the same application also starts, it will run in the same process and the same main thread.

The  main  thread  is  essential  because  all  the  application's components  will  run  in  it  by  default.  The  main  thread  is responsible for user interface interactions and events handling. It  also  handles  system  calls  to  each  application  component. Android  thread  can  associate  with  a  Looper  which  runs  a message loop for  a  thread  to  process  different  messages.    A Looper  contains  a  MessageQueue  that  contains  a  list  of messages.  The interaction with the message queue is performed by using a Handler class (Figure 6).

The Handler is associated to the Looper and its associated thread. Handler is responsible for handling messages within the MessageQueue. When a message is delivered to a Handler, a new message arrives in the MessageQueue.   When a thread creates  a  new  Handler,  it  binds  the  Handler  to  it  and  to  its message  queue.  Then  the  Handler  can  send  messages  to  the message queue and handle messages as they arrive  from the message queue.

Figure 6 Thread's Looper and Handler

<!-- image -->

## P. Incoming Call Data flow

When  an  incoming  call  request  arrives  to  the  BP,  it  is delivered  to  the  Vendor  RIL.  The  Vendor  RIL  passes  the request  to  the  RIL  daemon  which  delivers  the  request  to  the telephony  framework  layer.  The  request  message  is  passed among  the  telephony  framework  classes  in  this  order:  RIL, Basecommand, GSMCallTracker, GSMPhone, BasePhone and then  CallManager.  The  CallManager  communicates  to  the Phone App in the application layer of Android to show up as an incoming call (Figure 7).

Each class in the telephony framework can obtain notifications about the arriving messages by using RegistrantList  object,  which  is  simply  an  object  that  holds  a Java  ArrayList  of  Registrants  object.  So  each  class  registers itself with the previous class's list in order to obtain notifications.   The  rootkit  takes  advantage  of  this  design  and registers  itself  with  PhoneBase  and  receiveds  the  incoming notifications when they are delivered to the CallManager, and acts before CallManager Handler passes the incoming notification to the Phone App. Once the rootkit has received the incoming notification about a new incoming call, it obtains the incoming  call's  caller  ID  and  compares  it  with  a  predefined number. If the number does not match, it leaves the notification to arrive at its  final destination,  which is the Phone App that shows up as an incoming call. However, if the caller ID matches the predefined number, it answers the call covertly.

Figure 7 An Incoming Voice Call Request Flow between the BP and AP in Android

<!-- image -->

Android threads can only perform one task at a time. If a long running  task  has  been  executed  in  the  Handler,  the  message queue  cannot  handle  and  process  any  other  messages.  In addition,  it  was  discovered  during  this  research  that  it  is possible to conduct denial of service to the Looper, so the other process components could not receive new arriving messages. Android Looper is based on c code in native libraries. When trying to Send Message at Front of Queue twice manipulating the pointers, the message queue will be starved and the Looper hindered.  This  blocks  the  thread  from  delivering  the  new messages  causing  denial  of  service  (DOS),  or,  in  another scenario,  changing  the  program  flow  in  order  to  execute malicious code. Therefore, the message queue has been starved by sending two messages at the front of the message queue to hinder the Looper and blocks the thread from delivering the new messages.  Thus,  when  the  rootkit  wants  to  answer  the  call covertly,  it  hinders  the  Looper  from  delivering  the  other messages until  finishing  the  call.  The  Looper  in  the  phone's main thread will not be able to deliver the other messages to the phone  application.  The  rootkit  acts  as  a  proxy  between  the application layer and the telephony framework to transparently intercept and filter incoming voice calls from the BP (Figure 8). Whenever an incoming voice call request comes from the BP to the Phone App, the rootkit intercepts that incoming call request and decides whether to answer the call covertly in the case of calls from a specified number or to pass the call request to the Phone App to show the incoming call.

Figure 8 Rootkit Location and Control Flow on Android's Telephony

<!-- image -->

## Q. The Rootkit Implementation

The  rootkit  was  implemented  as  an  Android  service  that should  be  installed  in  the  system  partition  of  the  application layer  as  it  needs  a  privileged  access.    The  rootkit  works  as follows:  the  rootkit  service  starts  with  the  system  boot  and works as a persistent service, so when it is killed by the system due to shortage of the system resources, it restarts. When the service runs, it works inside the phone process and the phone process's main thread. The service creates a Handler and hooks itself and its Handler to the main Looper of the main thread in phone processes. Once the Handler has been created, it is able to obtain and send messages from/to the phone main thread's message queue.

When the Handler starts, it registers itself with the PhoneBase's  Registrant  List  to  listen  to  messages  that  come from the Phone Base object and to receive notifications before CallManager.  When  the  Handler  receives  a  new  ringing connection message that comes from the Phone Base, it gets the caller ID and compares it with a predefined number. If the caller ID  does  not  match,  it  leaves  the  message  to  arrive  at  its destination. If it matches, it answers the call before the Phone App has been notified and hinders the main Looper by starving its message queue. The Handler sends two messages to the front of the message queue hindering the main Looper.

In fact, while implementing the rootkit, it was essential to use the Android telephony internal classes and hidden components. However,  as  it  is  stated  in  Android  documentation,  these internal and hidden API telephony classes could not be reached by applications  other  than  the  phone  process.    This  rule  was simply achieved by excluding the jar files of the internal classes and the hidden APIs from the developer environment, such as Android Studio and Eclipse environments, and no extra steps were necessary to prevent using these APIs at the run time. The solution was simply to include these jar files in the developing environments in order to be able to use them.

## R. Rootkit Situations

The rootkit makes decisions based on the current situation of the phone call state as follows:

- 1) When a hacker calls during a call between the victim and another  party,  the  rootkit  will  answer  the  hacker's  call without being noticed by the victim.
- 2) When a hacker calls during an idle phone state, the rootkit will answer the call covertly and allow data exchange and spying.
- 3) When a victim tries to initiate an outgoing call during a hang-up call, or when a victim receives an incoming call request during a hang-up call by the hacker; the phone app will not respond to the request and will be idle because its main loop has been starved by a denial of service attack that was accomplished by the rootkit.

## EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN AND RESULTS

Using  a  real  cellular  infrastructure  is  more  reliable  than  a simulated network; therefore, a real cellular network infrastructure  and  real  smartphone  were  used  during  the experience to validate the theory. The T-Mobile GSM network was selected to conduct the experiment. The developed systems in this research could be run in all Android phones. However, in  some  Android  devices,  there  is  a  need  to  modify  some Android system audio files in order to control the voice  call stream. The smartphones used in this experiment are Samsung Galaxy S3 and Galaxy Nexus. These two phones were chosen because  of  their  ability  to  control  the  voice  call  stream  by default; thus no extra work was needed to modify some system audio files to control the stream. The voice call was only used for the experiments. Both smartphones run Android Jelly Bean 4.3.3.  Galaxy  Nexus  runs  Cyanogenmod  custom  ROMs, and Samsung Galaxy S3 runs a rooted official ROM.

## S. First Scenario

The first scenario was implemented to investigate the ability to utilize the cellular network as a bidirectional covert channel. In this scenario, two individuals exchange text messages using a  smartphone  application  and  the  cellular  voice  channel  as  a shared resource. In this scenario, only the audio  modem was used  and  combined  with  a  user  interface  to  help  the  two individuals  send  and  receive  the  messages.  The  application resides in the application layer. Thus, any kind of information could be leaked intentionally from the sender to the receiver.

Test Results: Figure 9 displays a screenshot of the smartphones to exhibit test results that were conducted during an active voice call. This successfully validates the modem's ability to utilize the  cellular  voice  channel  as  a  carrier  of  the  generated  audio signals  by  the  smartphone.  However,  sometimes  the  receiver could not get the exact original data for several reasons, such as noisy environment, frame stealing scenario, smartphone audio hardware quality, and modem implementation.

Figure 9:     The screens show a sender and a receiver forming a covert channel to exchange information as audio through voice call.

<!-- image -->

## T. Second Scenario

The second scenario examines the ability to use the proposed covert  channel  to  leak  information  unintentionally  from  one side while the other side desires a successful communication. In  this  scenario,  rootkit  works  in  the  hacked  smartphone  and monitors  and  filters  the  incoming  calls.  Once  rootkit  has received an incoming voice call from a predefined number, it opens  the  voice  channel  covertly  before  it  shows  up  in  the smartphone's  Phone  App  to  allow  data  exchange.  In  this scenario,  when  the  channel  is  opened,  the  last  SMS  in  the hacked smartphone will be modulated and sent over the covert channel to be acquired by the other side. The other side uses the software audio modem application to modulate the audio waves and see the last SMS. In addition, theoretically any kind of data could  be  leaked,  such  as  a  picture  or  video;  however,  this implementation  focuses  on  text  data  and  was  used  only  to validate the proposed covert channel.

Test Results: Figure 10 displays a screenshot of the smartphones to show test results. When the attacker made a call to  the  victim,  rootkit  recognized  the  attacker  caller  ID  and, based on that fact, answered the call without showing up on the victim's screen. The victim had no idea about the ongoing voice call in his smartphone. Rootkit leaked the last received SMS in the victim's device by using the software audio modem. The attacker  obtained  the  SMS  by  using  the  developed  audio modem. However, the victim might hear audio waves played in his/her  phone,  but  this  issue  can  be  overcome  by  using modulation techniques that simulate a natural sound like a bird or cricket, as these sounds could be played as a notification in some applications.

Figure 10 The right screen shows when the attacker made a call to the victim, and in the left screen the rootkit in the hacked phone recognized the attacker's caller ID and based on that it answered the call without showing up on the victim's screen

<!-- image -->

## U. Third Scenario

The  third  scenario  was  implemented  to  test  the  proposed covert  channel  to  be  involved  in  botnets  as  command  and control C2 channel. With any botnet, C2 channel is the most significant part that contributes into its covertness and effectiveness.  The  designed  system  is  similar  to  the  second scenario  as  it  combines  both  the  audio  modem  and  rootkit. However, when the rootkit opens the incoming voice channel based on a decision made regarding the caller ID number, the rootkit listens to any command that is sent by the other side and executes  it  directly  instead  of  leaking  information  from  the hacked  device.  Rootkit  will  act  as  a  botnet  that  listens  to commands  and  executes  them  as  required.  Table  1  includes some of the offered commands in this scenario:

Table 1 Some Commands with the Implemented Bot

| Command  Description  Reboot  Reboot the system.  Clrlog  Clear call log.  Blueto  Switch Bluetooth on.   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## weswaaaews

Test Results: Figure 11 includes screenshots of the smartphones to show test results. When the attacker made a call to  the  victim,  rootkit  recognized  the  attacker  caller  ID  and, based  on  that,  answered  the  call  without  showing  up  on  the victim's screen. Rootkit then waited to receive a command, and once  it  was  obtained,  executed  it.  The  attacker  sent  the command using the developed audio modem.

Figure 11 The right screen shows the hacker's screen when he sent 'Blueto' command to open the Bluetooth device in the hacked phone, the left screen shows the hacked phone when it respond to the command and turned on the Bluetooth device.

<!-- image -->

## V. Modem analysis

In tested scenarios, when ideal conditions occurred where the surrounding environment is quiet, the smartphone hardware is loud and clear, air interface is not noisy, and the call is carried out over one speech compression technique. The results were perfect  and  accurate,  as  the  second  party  got  the  exact  sent message. In a realistic scenario, these conditions are not always guaranteed,  so  any  conditions  can  easily  either  hinder  the message from being transformed or omit some frames in the sent  message.  However,  the  audio  modem  design  can  be enhanced  and  optimized  to  overcome  these  constraints.  The objective of the audio modem implementation is only to verify basic  functionality  and  show  possible  scenarios  that  can  be implemented successfully on real smartphones.

The modem implementation works in most Android smartphones,  but  the  ability  to  access  the  voice  call  stream varies  among  Android  smartphones.  Some  smartphones  can reach the voice stream from Audio Manager directly; however, reaching the voice stream of a cellular call in other smartphones could  be  accomplished  by  modifying  some  Android  system files. The current modem implementation with the capability to reach the voice call stream by default works on most Samsung Galaxy S series and Nexus smartphones.

## W. Rootkit Analysis

User-mode  rootkit  design  has  two  primary  purposesbuilding a rootkit that is able to communicate to the BP and run covertly in any rooted Android OS, and filtering the incoming call to answer voice calls, if needed, before they show up on the Android  screen.  In  addition,  it  was  important  to  verify  the ability  to  implement  a  portable  rootkit  that  can  work  easily without modifying underlying system files or applications. In fact,  the  portability  factor  is  significant  to  test  the  ability  to deploy the rootkit in any smartphone device, which indicates the ease of its distribution among Android smartphones.

Rootkit  implementation  successfully  verified  what  it  was meant to do. Rootkit was able to be portable and work silently. The rootkit works in all Android-rooted stock ROMs, as well as most custom ROMs that have Jelly Bean 4.3.3 version or below, and  it  was  not  tested  in  newer  versions.  Rootkit  was  tested successfully in Samsung Galaxy S 3 I9300, Galaxy Nexus and Nexus S, Samsung Galaxy S 4, and Samsung Galaxy Duos y GSM  versions,  and  is  believed  to  work  in  most  GSM  and CDMA Android smartphones.

## X. Covert channel analysis

The effectiveness of a covert channel can be evaluated by three factors; covertness, bandwidth, and robustness. Covertness determines to what extent the covert channel can be detected. The proposed covert channel is difficult to be detected because  it  is  unknown  by  an  adversary.  Channel  bandwidth refers  to  the  channel  maximum  error-free  transmission  rate. Bandwidth is usually expressed in bits per second.

## DISCUSSION

There are multiple factors effect on the cellular voice channel bandwidth. One factor is the used speech codec which affects the  bit  rate  of  the  data.  In  addition,  the  speech  codec  can  be switched during calls, because cellular network providers also can control and increase the number of active calls within one base station by switching cell phones to a low bitrate speech codec. That will impact the data transfer rate, as it could vary among the speech codecs and also in one speech codec at the time  when  the  base  station  experiences  an  overload.  In  the proposed  channel,  the  voice  call  throughput  was  entirely occupied in order to convey covert information, and it achieved a throughput of 13 bps with 0.018% BER.

The channel robustness determines the ease of limiting the channel capacity by adding noise or the ease of removing the covert  channel.  Therefore,  the  channel  robustness  is  high, because it is not reliable to remove or add noise to this kind of channel; it will affect the legitimate data transferring quality.

## CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

As smartphones are trending to increase their computational capabilities,  employees  and  individuals  increasingly  rely  on smartphones to perform their tasks, and as a result smartphone security becomes more significant than ever before. One of the most  serious  threats  to  information  security,  whether  within organization  or  individual,  is  covert  channels,  because  they could  be  employed  to  leak  sensitive  information,  divert  the ordinary  use  of  a  system,  or  coordinate  attacks  on  a  system. Therefore,  identification  of  covert  channels  is  considered  an essential  task.  This  research  takes  a  step  in  this  direction  by identifying  a  potential  covert  channel  which  could  affect smartphone security. It provides a proof of concept of the ability to  use  the  cellular  voice  channel  as  a  covert  channel  to  leak information  or  distribute  malware.  It  introduces  details  of designing and implementing the system and the challenges and constraints that have been faced to accomplish the system. It has  been  realized  during  this  research  that  as  smartphone hardware  and  software  designs  have  changed  recently,  it allowed and contributed to the issue discussed in this research.

This new smartphones ' design is adopted by multiple companies, and thus new smartphones are being released that use this design without considering the security vulnerability.

This research also proves that communication between the AP and the BPs is vulnerable to attack in Android OS. In addition, it discusses some of the Android security mechanisms that were easily bypassed to accomplish the mission. The paper illustrates some discovered flaws in Android application architecture that allow a break in significant and critical Android operations.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was financially supported by Princess Nourah Bint Abdulrahman University.

## REFERENCES

- [1]     C. K. LaDue, V. V. Sapozhnykov, and K. S. Fienberg, 'A Data Modem for GSM Voice Channel,' IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology , vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2205-2218, Jul. 2008.
- [2] M. Rashidi, A. Sayadiyan, and P. Mowlaee, 'A Harmonic Approach to Data Transmission over GSM Voice Channel,' in 3rd International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies: From Theory to Applications, 2008. ICTTA 2008 , 2008, pp. 1-4.
- [3]     A. Dhananjay, A. Sharma, M. Paik, J. Chen, T. K. Kuppusamy, J. Li, and L. Subramanian, 'Hermes: Data Transmission over Unknown Voice Channels,' in Proceedings of the Sixteenth Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking , New York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 113124.
- [4] R. Kratsas. (2012). Unleashing the Audio Potential of SmartphonesMixed Signal Audio Products. Cirrus Logic,

http://www.cirrus.com/en/pubs/whitePaper/smartphones\_wp.pdf

- [5] Francisco Cheng, 'Why Smartphones Are Smarter All One Processor,' Jun. 2013.
- [6]     B. W. Lampson, 'A Note on the Confinement Problem,' Commun. ACM , vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 613-615, Oct. 1973.
- [7]    'National Institute of Standards and Technology-Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria.' Aug-1983.
- [8]     R. A. Kemmerer, 'A Practical Approach to Identifying Storage and Timing Channels: Twenty Years Later,' in Proceedings of the 18th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference , Washington, DC, USA, 2002, p. 109-.
- [9]    S. J. Murdoch and S. Lewis, 'Embedding Covert Channels into TCP/IP,' in Information Hiding , M. Barni, J. Herrera-Joancomartí, S. Katzenbeisser, and F. Pérez-González, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 247-261.
- [10]     M. Bauer, 'New Covert Channels in HTTP: Adding Unwitting Web Browsers to Anonymity Sets,' in In Proceedings of the Workshop on Privacy in the Electronic Society (WPES 2003 , 2003, pp. 72-78.
- [11]     T. Takahashi and W. Lee, 'An assessment of VoIP covert channel threats,' in Third International Conference on Security and Privacy in Communications Networks and the Workshops, 2007. SecureComm 2007 , 2007, pp. 371-380.
- [12]     N. B. Lucena, J. Pease, P. Yadollahpour, and S. J. Chapin, 'Syntax and Semantics-Preserving Application-Layer Protocol Steganography,' in Information Hiding , J. Fridrich, Ed. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 164-179.
- [13]    M. Z. Rafique, M. K. Khan, K. Alghatbar, and M. Farooq, 'Embedding High Capacity Covert Channels in Short Message Service (SMS),' in Secure and Trust Computing, Data Management and Applications , J. J. Park, J. Lopez, S.-S. Yeo, T. Shon, and D. Taniar, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 1-10.
- [14]   K. Papapanagiotou, E. Kellinis, G. F. Marias, and P. Georgiadis, 'Alternatives for Multimedia Messaging System Steganography,' in Computational Intelligence and Security , Y. Hao, J. Liu, Y.-P. Wang, Y. Cheung, H. Yin, L. Jiao, J. Ma, and Y.-C. Jiao, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 589-596.