## Mathematical Foundations of Realtime Equity Trading. Liquidity Deficit and Market Dynamics. Automated Trading Machines.

Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin ∗

Ioffe Institute, Politekhnicheskaya 26, St Petersburg, 194021, Russia

Ray Bakhramov †

Forum Asset Management LLC, 733 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017 (Dated: September 13, 2015)

## $Id: LD.tex,v 1.211 2016/12/04 09:32:16 mal Exp $

We postulates, and then show experimentally, that liquidity deficit is the driving force of the markets. In the first part of the paper a kinematic of liquidity deficit is developed. The calculus-like approach, which is based on Radon-Nikodym derivatives and their generalization, allows us to calculate important characteristics of observable market dynamics. In the second part of the paper this calculus is used in an attempt to build a dynamic equation in the form: future price tend to the value maximizing the number of shares traded per unit time. To build a practical automated trading machine P&amp;L dynamics instead of price dynamics is considered. This allows a trading automate resilient to catastrophic P&amp;L drains to be built. The results are very promising, yet when all the fees and trading commissions are taken into account, are close to breakeven. In the end of the paper important criteria for automated trading systems are presented. We list the system types that can and cannot make money on the market. These criteria can be successfully applied not only by automated trading machines, but also by a human trader.

[∗ malyshki@ton.ioffe.ru](mailto:malyshki@ton.ioffe.ru)

[† rbakhramov@forumhedge.com](mailto:rbakhramov@forumhedge.com)

Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.

Isa.47:13

## I. INTRODUCTION

Market dynamic study attract a lot of attention[1-5]. We start with a short review about available data for equity trading market. Exchange trading is typically consist of sending limit orders at specific price. Depending on liquidity available this order can be either executed (matched to an order of opposite type), or, in case no matching liquidity available, to be put into the order book. This is so called double auction process (both 'buy' and 'sell' orders are put into the order book; we will use NASDAQ ITCH terminology, where 'bid orders' are called 'buy orders' and 'offer orders' are called 'sell orders'), the difference between best sell and best buy orders in the order book is spread. Our experiments show that since about 2008 order book (tested on NASDAQ ITCH total view feed and on CME data) carry no valuable information. Our study show that: 1) More than 90% of orders being at best price level at some time end being cancelled, not executed (order-stuffing like behavior). The Ref. 6 authors came to the same conclusion regarding cancellation. 2) Spread is also very misleading indicator. Our experiments show that a limit order being put inside spread interval has very high chances of being immediately executed. There are two reason for that: many market participants do not show their liquidity if the price they can accept is inside spread interval and 'hidden' type of orders (the ones not being broadcast as available in order book, but actually existing in exchange order book. Such 'hidden' type orders cost more on NASDAQ. Executed hidden order id was actually available before October 6, 2010, but after this date NASDAQ broadcast 0 as hidden order id, see Appendix A of Ref. 7). 3) There is a long discussion that order book observable spread is actually higher that 'actual' spread[8] because of order book manipulation (typically either stuffing the book or attempting to frontrun).

Based on all the information above we state that even for a hedge fund order book information is incomplete or manipulative[9].

We can imagine that to an exchange or to major brokerages some additional information can be potentially available, but not to general public. So we go for a much more ambitious goal - try to predict market dynamics based on price and volume of executed orders only. The information of executed orders is legally required to be available (Dark Pools and brokerages internal order matching can be a problem to some degree, but not much), and it is much more costly to manipulate through actual trades. Whether market manipulation is possible via trade execution is one of most fundamental problem of market analysis. Naive pumpand-dump type of manipulation (buy shares to drive market up, then sell then) actually never work because of concave type of impact[10]. The volume required to 'pump' shares from current price to some higher price is greater that the volume on a way back. This way a 'manipulator' would not be able to sell all shares bought, and to sell the remaining shares price should go below its initial value, thus this strategy would lose money. We disagree on this type of 'active trading strategy' with[11] who observed convex demand on a number of low liquidity stocks. Our experiments on low and medium liquidity stocks show that in a situation when overall market is flat once price of some stock is driven by excessive buying to some level the market maker (or some other market participant) start buying whatever volumes is available, so after some price level almost no further price movement possible, even on very high volume.

On NASDAQ placing a limit order and then cancelling it cost almost nothing, what create a free opportunity to manipulate order book. From our opinion, the most effective way to suppress order book manipulations can be an introduction, not an artificial delay, what HFT opponents often propose, but order fee structure, similar in philosophy to currently existing execution fee structure (exchange rebate and liquidity removal fee, but for orders exchange rebate will be zero and liquidity removal fee will be small). Proposed fee structure to suppress order book manipulation may be this:

- Your order in order book was matched by somebody else order - your get 'exchange rebate', a fraction of a cent per each share, same as it is now on most exchanges.
- You matched somebody else order in the order book (remove liquidity) you are charged 'liquidity removal fee', which is slightly greater than the 'exchange rebate', same as

it is now on most exchanges.

- New fee proposed: You cancelled your own order in order book: you are charged 'order removal fee', which should be much lower than the difference between 'liquidity removal fee' and 'exchange rebate' for executed orders.

This fee structure would make order book manipulation non-free, but in the same time it would not not suppress actual trading (execution orders matching).

The major risk for manipulator through order execution is not so much the fees, but market movement. With a spread about few cents market manipulator through execution takes a huge risk of market moving against him. Currently only trade execution is expensive to manipulate, so our theory uses only trade execution information: for a company 'XYZ' at time t an order of size v was executed at price p . There are few other worth to mention attributes, not used in this paper, but possessing some interesting properties (we are going to discuss them in a separate publication).

- Volume multiplied by spread.
- Execution type: 'sell' (when buy order matched sell limit order in order book) or of type 'buy' (when sell order matches buy limit order in order book).
- A 'signed volume' is used by some traders[11]: when type is 'sell' use order size v , when type is 'buy', use -v .
- Order book information, from out opinion, is only valuable[9]. as a product of (possibly signed) order size multiplied by τ oe , the difference between execution time and limit order origination time. An important property of this attribute τ oe dv/dt is that it combines the characteristics of original limit order τ oe and matching to it marker order dv/dt (execution flow), thus the attribute can be considered(when signed volume is used) as proportional to supply-demand disbalance.

## II. KINEMATICS

Executed orders is a set of timeseries observations. We convert observations data from timeseries space to an invariant basis space. Selection of the basis depends on a number of factors. The simplest selection is polynomials basis Q k ( x ), where Q k is a polynomial of a degree k , with some measure selected to define inner product. The three bases below are the most convenient ones to transform a timeserie f ( t i ) to moment f k space. Laguerre basis:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Any timeserie f ( t i ) with thousands (and even millions) of observations can be converted to a limited number of basis moments f k . The 0-th moment f 0 is exponential moving average of f with timescale τ . For our theory we need large number of moments, typically at least a dozen, what create numerical instability if f k are naively calculated. For three bases above the basis functions are polynomials but the measure is different: (3) , (7), (11). Let us define average symbols &lt;&gt; (bra-ket quantum mechanics notations) as an integral over measure support:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Shifted Legendre basis:

Price basis:

All the results are invariant with respect to polynomial Q k choice as long it is of k -th order, e.g. monomials can be used Q k = x k . But this naive style of basis selection causes severe numerical instability at large k , typically for all k &gt; 5. The specific basis selection is a very delicate question[12] which we discuss briefly in Appendix A and the problem to be discussed in details in a separate publication. Short result : for numerical stability the basis Q k ( x ) should be selected in a way Q k ( x ) are orthogonal with respect to some positive measure, e.g. dµ ( x ). The simplest Q k ( x ) choice is orthogonal polynomials with respect to measure dµ ( x ).

For Laguerre basis (3) selection Q k ( x ) = L k ( -x ), where L k ( x ) are Laguerre polynomials, make basis orthogonal 〈 Q i Q j 〉 µ = δ ij . For Shifted Legendre basis (7) selection Q k ( x ) = P k (2 x -1), where P k ( x ) are Legendre polynomials make basis orthogonal 〈 Q i Q j 〉 µ = 1 2 i +1 δ ij . For Price basis (11) the orthogonal polynomials are non-classic, but selection of monomials Q k ( x ) = ( p -p ∗ ) k or Hermite polynomials Q k ( x ) = H k ( p -p ∗ σ ) often give good enough numerical stability for not very large k (Here p ∗ is some price close to average and σ is some value close to standard deviation; again, the result does not depend on selection of p ∗ or σ , only numerical stability of calculations may depend on these values.) The (11) basis is very convenient for quasi-stationary consideration of market dynamics [13]. However, for time-dependent dynamics it requires the dp/dt moments, that carry much less information than the v , dv/dt and d 2 v/dt 2 moments. In the bases (3) and (7) the v and d 2 v/dt 2 moments can be easily calculated from the dv/dt moments using integration by parts.

Before we go further, let us show some familiar calculations using the basis we introduced.

1.Interpolate price (assume f = p ) by a polynomial of n -th order using least squares approximation.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here G -1 is a matrix inverse to Gramm matrix G calculated in basis Q k using inner product (13). The interpolation polynomial (16) is of n -th order and depend on the moments 〈 Q k ( x ) f 〉 , where k = 0 ..n (In Ref. 12 only monomials moments 〈 x k f 〉 are called 'moments' and the 〈 Q k ( x ) f 〉 are called 'modified moments', we would call all of them 'moments').

Note that interpolation polynomial typically give good interpolation in the middle of interval, but exhibit oscillations near interval ends (Runge oscillations).

2. Given two prices p and q calculate covariance between then.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The measure µ (13) in general case is not necessary normalized to 1 and because of this all averages in (18) should be divided by the normalizing factor &lt; Q 0 &gt; equal to an integral from a constant Q 0 , but all three measures we consider have &lt; 1 &gt; = 1, so if Q 0 = 1 this normalizing factor can be omitted, see the see Appendix E for exact formulas in general case. Note that (18) provide very efficient(linear time) algorithm of stock prices cross-correlation calculation. For every stock calculate [0 ..n ] moments 〈 Q k ( x ) p 〉 forming a vector, then obtain covariance through scalar product of these vectors with Gramm matrix inverse used as a scalar product matrix (note here, that if original Q k basis is orthogonal then Gramm matrix is diagonal and its inversion process is stable, while in general case the process of Gramm matrix inversion is numerically unstable[14]).

## A. Radon-Nikodym derivatives and rational approximation

Consider reproducing kernel K ( x, y, µ ) for a positive measure dµ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(Here and below we assume a summation [0 ..n ] over 'silent' indexes i, j . Another notation we will use from time to time is vector notation, where bold Q define the entire vector Q k and matrix indexes are omitted. The Eq. (23) is exactly the same as (22) but written in vector notation.) For arbitrary P ( y ) = α i Q i ( y ) (22) gives P ( x ) = 〈 K ( x, y, µ ) P ( y ) 〉 µ ( y ) . The 1 /K ( x, x, µ ) is a Christoffel function, related to the 'density' of measure µ at point x , for example Gaussian quadrature weights built for the measure µ are equal to exactly 1 /K ( x, x, µ ) at x equal to quadrature nodes[15].

Consider two positive measures dµ ( x ) and dν ( x ). Their ratio dν dµ is called Radon-Nikodym derivative[16] and is of extreme importance in market analysis[17]. The most important for us would be to estimate shares trading rate, or executed orders flow, I

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

I is the number of shares traded in unit time and is always positive. The higher I is the more active trading is.

The problem is to estimate Radon-Nikodym derivative dν dµ at x given the only moments of measures µ and ν . This can be estimated, for example, through Christoffel functions ratio[18]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The estimation (25) is a ratio of two polynomials of order 2 n . In contrasts with least squares approximation (16) (use f = dν/dµ in (16)), the (25) preserves sign of interpolated function dν/dµ , does not diverge when x →∞ , it tends to a constant instead, and does not exhibit diverging oscillations near measure support edges. The estimation requires 0 .. 2 n moments to be known (instead of just 0 ..n moments for least squares approximation). As we stated in the beginning of the Chapter II numerical estimation for large n is unfeasible (because of numerical instabilities) unless a basis Q s orthogonal with respect to some measure (not necessary the µ , but µ is often good enough) is chosen. This approach allows us to calculate Radon-Nikodym derivative to very high n (up to 15-20 in Shifted Legendre basis and up to 12-15 in Lagurre basis, Chebyshev basis sometimes allows to use n up to 30).

The approximation (25) requires both measures to be positively defined. There is exist a different numerical estimation of Radon-Nikodym derivative, requiring only one measure dµ to be positive:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where π is some positive measure, e.g µ . If we formally replace Hermitian matrix ( M π [1]) -1 by non-Hermitian matrix ( M µ [1]) -1 / 2 ( M ν [1]) -1 / 2 and its transpose then we receive original expression (25). The (26) Radon-Nikodym derivative estimator can be used for interpolation of arbitrary function f . Just put π = µ and dν = fdµ . See Appendix D as an example of Runge oscillations suppression. The expression (26) in this special case π = µ and dν = fdµ is plain Nevai operator[19]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

That can be easily estimated numerically (see the code from com.polytechnik.utils. NevaiOperator. getNevaiOperator) as a ratio or two polynomials of order 2 n :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This Nevai operator matches exactly the simplistic form ( π = µ ) of Radon-Nikodym derivative in function approximation like in (D4). The Radon-Nikodym derivatives approach is based on matrices, not vectors as least square approximation is. This matrix approach can be also effectively applied to average calculation, see Appendix E for an example of two stocks price covariance calculation.

## B. Example of executed orders flow I

In subsection II A we provided a theory allowing to numerically calculate the executed orders flow. To show this theory practical value let us apply it to calculation of executed order flow I for stock AAPL on September, 20, 2012. All the charts we present will be for this specific day. In our analysis we actually analyzed about 4 years period. Optimized ITCH parser along with recurrent calculation of the moments (given the moments on interval [ -∞ , -τ ] (old moments) the new moments on interval [ -∞ , 0] (t=0 is 'now') can be calculated using old moments and performing timeserie scanning only on [ -τ, 0] interval). Such optimization allows to run entire trading day analysis for hundred of stocks in less than 15 minutes. But this massive data analysis is not the point of the paper. This would be important were we building some statistical arbitrage model. But for dynamic model single day is enough to demonstrate the key elements of the theory. The September, 20, 2012 was chosen for simple reason that it had bear market before 10:00 and bull market with high volatility after 10:00. Such market behavior almost always lead to severe losses by automated trading machines, so this day is a good one for testing.

On Fig. 1 we present execution flow I 0 ( I at t = 0) calculated in Shifted Legendre basis as x = exp( t/τ ), dµ = exp( t/τ ) dt and dν = exp( t/τ ) dv , then I from (24) can be estimated as Radon-Nikodym derivative dν/dµ calculated at t = 0. On Fig. 1 the I 0 (scaled to fit the chart) show large fluctuations, with alternating periods of low and high trading activity. High trading activity events exhibit singular type of behavior in I , that manifest itself in price as a peculiarity, not as singularity. This allows us to suggest that in market dynamics executed trades flow is primary and price changes are secondary.

FIG. 1. The AAPL stock price on September, 20, 2012 round 10am. The time on x axis is in decimal fraction of an hour, e.g. 9.75 mean 9:45am. Red line AAPL stock price. Black line execution order flow I 0 (in arbitrary units shifted to fit the chart) at interval edge(time='now') calculated in Shifted Legendre basis with n = 6 and τ =128sec.

<!-- image -->

The minimal calculable time scale of I spikes can be estimated as τ/ ( n +1) for Shifted Legendre basis and as τ for Laguerre basis. If we accept the hypothesis that fluctuations in I cause market dynamics then we can estimate time scale on which automated trading machine can potentially work. The idea is to have large fluctuations △ v/ △ t (fluctuations can be many orders of magnitude, but for our way to calculate Radon-Nikodym derivatives they are limited to minimal time scale). If minimal time scale is set large enough (about an hour) volume fluctuations on this scale become small and such small fluctuations of orders flow cannot be the source of predictable price movement. In the same time too small time scale provide little liquidity and only companies with very advanced infrastructure can potentially take advantage of such small time scales. This make us to conclude that workable time scales are bounded at low values - by insufficient liquidity available and at high values - by low I fl uctuations.

One can extract some additional important facts from this chart, but the main question with I 0 is: What is the scale the I should be compared to to tell that we have liquidity excess ( I &gt; I IH ) or liquidity deficit ( I &lt; I IL ). Any values calculated from fixed time scale (e.g. &lt; I &gt; , which used τ as time scale) cannot provide workable values for I IH and I IL . The next section is dedicated to this problem.

## C. Generalized Radon-Nikodym derivatives and Generalized Eigenvectors problem

The Eq. (26) can be rewritten in the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the (29) is a 'wavefunction' localized at x = x 0 and (30) is the value of RadonNikodym derivative at x = x 0 . Let us remove the localization restriction (29), then the

and for simplest case π = µ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

can be considered as generalized eigenvalues problem with scalar product &lt; a | b &gt; = &lt; a | M µ [1] | b &gt; . The upper index ( j ) numerate eigenvalues and eigenvectors. If matrix M µ [1] is positive, (e.g. dµ = ω ( t ) dt with ω ( t ) &gt; 0) then (34) has exactly dim M = n + 1 real eigenvalues λ ( j ) and corresponding to them eigenvectors | ψ ( j ) &gt; . This problem is invariant to basis transform. A good basis selection (e.g. (3) or (7) ) make matrix M µ [1] diagonal and the problem (34) is trivially reduced to a regular eigenvalues problem. In general case generalized eigenvector problem is not any more problematic, than regular eigenvalues problem and can be solved numerically using standard, e.g. LAPACK[20] routines dsygv, dsygvd and similar.

The problem (34) is much more generic than its 'localized' Radon-Nikodym version (26). Trivial usage of (34) is to find minimal/maximal value of Radon-Nikodym derivative (or a function, for this just put dν = f ( x ) dµ ), this will be the minimal/maximal eigenvalue λ . (Note, that the eigenfunction, corresponding to minimal/maximal eigenvalue has very noticeable topological properties, such as: 1. If highest order polynomial coefficient of eigenfunction ψ ( x ) is non zero (if it is zero, then it can be varied to some infinitesimal value) then the ψ ( x ) (a polynomial of n -th order) has exactly n simple real distinct roots (but not necessary on the support of dµ or dν ). This property does not hold for ψ ( x ) corresponding to other than minimal/maximal eigenvalue. 2. The measure dθ = dν -λ min dµ (or similarly for maximal eigenvalue take dθ = λ max dµ -dν ) generate n +1 orthogonal polynomials, the last one the n -th order polynomial equal (within a constant) exactly to ψ ( x ), corresponding to λ min , and has the norm with measure dθ exactly equal to zero &lt; ψ | ψ &gt; θ = 0 A Gaussian quadrature can be build on this measure dθ , all nodes are located at ψ ( x ) roots and all weights are positive. We expect to put more study of this interesting topic separately.)

But before we go this direction, let us show some simple illustrative example, when dν = P ( t ) dµ , where P is asset price. Then all eigenvalues are just the prices near which the asset was traded the most. In Price basis (10) the eigenvalues are the nodes of Gaussian quadrature built on measure (11). In Laguerre and Shifted Legendre basis the result is very similar, but does not have a meaning of quadrature nodes (it is now related to M µ [ P ] matrix spectrum). In case n = 0 there is a single eigenvalue, which is equal exactly to moving average with the measure dµ . So this technique can be considered as moving average generalization. Putting price into (34) does not provide one with any information about the future. The Fig. 2 serve just as an illustration of generalized eigenvalues technique.

## D. Example of thresholds calculation

The ψ from Eq. (31) is a state localized at x 0 . Consider x 0 to be interval end ( x 0 = 0 for Laguerre basis (4) and x 0 = 1 for shifted Legendre basis (8)). All functions ψ ( x ) orthogonal to (31) with respect to measure dµ have ψ ( x 0 ) = 0. Then we can write generalized eigenvalues equation (34) with a 'boundary condition':

FIG. 2. The AAPL stock price on September, 20, 2012 around 10am. The time on x axis is in decimal fraction of an hour, e.g. 9.75 mean 9:45am. Red line AAPL stock price. Other lines - eigenvalues of (34) with dν = P ( t ) dµ , calculated in Shifted Legendre basis with n = 6 (seven eigenvalues: 0 .. 6) and τ =128sec.

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The boundary condition (39) can be removed by introducing two measures d ˜ µ = ( x -x 0 ) 2 dµ and d ˜ ν = ( x -x 0 ) 2 dν , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

FIG. 3. Same chart as Fig. 1 with addition I IL and I IH thresholds and price (corresponding to ψ IH ) are calculated. The I IL and I IH are minimal and maximal eigenvalues of (41). Because of the boundary condition the corresponding matrix has the dimension one less the original matrix dimension.

<!-- image -->

we receive regular generalized eigenvalues problem and ψ from (43) obey the required boundary condition (39). Any solution ψ of (41) is orthogonal to (31) because it is equal to 0 at x 0 , e.g. it carry no information about 'now', only about 'the past'. The minimal/maximal eigenvalues of (41) I IL and I IH are the thresholds we were looking for[21].

On the Fig. 3 we present execution rate I 0 and thresholds I IL ('low', minimal eigenvalue) and I IH ('high', maximal eigenvalue) calculated only from 'the past'. One can observe two highly distinctive behavior at I 0 &lt; I IL (liquidity deficit) and I 0 &gt; I IH (liquidity excess). It is important to note that the time scale corresponding to I IL and I IH is not fixed, but selected automatically from the time scales available in matrix M µ [ I ] (for a matrix of dimension d the 2 d -1 time scales are used). The events when I 0 &gt; I IH are rather seldom, and as we would show later they are exactly the events portfolio position to be closed. The events I 0 &lt; I IL are much more common and as we would show later they are exactly the events portfolio positions to be opened. The price P IH (blue curve) is the price corresponding to ψ IH = &lt; ψ IH | pI | ψ IH &gt; µ / &lt; ψ IH | I | ψ IH &gt; µ (as a very crude direction estimator a difference between last price and P IH can be used). Similarly to I = dv/dt same theory can be applied to calculation of dp/dt at t = 0 and corresponding thresholds for dp/dt . The problem with dp/dt is the contribution to dp/dt at t = 0 is so large that it exceeds the thresholds calculated on past data most of the time. This again manifest our statement that price alone carry no information about dynamic.

On Fig.4 we present one more chart to show prices behavior at various | ψ &gt; states. For n = 6 and τ = 128 sec the P IH ; N calculated from generalized eigenvalues problem without using boundary condition ψ ( x 0 ) = 0 (matrix dimension is n + 1), P IH calculated from generalized eigenvalues problem (41) with boundary condition ψ ( x 0 ) = 0 (the original matrix dimension is n + 1, but boundary condition (43) reduce it by 1 to use the same moments), and exponential moving average P AV ER . What one can very clear see is while P AV ER is always delayed from the stock price by a fixed time τ the delay for P IH is variable and depend on localization of ψ IH . This is very important for market trending identification: one do not need to wait time τ to identify trend change. The P IH ; N , is a solution of similar eigenproblem, but without boundary condition ψ ( x 0 ) = 0. When I 0 ( I at x 0 or t = 0, i.e. 'now') is high then the solutions for the problems with and without boundary condition differ(one has ψ ( x 0 ) = 0, another one is localized at x 0 ) and corresponding prices (dark and light blue) also differ significantly (this difference, calculated on liquidity excess events can also serve as a crude estimator of market trending direction). When I 0 is low then P IH and P IH ; N are almost the same because corresponding states | ψ &gt; are not localized near x 0 . What is the most important - the states corresponding to maximal[22] I select the timescale automatically among the ones available in matrix M µ [ I ], what is drastically different from moving averages, which has only a fixed time scale τ .

## E. P&amp;L operator and trading strategy

Before we go further we would like to emphasize the importance of variables selection. As we discussed earlier the price fluctuations are small (below few percent) and only reflect liquidity fluctuations. Nevertheless most traders and Automated Trading Machines focus on price prediction. From our opinion prices cannot be predicted on real markets. But if you look deeper, a trader is not actually interested in prices, what actually of his interest is the P&amp;L. From our point of view the P&amp;L, not price, should be a value to predict. Let us define the position change dS - the amount of shares bought ( dS &gt; 0) or sold ( dS &lt; 0) during time interval dt . Then the P&amp;L can be written in the form:

FIG. 4. The AAPL stock on September, 20, 2012 around 10am. Price P , P IH , P IH ; N and P AV ER are presented.

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The constrain (45) means the total asset position should be zero in the beginning and in the end of trading period. Integrating (44) by parts one can obtain a P&amp;L expressed via price changes dp :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where constrain (47) explicitly indicate that the position S ( t ) should be 0 in the beginning and in the end of trading interval.

Now the problem can be formulated in the following way: find the position function S ( t ) providing positive P&amp;L. There is a trivial solution: S = dp/dt to put to (46) or dS = dtd 2 p/dt 2 to put to (44). This means that position increment dS should behave as second derivative of price. This sounds trivial (if you know future price change you can make money), but it is actually not. The very important is the symmetry of position increment. Position increment should have the symmetry of second derivative of price (first derivative is good only for entire position, not position increment. An Automated Trading Machines trading in position increment but using a variable with a symmetry of first price derivative cannot give a success).

Let us give some other trivial, but nevertheless useful examples of position function S ( t ) providing positive P&amp;L.

Assume we have sufficient liquidity to buy shares in any time moment and trade a single share in just two moments (sell/buy or buy/sell) of unit length. Then we can take position increment in the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for normalized ψ (49) the condition (45) satisfies automatically and the problem (44) is reduced to the following generalized eigenvalues problem:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the solution for maximal P&amp;L in (50) is rather trivial. Solve generalized eigenvalues problem M µ [ p ] | ψ &gt; = λM µ [1] | ψ &gt; then take ψ buy as ψ corresponding to minimal λ and take ψ sell as

ψ corresponding to maximal λ , then P&amp;L = λ max -λ min . The answer is trivial buy low ( p = λ min ) and sell high ( p = λ max ) and not practical (as we stated earlier price carry no information about future price change) but nevertheless very useful: it indicates the power of the technique: P&amp;L optimization problem is reduced to matrix spectrum analysis.

Another trivial example: hold some fixed average position.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The (53) set average position held and boundary condition (54) require no position to remain outside of trading interval. Then using (46) we receive:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which has a simple solution: Solve generalized eigenvalues problem M µ [ dp/dt ] | ψ &gt; = λM µ [1] | ψ &gt; , find λ min and λ max , select the one with maximal absolute value, the corresponding ψ is the answer. This answer is also trivial if market go up ( dp/dt &gt; 0) hold long position, if market go down ( dp/dt &lt; 0) hold short position. Again, the example is not practical, it just indicates how P&amp;L optimization problem is reduced to matrix spectrum analysis. One more note about P&amp;L is that it is typically calculated on cash basis (require no shares held outside trading interval, then calculate P&amp;L cash difference), but for some trading strategies asset-based definition can be more useful (require no cash held outside trading interval, then calculate P&amp;L as shares number difference).

## III. DYNAMICS

## A. Observable and Unobservable variables

What variables can be potentially used for market dynamics? We already worked with such variables as price p and executed orders flow I = dv/dt . They are real, they are reported on execution tape by exchanges. There are other variables, which are slightly more difficult to observe, e.g. spread, order type (buy/sell), time the order type was put to order book, orders distribution in order book, etc. And there are other, 'virtual' variables, such as supply or demand. A schematic supply-demand chart is presented on Fig. 5. We will treat supply and demand as flow (number or units in unit time dN/dt ), not as total number of units. If some supply-demand chart is stationary and has a form similar to Fig. 5 it is clear that only the price corresponding dN buy /dt = dN sell /dt = I is the stationary solution and execution take place only at this equilibrium price. When, for any reason, execution take place at price, different from the equilibrium the supply-demand disbalance formally give orders accumulation with time. This accumulation actually never happen in practice (either orders flow stops or price changes), but the accumulation can be formally considered as an increase in limit order execution time. But limit order execution time is actually known, this is the time the order spent in the order book before execution. The product of signed I by time the limit order spent in the order book before execution can serve as a supply-demand estimator. We are going to discuss observable supply-demand estimators in a separate publication, and touch here only fundamental properties having the goal to transform supply=demand condition to the one expressed only in terms of observable variables.

The question: what can we tell about supply and demand curves at prices different from equilibrium one. The answer is: nothing. The orders flow at prices off current is not measurable and, we would tell even stronger, actually do not exist at any price except currently executed (unexecuted order book orders flow is not a supply/demand, this is just manipulations and traders pipe dreams).

Stationary chart like Fig. 5 or even non-stationary supply-demand dependencies are conceptually incorrect in equity trading, because it operates with values, which cannot be measured or even estimated. A theory can work with unobservable concept, e.g. our theory, same as quantum mechanics, operate with ψ ( x ), but only ψ 2 ( x ) enter into measurable values. The supply=demand classical approach can be replaced by the one working only with observable variables:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The (57) means : 'the price tend to the value, maximizing future I ( p )'. The stationary theory on Fig. 5 is equivalent to Eq. (57), reverse is not true and the (57) is much more generic and can be applied to securities trading dynamics. Critically important that (57)

FIG. 5. Schematic plot of supply and demand as a function of price.

<!-- image -->

operates only with observable variables (observable postfactum, the I we were calculating in Section II is calculated on past(already observed) values, but even this is much better than supply=demand classical theory where the values of supply and demand cannot be measured even postfactum.

## B. Volatility

Price volatility is a very old concept, and 'reverse-to-the mean' type of theories is actually equivalent to: price tend to the value, at which volatility (measured as standard deviation calculated on past sample) is minimal.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

while this type of strategy would never work in practice (see Section IV for description of the reasons), there are critically important questions: What volatility actually is? Does 'true' volatility correspond more or less to price fluctuation or to I fl uctuation? Is volatility a concept of the same nature as I or they are completely different concepts? Looking at charts we see that price volatility is typically large at large I , but this may be like kinetic to potential energy transform in mechanics.

The other definitions of volatility can be introduced as price fluctuations, e.g. Volatility = 〈 ( dp/dt ) 2 〉 , the problem with this definition is that it diverges at small time scales. (One derivative is compensated by the integral, and another one is translated to measure support boundary, what lead to expression divergence at small time scales.) The M µ [( dp/dt ) 2 ] matrix cannot be directly calculated from price timeserie sample, and the formal expansion in a style of Appendix E M µ [( dp/dt ) 2 ] = M µ [ dp/dt ] G -1 µ M µ [ dp/dt ] is not a good one because it introduces basis minimal scale into the expansion.

Let us give alternative volatility definition:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This definition uses first derivative, so all the moments can be directly calculated from price timeserie sample, as ∫ Q k ( x ) ω ( x ) | dp | , this expression is essentially the same as dp/dt moments, but absolute value of price change should be used in the sum corresponding to the integral. Technically this calculation is almost the same as dv/dt moments calculation, with the difference that 'trading events' occur in the points of price change and the 'trading volume' is absolute value of price change. On the Fig. 6 we present real execution flow I = dv/dt (black line) and artificial one J = | dp | /dt (green line). They are very similar in nature. This probably means that supply-demand and price volatility are the entities of the same nature, at least for equity trading. When trading volume is unavailable the | dp | can be used as a substitute of dv .

FIG. 6. A chart similar to the Fig. 1, but comparing real execution flow I = dv/dt (black line) and artificial one J (green line) calculated from | dp | /dt .

<!-- image -->

During our attempt to build dynamic equation we spent substantial effort in an attempt to define Lagrange functional L and then build action S like in other dynamic theories:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This approach is very attractive: it requires to minimize price volatility (like in 'reverse-tomean' type of theories) and to maximize execution flow I (like in supply-demand theories), but possibly fruitless. We spent substantial time pursuing this route using various volatility models and constrains on action variation with no improvement compared to using just I and only supply-demand functional (57). This means that the 'effective mass' m in

(62) is close to 0, at least for equity trading. At this point we do not have an answer to the fundamental question about price volatility role, and whether other therms, similar in their nature to volatility, should be put to Lagrange functional (62) along with supplydemand term I = dv/dt . In all the calculations below we would assume m = 0. Note that in stationary case on Fig. 5 these volatility-like terms play no effect, they play role only in dynamic situation, when price change, so our approach can be considered as a 'quasistationary approximation'. We can give another reason why price volatility (but not the terms like ( dψ/dt ) 2 , that lead to Schr¨ odinger - like equation, which was also tried without much success) should not enter the dynamic equation: as we discussed earlier, price fluctuations are secondary to liquidity fluctuations, and position enter/exit conditions should be calculated without price used. Then, only on the last step, when P&amp;L need to be calculated the price should be used to calculate the direction.

## C. Price corresponding to maximal I on past sample

The P AV ER introduced in Subsection III B is calculated as average over some time (or volume) interval (60). This price(calculated on past sample) has no any degree of freedom available and correspond to a strategy buy below P AVER , sell above P AV ER thus maximize trading volume (to have the condition (47) satisfied one have to use median, not average price, but for practical calculations median and average are close enough). Now, instead of trading to maximize volume consider trading to maximize I , Eq. (57). What is different, we now have dim M degrees of freedom ( ψ components) available, that are selected to have I maximized. Calculations still uses only 'charted' past prices (because both measures Idµ and dµ are positive), but the time scale is now selected automatically. This is the most critical improvement when doing a transition from maximizing volume to maximizing I . The corresponding price P IH (two versions calculated with different boundary conditions were already presented on the Fig. 4), but now we are going to perform an analysis it in terms of P&amp;L dynamics.

The problem can be formulated as to find a strategy, maximizing the P&amp;L. Let us present a simple, but nevertheless practical, trading strategy, which exhibit all the important elements of the theory.

Input: at time t i execution with price p ( t i ) and trading volume dv ( t i ).

Continuously calculate I 0 , I IL , I IH , and P IH as we did in the previous section. There is one more variable dir , which determine the direction of position opening, and threshold constant th , that is typically selected about 0.8-0.9. Then apply the following heuristics:

1. If I 0 &lt; I IL enter long position if dir &gt; th , enter short position if dir &lt; -th , otherwise hold no position.

## 2. If I 0 &gt; I IH :

- Recalculate dir . First calculate P IH (see Section II D) with boundary condition ψ ( x 0 ) = 0, then build matrix M µ [( p -P IH ) I ] from M µ [ p ] and M µ [ pI ] matrices calculated directly from the moments of observable samples. The matrix M µ [( p -P IH ) I ] corresponds to P&amp;L matrix in scenario 'enter position at ψ IH '. Note that if entering position take unit time, then the I IH is the maximal volume which can be accumulated in unit time on past sample.
- Determine how 'exit now' scenario is good for P&amp;L operator. Solve generalized eigenvalues problem (without boundary condition ψ ( x 0 ) = 0) &lt;ψ | M µ [( p -P IH ) I ] | ψ&gt; &lt;ψ | M µ [1] | ψ&gt; = λ P&amp;L , find ψ P&amp;L;min and ψ P&amp;L;max , corresponding to min and max values of λ P&amp;L , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ψ 0 is from Eq.(31).

- Remember dir for later use on stage 1.
- If dir &gt; th close long position, if dir &lt; -th close short position.

Conceptually the described heuristics is similar to p last -P IH directional trading (all supplydemand type of theories are directional theories), but generalized eigenvalues techniques is used to estimate the thresholds and time scale. Note that if one need just a prediction of I - the result is very accurate: If current I 0 is large ( I 0 &gt; I IH ) then future I 0 will be low ( I 0 &lt; I IL ), similar if current I 0 is low ( I 0 &lt; I IL ), then future I 0 will be high ( I 0 &gt; I IH ). This may look trivial (alternating periods of low and high liquidity availability) but this mean that liquidity(not price!) undergo large oscillations, and price changes are just the consequences of large changes in liquidity.

The key element of the strategy is that it actually trades liquidity, providing liquidity during deficit and taking it during excess. Our HFT experiments to be discussed in details in a separate publication, here we just put briefly only the most important qualitative observations.

Among a number of different strategies tested - only this one provided no eventual catastrophic P&amp;L drain ('Black Swan'[23] -like events). The reason is simple: the strategy of holding zero position during liquidity excess make the system resilient to the situation when market moves against position held, but in the same time entering the position during liquidity deficit (when the volatility is small) make the system collecting most of the market movement juice.

Our experiments (especially for other than equity markets) show that in a situation when market direction is known by a human trader the value of dir can be set manually according to trader's view and the system would effectively collect the P&amp;L on small market movements, in the same time avoiding catastrophic P&amp;L drains on the events when market moves against position held. On Fig. 7 we present calculated dir for I 0 &gt; I IH . The calculated during liquidity excess the value of dir should be saved for liquidity deficit ( I 0 &lt; I IL ) time moments for determination of position opening direction. The chart shows time scale auto adjustment, what is drastically different from P AVER on Fig. (4), where time scale is exactly τ . The result is stable in a sense the time scale of dir sign change is greater than minimal time scale available in M µ [ I ] matrix.

Testing the strategy on real data (even paper trading, not to mention real trading) is a complex task, because all the fees, commissions, delays should be taken into account. In this paper we will give qualitative description of results obtained as a 'paper trading' on four year period, the detailed results to be published elsewhere.

Any attempt to use P AVER (corresponding to maximizing trading volume on past trades) give losses. When used in trade following strategy because of τ delay in trend switch identification. There are relatively small losses on almost all days. When using 'reverse to P AV ER ' type of strategy most of days are profitable, but because of catastrophic P&amp;L drain on relatively seldom trending days (like the one we used in this presentation) overall P&amp;L is negative. Use of P IH (corresponding to maximizing I = dv/dt on past trades) to determine market direction dir and then using this direction to enter position during liquidity deficit and closing position during liquidity excess typically give profit on both volatility days and trending days. Very important is that this strategy give no days with catastrophic P&amp;L drain. Total number of trades per day is about few hundred for high liquidity stocks. Average daily return vary from -1% to 2% depending how execution price is modeled and exchange commissions. Our main result is that self-adjusting time scale and liquidity(not price) based enter/exit conditions is critically important for a reasonable Automated Trading Machine. Our approach to market dynamics as maximizing I ( p ), Eq. (57), (even on past trades, what we do in this paper, without volatility terms discussed in Section III B, that are not well understood), give very promising results. The most important is experimental evidence that there is no catastrophic P&amp;L drain in liquidity trading strategy.

FIG. 7. The AAPL stock on September, 20, 2012 around 10am. Price P , P IH , and dir (at I 0 &gt; I IH ) are presented.

<!-- image -->

## D. Volatility Trading

In previous section III C we did out best to build directional trading machine, that was trying to predict, with some success, future price. But price prediction is extremely difficult because, as we stated earlier, price fluctuations are small and are secondary to liquidity fluctuation, so our P&amp;L trading theory from section II E was an attempt to overcome this issue. A question arise whether liquidity deficit can be traded directly. If we accept experimentally observed in section III B fact that liquidity deficit is an entity of the same nature as volatility then the answer is yes, and liquidity deficit can be traded through some kind of derivative instruments. Let us illustrate the approach on a simple case - options trading. Whatever option model is used, the key element of it is implied volatility. Implied volatility trading strategy can be implemented through trading some delta-neutral 'synthetic asset', built e.g. as long-short pairs of a call on an asset and an asset itself, call-put pairs or similar 'delta-neutral vehicles'. Optimal implementation of such 'synthetic asset' depends on commissions, liquidity available, exchange access, etc. and varies from fund to fund. Assume we have built such delta-neutral instrument, the price of which depend on volatility only. How to trade it? We have the same two requirements: 1) Avoid catastrophic P&amp;L drain and 2) Predict future value of volatility (forward volatility). Now, when trading delta-neutral strategy, this matches exactly our theory and trading algorithm become this.

1. If for underlying asset we have I 0 &lt; I IL then enter 'long volatility' position for 'deltaneutral' synthetic asset. This enter condition means that if current execution flow is low - future value of it will be high, what exactly correspond to price dynamics from section III C: If at current price the value of I 0 is low - the price would change to increase future I .
2. If for underlying asset we have I 0 &gt; I IH then close existing 'long volatility' position for 'delta-neutral' synthetic asset. At high I 0 future value of I cannot be determined, it can either go down(typically) or increase even more(much more seldom, but just few such events sufficient to incur catastrophic P&amp;L drain). According to main concept of our P&amp;L trading strategy, one should have zero position during market uncertainty.

The reason why this strategy is expected to be profitable is that experiments show that implied volatility is very much price fluctuation-dependent, and execution flow spikes I 0 &gt;

I IH in underlying asset typically lead to substantial price move of it and then implied volatility increase for 'synthetic asset'. This strategy is a typical 'buy low volatility', then 'sell high volatility'. The key difference from regular case is that, instead of price volatility, liquidity deficit is used as a proxy to forward volatility. The described strategy never goes short volatility, so catastrophic P&amp;L drain is unlikely. We performed the strategy testing on much more limited data we have available to us (about 1 month of CME data) than we did for testing directional strategy on data for NASDAQ ITCH[7] (4 years of data), but the effect, nevertheless, clearly exist, but more testing is required to get the final conclusion about applicability of liquidity deficit as a proxy to implied volatility. In addition to that we want to emphasize, that despite our theory seems to predict implied volatility much better than price direction, actual trading implementation require the use of 'delta-neutral' synthetic asset, what incur substantial cost on commissions and execution, thus actual P&amp;L is difficult to estimate without existing setup for high-frequency option trading.

## IV. SPECULATIONS

In this paper we presented a theory trying to describe kinematics and dynamics of the market. The effect is relatively weak, so it is difficult to make money directly, but provided theory can state very clear what kind of Automated Trading Machines CANNOT make money. In best case they will be making little money for some time, then lose more than they made in a single event. Specifically:

- Any system that uses only single asset price (and possibly prices of multiple assets, but this case is not completely clear) as input. The price is actually secondary and typically fluctuates few percent a day in contrast with liquidity flow, that fluctuates in orders of magnitude. This also allows to estimate maximal workable time scale: the scale on which execution flow fluctuates at least in an order of magnitude (in 10 times).
- Any system that has a built-in fixed time scale (e.g. moving average type of system). The market has no specific time scale. Minimal number of time scales is 3 (the time scales of 2x2 matrix (21), typical value to make system some-kind working is 13 time scales (all time scales of 7x7 matrix (21)).

- Any 'symmetric' system with just two signal 'buy' and 'sell' cannot make money. Minimal number of signals is four: 'buy', 'sell position', 'sell short', 'cover short'. The system where e.g. 'buy' and 'cover short' is the same signal will eventually catastrophically lose money on an event when market go against position held.
- Any system entering the position (does not matter long or short) during liquidity excess (e.g. I &gt; I IH ) cannot make money. During liquidity excess price movement is typically large and 'reverse to the moving average' type of system often use such event as position entering signal. The market after liquidity excess event bounce a little, then typically go to the same direction. This give a risk of on what to bet: 'little bounce' or 'follow the market'. What one should do during liquidity excess event is to CLOSE existing position. This is very fundamental - if you have a position during market uncertainty - eventually you will lose money, you must have ZERO position during liquidity excess. This is very important element of the P&amp;L trading strategy.
- Any system not entering the position during liquidity deficit event (e.g. I &lt; I IL ) typically lose money. Liquidity deficit periods are characterized by small price movements and difficult to identify by price-based trading systems. Liquidity deficit actually mean that at current price buyers and sellers do not match well, and substantial price movement is expected. This is very well known by most traders: before large market movement volatility (and e.g. standard deviation as its crude measure) become very low. The direction (whether one should go long or short) during liquidity deficit event can, to some extend, be determined by the theory from Section III and balance of supply-demand generalization (57).
- An important issue is to discuss what would happen to the markets when this strategy (enter on liquidity deficit, exit on liquidity excess) is applied on mass scale by market participants. In contrast with other trading strategies, which reduce liquidity at current price when applied (when price is moved to the uncharted territory the liquidity drains out because supply or demand drains out as on classical Fig. 5), this strategy actually increase market liquidity at current price. This insensitivity to price value is expected to lead not to the strategy stopping to work when applied on mass scale by market participants, but starting to work better and better and to markets destabilization in the end.

- While proposed theory was developed and tested mostly on US equity market, it can be extended to other global markets (Treasury, FX, Sovereign Debt, etc) with corresponding time scale adjustment. Noticed in Section III B similarity between dv and | dp | behavior can probably allow the theory to be applied even to the markets, where trading volume is not available, using | dp | as a substitute.

## Appendix A: Non-monomials polynomial bases

A number of numerical algorithms use monomials basis x k . However, selection of other bases can be greatly beneficial to numerical stability improvement. A choice of a basis satisfying recurrent relation.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

has some important stability properties[12, 24].

For our calculations we use the following four bases:

- Laguerre: (see com.polytechnik.utils.Laguerre)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- Legendre: (see com.polytechnik.utils.Legendre)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- Chebyshev: (see com.polytechnik.utils.Chebyshev)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- Hermite (actually He basis): (see com.polytechnik.utils.HermiteE)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To use these bases in calculations we need to be able to perform standard operations on polynomials in these bases F ( x ) = ∑ k = n k =0 f k Q k ( x ), where f k is now the coefficient by Q k , not by x k as in monomial basis.

1. Multiplication operation:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the four mentioned bases the coefficients c ij k from (A14) are known: For Laguerre basis: Ref. 25. For Legendre Basis: Ref. 26, formulae 8.915.5, A(9036), page 1040. For Chebyshev Basis: Ref. 27, formulae 22.7.24, p. 872. For Hermite Basis: Ref. 28 or 29 formulae 4.5.1.11 page 569.

2. Multiplication by ax + b . Use 3 term recurrence relation.
3. Given a set of observations x j and w j calculate the moments as ∑ j Q n ( x j ) w j . Use 3 term recurrence relation (see the method calculateMomentsFromSample).
4. Expand ax + b argument Q n ( ax + b ) = ∑ j = n j =0 d ( n ) j Q j ( x ). Use 3 term recurrence relation to find d ( n ) j .
5. Synthetic division. For a given polynomial P = ∑ k = n p k =0 p k Q k and D = ∑ k = n d k =0 d k Q k find polynomials R and Q such as P = Q ∗ D + R . For n d = 1 result can be calculated directly from three term recurrence (A1), for n d &gt; 1 use the (A14) coefficients and solve linear system with respect to R and Q coefficients.
6. Calculation of ∑ k = n k =0 f k Q k ( x ) at x . Use Clenshaw recurrence formula see Ref. 30, page 56.

7. Integration and differentiation of a function ∑ k = n k =0 f k Q k ( x ) at x . Use Q k ( x ) integration and differentiation formulas from Refs. 26, 27, and 29, then apply Clenshaw recurrence formula.
8. Given F ( x ) = ∑ k = n k =0 f k Q k ( x ) find the roots(possibly complex) of F ( x ) = 0. Build confederate matrix[31, 32] the eigenvalues of which give the polynomial F ( x ) roots. See getConfederateMatrix(final double [] coefs) method and com. polytechnik. utils. PolynomialRootsConfederateMatrixABasis class.

We have a numerical library implementing these (and also some other) polynomial operations for the four bases in question (see mentioned above four classes extending the com. polytechnik. utils. BasisPolynomials). The code is availble from authors[33]. To show simple application of these bases let us apply them to quadratures calculations. This will be demonstrated in Appendix B

## Appendix B: Quadratures calculation

In this section given the moments &lt; Q k &gt; µ we apply the operations from Appendix A to calculate Gauss, Radau, Kronrod and Multiple Orthogonality quadratures.

Gaussian quadratures. Using multiplication coefficients (A14) obtain matrices M µ [ x ] and M µ [1]. The first one is obtained initially by multiplication by x , then using (A14), the second one is obtained by direct application of (A14). Solve generalized eigenvalues problem

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The eigenvalues are the quadrature nodes x k , k = [0 ..n ] and the weights w k = 1 / ( ψ ( k ) ( x k ) ) 2 , where ψ ( k ) ( x k ) is the value of k -th eigenfunction at x k , which is ∑ j = n j =0 ψ ( k ) j Q j ( x k ). Because &lt; ψ ( j ) | M µ [1] | ψ ( k ) &gt; = δ jk the K ( x, y, µ ) from (23) and corresponding Christoffel function has a very simple form in | ψ ( k ) &gt; basis:

The ψ ( k ) ( x ) are equal(within a constant) to the Lagrange interpolating polynomial built on x j , j = [0 ..n ] nodes ( ψ ( k ) ( x j ) = 0 for j = k ).

̸

Radau quadratures. Using multiplication coefficients (A14) obtain matrices M µ [( x 0 -x ) x ] and M µ [( x 0 -x )], then use Gaussian quadratures for nodes and weights calculation.

Kronrod quadratures[34, 35]. Build Gaussian quadrature first, then obtain n -th orthogonal polynomial P n on measure µ (e.g. by multiplication ψ ( k ) by x -x k or in some other way), then calculate &lt; Q k P n &gt; moments using (A14) and calculate Gaussian quadrature once again on these new moments. If successful - the result give Kronrod nodes. Once Kronrod nodes are known Kronrod weights can be easily calculated from first and second Gaussian quadrature weights. See the code in com.polytechnik.utils. OrthogonalPolynomialsABasis. getKronrodQuadratures.

Multiple orthogonality[36]. See the code in com.polytechnik.utils. OrthogonalPolynomialsABasis. getQuadraturesForMultipleOrthogonalPolynomial

Java code is available from authors [33].

## Appendix C: Distribution Parameters Estimation with Gaussian Quadratures

The quadratures we have built in Appendix B can be applied for distribution parameters estimation. For a positively defined measure dµ with existing moments [0 .. 2 n -1] it is possible to build n -point quadrature rule, such that the relation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is exact if Π( x ) is arbitrary polynomial of degree 2 n -1 or less. The nodes x k and the weights ω k define Gaussian quadrature[12, 15, 37] While most quadrature applications focus on using (C1) for integrals estimation, it can be viewed as interpolation of the measure dµ itself by a discrete measure with support on quadrature nodes, i.e. by delta functions at points x k and magnitude ω k . (See the Ref. [15] for distribution of x k (the roots of the n -th order orthogonal polynomial with respect to measure dµ ) review in various cases). Some trivial usage of a quadrature can be an estimation of a quantiles (e.g. median) of the measure dµ using the discrete measure ω k as a substitute.

In this appendix we present a new skewness estimator for a distribution. Given the 〈 Q k 〉 ; k = 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 moments it is possible to build two point quadrature rule. Assuming the quadrature nodes are ordered in ascending order x 1 &lt; x 2 define the skewness as asymmetry of nodes weights

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

FIG. 8. Skewness for chi-squared distribution. Solid line: half of regular skewness √ 8 /k . Dashed line: modified skewness from (C9)

<!-- image -->

The definition (C2) is bounded to [ -1; 1] interval because all ω k are positive.

Practical Gaussian quadrature calculation can be rather complicated for a large n because of numerical instability, but for n = 2 calculation is trivial and can be performed even in monomials basis. Consider L 2 extremal problem of ∫ ( a + bx + x 2 ) 2 dµ , what lead to linear system and the values for a and b are:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then (C2) becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then the nodes are the a + bx + x 2 roots and the weights are:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The skewness defined in (C2) and calculated in (C9) is very similar to regular skewness γ 1 from (C13) when applied to commonly used distributions.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On Fig. 8 a plot of regular skewness γ 1 from (C13) and 'modified' skewness Γ from (C2) are presented for chi-squared distribution as a function of degree of freedom k (regular skewness is equal to exactly √ 8 /k , on a chart it is divided by two to have the same asymptotic as (C9) at k →∞ ). In some situations a definition of skewness, having the dimension of x is required (e.g. a difference between mean and median used in nonparametric skew). For such estimation half of (C9) nominator can be used, what gives (C10) as a difference between the midpoint of x 1 and x 2 and mean x . Note that the x is the root of first order orthogonal polynomial P 1 ( x ) built on dµ and x 1 and x 2 are the roots of the second order orthogonal polynomial P 2 ( x ) built on dµ , thus the (C10) is a difference between a midpoint of P 2 ( x ) roots and P 1 ( x ) root. See the com.polytechnik.utils.Skewness for the code calculating Γ from the [0 .. 3] moments in arbitrary basis.

First [0 .. 2 n -1] moments of a positive measure can be one-to-one mapped to n -point Gaussian quadrature. A modified skewness estimation as asymmetry of two-point Gaussian quadrature weighs is proposed. This modified skewness has additional important properties, such as bounded to [ -1 .. 1] interval and being applicable well to two-mode distribution, it gives exact answer, for example, in case of discrete distribution with two support points. Note, that discrete distribution is a typical problematic case for skewness estimation[38]. While quadratures approach can be easily applied to skewness estimation, kurtosis estimation from Gaussian quadrature is not possible if input moments are limited to the same ones used in classic definition of kurtosis. Classic kurtosis estimation requires [0 .. 4] moments for estimation, but 3-point Gaussian quadrature requires [0 .. 5] moments. In this sense quadrature-based skewness estimation is some kind special, because it can be built using the same input moments as classically defined skewness. In practical applications the Christoffel function (23) asymptotic 1 /K ( x, x, µ ) can be much more successfully, than kurtosis, applied for testing a distribution on 'fat tails'. Technically Christoffel function behavior can be better understood in the (B1) eigenfunctions basis (in which K ( x, y, µ ) has a very simple form (B2)) rather than in the original Q k ( x ) basis, in which K ( x, y, µ ) has a general form (22). Given distribution sample to obtain K ( x, x, µ ) select a basis out of four bases considered (for numerical stability choose the one the measure of which is most similar to distribution of the sample and scale x to the basis measure support), then use basis implementation of com.polytechnik.utils. BasisPolynomials. calculateMomentsFromSample to obtain &lt; Q k &gt; moments, after that make the M [1] matrix using com.polytechnik.utils. OrthogonalPolynomialsABasis .getQQMatr, inverse it (obtain G -1 ) by applying e.g. com.polytechnik.utils .Linsystems .getInvertedMatrix, and finally calculate the polynomail Q ( x ) G -1 Q ( x ) by using the com.polytechnik.utils. OrthogonalPolynomialsABasis .getKK. Java code for e.g. Chebyshev basis would look about like this:

```
/** The method calculates K(x,x) (2d-1 elements returned, the polynomial of 2d-2 order) * in Chebyshev basis from observations sample x[]. */ static double [] getKxxFromSample(final int d,final double [] x){ final com.polytechnik.utils.OrthogonalPolynomialsABasis Q= new com.polytechnik.utils.OrthogonalPolynomialsChebyshevBasis(); return Q.getKK(d,com.polytechnik.utils.Linsystems.getInvertedMatrix(d,d, Q.getQQMatr(d,Q.B.calculateMomentsFromSample(2*d-1-1,x))),d); }
```

FIG. 9. Original Runge function f , Least Squares approximation A LS and Radon-Nikodym approximation A RN

<!-- image -->

## Appendix D: Runge Oscillations supression

We take Runge function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

And interpolate it on [ -1; 1] interval choosing the measure dµ = dx and n = 6. A LS ( x ) is least square approximation (16) and A RN ( x ) Radon-Nikodym approximation (26).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The results are presented on Fig. 9. One can see that near edges oscillations are much less severe, when Radon-Nikodym approximation as polynomials ratio is used for the interpolation of f . One can see from the chart typical behavior difference for least square and Radon-Nikodym approximations: Least squares have diverging oscillations near measure support boundaries and tend to infinity with the distance to measure support increase. Radon-Nikodym have converging oscillations near measure support boundaries and tend to a constant with the distance to measure support increase. The code calculating A RN ( x )

from &lt; Q k &gt; and &lt; fQ k &gt; moments is very similar to an example calculating the K ( x, x, µ ) polynomial at the end of Appendix C, with the difference that the calculations now have to be performed twice: first time for denominator, what give exactly K ( x, x, µ ), and second time for nominator, with only difference is that instead of the matrix G -1 the matrix G -1 M [ f ] G -1 should be used. See the com.polytechnik.utils. NevaiOperator. getNevaiOperator as an example where these calculations are implemented and the polynomials for nominator and denominator are calculated from the moments in a given basis.

Another, worth to mention point, is related to derivatives calculation. For this the moments 〈 Q k df/dx 〉 should be calculated first (for the measures like (3) or (7) this can be done using 〈 Q k f 〉 moments and integration by parts), and only then applying RadonNikodym approximation like (D4) using the derivative moments. If one, instead of using the 〈 Q k df/dx 〉 moments, would differentiate f approximation expression (D4) directly - the result will be incorrect.

## Appendix E: Matrix averages

In the beginning of Section II we mentioned an effective way of average and correlation calculation. Specifically we need an effective way to calculate &lt; fg &gt; given only &lt; Q k f &gt; and &lt; Q k g &gt; information. The approach mentioned in Section II is actually

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(in this appendix we mix vector &lt; Q f &gt; and index &lt; Q k f &gt; notations for notation compactness, but this should not mislead the reader).

The expression(E2) can be also considered as conversion of f ( t ) and g ( t ) timeseries to vectors &lt; Q f &gt; and &lt; Q g &gt; then taking inner product of them with matrix G -1 defining inner product (another way to look at this is to consider least squares approximation of f ( x ) and g ( x ) then taking average of two interpolated functions product).

In a way how Radon-Nikodym derivatives improve interpolation of a function, the transition from a vector &lt; Q k f &gt; to matrix M [ f ] can similary improve calculations of an average. Let us use the M ij [ f ] = &lt; Q i fQ j &gt; from (21) and define an average f :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Spur is matrix trace (sum of diagonal elements) operator. It is easy to see that the definition (E3) immediately give (note that G = M [1] and Spur ( G -1 M [ f ]) = Spur ( M [ f ] G -1 ))

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The average (E5) is related to quantum mechanics [39] density matrix -type of average, and it has all the regular properties of average, but operates on matrices (an equivalent of quantum mechanics density matrix), not on vectors. This greatly increase stability of calculations (both because of using more moments [0 .. 2 n ] instead of [0 ..n ] and because of matrix nature of the expression (E3)). If the basis Q k ( x ) is chosen in a way the G is a unit matrix then all G -1 terms vanish and f is just Spur( M [ f ]) / dim G and fg is just Spur( M [ f ] M [ g ]) / dim G . Interesting properties arise when matrices M [ f ] and M [ g ] have some special properties (e.g. have common basis in which both are diaginal, commutate, etc.).

Note, that the formulae (E5) practically allows to calculate stock cross correlation in linear time. To obtain price covariance of any two stocks p and q : obtain M [ p ] and M [ q ] matrices (21) from [0 .. 2 n ] moments of p and q timeseries, then use the (E5) for pq -p q .

- [1] Benoit Mandelbrot and Richard L Hudson, The Misbehavior of Markets: A fractal view of financial turbulence (Basic books, 2014).
- [2] Clive M Corcoran, Long/short market dynamics: trading strategies for today's markets , Vol. 323 (John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2007).
- [3] Joseph L McCauley, Dynamics of markets: The new financial economics (Cambridge University Press, 2009).
- [4] Jin Hyuk Choi, Kasper Larsen, and Duane J Seppi, 'Information and trading targets in a dynamic market equilibrium,' arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.02083 (2015).
- [5] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin and Ray Bakhramov, 'Mathematical Foundations of Realtime Equity Trading. Liquidity Deficit and Market Dynamics. Automated Trading Machines.' ArXiv e-prints (2015), http://arxiv.org/abs/1510.05510 , arXiv:1510.05510 [q-fin.CP].

- [6] Nikolaus Hautsch and Ruihong Huang, 'Limit order flow, market impact and optimal order sizes: Evidence f (2011).
- [7] Nasdaq OMX, NASDAQ TotalView-ITCH 4.1 , Report (Nasdaq OMX, 2014) Also see data files samples ftp://emi.nasdaq.com/ITCH/ .
- [8] [Sarah N. Lynch, 'Sec chair to congress: 'the markets are not rigged',' (29 Apr. 2014).](http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/04/29/us-sec-highspeed-trading-idUSBREA3S0OO20140429)
- [9] There is a singnificant effort we made trying to use book informationation to predict market dynamics. The information we tried to use without much success: volume disbalance near book edges, spread, cancellation rate, cancellation from best price, and many other. The only more or less useful order book information was origination time of the order to be executed. When orders on best level are old enough (old orders are near book edge) this typically indicates liquidity deficit event and is a good indication of stopping trading near this price. (This is also true for an executed trade, even without book data available: if recently executed orders were put to order book long time ago this means that at current price level there are no new liqudity available, because no recent orders get matched at current price.) A usage of order book information related to limit orders volume, was not successful at all. For example use order book volume dv as measure weight use Christoffel function w ( p ) = 1 K ( p,p ) = 1 π k ( p )( &lt;π ( p ) π ( p ) &gt; ) -1 kl π l ( p ) for both buy and sell sides of the order book. This is effectively an interpolation of book volume. The result show that for liquid stock one side is significantly large than other, the volume fluctuates, no good results are received from matching interpolated w ( p ) for buy and sell sides: w sell ( p ) = w buy ( p ) in an attempt to find an equilibrium p . The price differ significantly from buy/sell book edges. Using Haar measure instead of dv gave no improvement also.
- [10] Esteban Moro, Javier Vicente, Luis G. Moyano, Austin Gerig, J. Doyne Farmer, Gabriella Vaglica, Fabrizio Lillo, and Rosario N. Mantegna, 'Market impact and trading profile of large trading orders in stock markets,' arXiv:0908.0202 [q-fin.TR] (03 Aug. 2009).
- [11] Eugeny Yakushev, (2009), private communication.
- [12] Walter Gautschi, Orthogonal polynomials: computation and approximation (Oxford University Press on Demand, 2004).
- [13] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin, 'Market Dynamics. On Supply and Demand Concepts,' ArXiv e-prints (2016), http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.04423 , arXiv:1602.04423.
- [14] [Gennadii Stepanovich Malyshkin, Optimal and Adaptive Methods of Hydroacoustic Signal Processing. Vol 1.](http://www.elektropribor.spb.ru/publ/rbook32)

(Elektropribor Publishing, 2009) ISBN: 978-5-900780-90-0.

- [15] [Vilmos Totik, 'Orthogonal polynomials,' Surveys in Approximation Theory 1 , 70-125 (11 Nov. 2005).](http://www.math.technion.ac.il/sat/papers/3/3.pdf)
- [16] A. N. Kolmogorov and S. V. Fomin, Elements of the Theory of Functions and Functional Analysis (Martino Fine Books (May 8, 2012), 8 May 2012).
- [17] Nassim Nicholas Taleb, 'Silent risk: Lectures on fat tails,(anti) fragility, and asymmetric exposures,' Available at SSRN (2014).
- [18] Barry Simon, Szeg˝ os Theorem and Its Descendants (Princeton University Press, 2011).
- [19] Paul G Nevai, 'G´ eza Freud, Orthogonal Polynomials. Christoffel Functions. A Case Study,' Journal Of Approximation Theory 48 , 3-167 (1986).
- [20] ['Lapack version 3.5.0,' (2013).](http://www.netlib.org/lapack/)
- [21] There are other ways to estimate thresholds. One can use e.g. Radau-like measures d ˜ µ = ( x -x 0 ) dµ (or d ˜ µ = ( x 0 -x ) dµ depending on x 0 position) or, another option, drop boundary condition (39) altogether and estimate whether I is 'low' or 'high' as closeness of | ψ { IL,IH } &gt; to | ψ 0 &gt; , localized at x 0 (the one from (31)) as &lt; ψ { IL,IH } | ψ 0 &gt; 2 µ . We will discuss this approach separately.
- [22] The states corresponding to minimal I poses similar properties, but as we noted in Section II C the ψ IL ( x ) roots are simple real distinct (but not necessary on the support of the measure). Because I is the lowest on this state, the high values of I should be localized near the ψ IL ( x ) roots). In most situations the results obtained near the ψ IL ( x ) roots are very similar to the calculations above on | ψ IH &gt; state.
- [23] Nassim Nicholas Taleb, The black swan:: The impact of the highly improbable fragility , Vol. 2 (Random House, 2010).
- [24] Dirk P Laurie and Laurette Rolfes, 'Computation of Gaussian quadrature rules from modified moments,' Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 5 , 235-243 (1979).
- [25] G.N. Watson, 'A note on the polynomials of Hermite and Laguerre,' London Math. Soc. J. 13 , 29 (1938).
- [26] I.S. Gradshteyn and I.M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products (Fizmatlit, 1963).
- [27] L Melville Milne-Thomson, M Abramowitz, and IA Stegun, Handbook of mathematical functions (Dover Publications Nova Iorque, 1972).
- [28] L. Carlitz, 'The product of several Hermite or Laguerre polynomials,' Monatshefte fur Mathematik 66(5) , 393-396 (1962).

- [29] Yu. A. Brychkov, O. I. Marichev, and A. P. Prudnikov, Integrals and Series. Volume 2 (2003).
- [30] Leslie Fox and Ian Bax Parker, Chebyshev polynomials in numerical analysis , Vol. 29 (Oxford university press London, 1968).
- [31] John Maroulas and Stephen Barnett, 'Polynomials With Respect to a General Basis. II. Applications,' Journal of Matematical Alalysis Applications 72 , 599-614 (1979).
- [32] T.Bella, Y.Eidelman, I.Gohberg, V.Olshevsky, and E.Tyrtyshnikov, 'Fast inversion of hessenberg-quasiseparable-vandermonde matrices and resulting recurrence relations and characterizations,' preprint (2006).
- [33] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin, (2014), the code for polynomials calculation, http://www.ioffe.ru/LNEPS/malyshkin/code.html .
- [34] Aleksandr Semenovich Kronrod, Nodes and Weights of Quadratures formulas: 16-digits tables (in Russian) (Nauka, 1964).
- [35] Dirk Laurie, 'Calculation of Gauss-Kronrod quadrature rules,' Mathematics of Computation of the American Mathematical Society 66 , 1133-1145 (1997).
- [36] Carlos F Borges, 'On a class of Gauss-like quadrature rules,' Numerische Mathematik 67 , 271-288 (1994).
- [37] Gabor Szeg˝ o, Orthogonal Polynomials , fourth edition, 1975 ed., American Mathematical Society colloquium publications, Vol. 23 (American Mathematical Society, 1939).
- [38] Paul T von Hippel, 'Mean, median, and skew: Correcting a textbook rule,' Journal of Statistics Education 13 (2005).
- [39] Vladislav Gennadievich Malyshkin, 'Norm-Free Radon-Nikodym Approach to Machine Learning,' ArXiv e-prints (2015), http://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03219 , arXiv:1512.03219 [cs.LG].