## Compressed Sensing Algorithms for OFDM Channel Estimation

Jonathan Ling, Dmitry Chizhik, A. Tulino, and Inaki Esnaola 2 1 Alcatel Lucent, Bell Laboratories, Wireless Communications Research 2 University of Delaware, Electrical Engineering

AbstractRadio  channels  are  typically  sparse  in  the  delay domain,  and  ideal  for  compressed  sensing.    A  new  compressed sensing algorithm called eX-OMP is developed that yields performance  similar  to  that  of  the  optimal  MMSE  estimator.    The new algorithm  relies  on  a  small  amount  additional  data.    Both  eXOMP and the MMSE estimator adaptively balance channel tracking and noise reduction.  They perform better than simple estimators such as  the  linear-interpolator  which  fix  this  trade-off a  priori .        Some wideband measurements are examined, and the channels are found to be represented by a few delays.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Wireless transmission links use reference symbols or pilots so that transmitted data symbols can be properly demodulated. In  the  cellular  standard  LTE  the  overhead  due  to  pilots  is about 5% per antenna.  Multiple transmit antennas can be used for  diversity  or  improving  received  signal  power  or  sending multiple spatial streams, all which increase transmission throughput.  As the number of antennas grows so also does the overhead  due  to  pilots.    In  the  case  of  spatial  multiplexing, overhead  due  to  pilots  actually  limits  the  number  of  useful transmit antennas and consequently the throughput [1].  In the case  of  downlink  beamforming  at  the  basestation,  all  mobile users must make available their channels, usually with uplink pilots.  Likewise, uplink pilot overhead can limit the number of orthogonal users [2].

Compressed  sensing  [3]  for  channel  estimation  relies  on the assumption that channels can indeed be represented compactly in some basis, and thus fewer samples are required to  learn  the  channel  than  what  was  traditionally  thought. Traditional  Nyquist  sampling  requires  that  the  sampling  rate be at least twice the highest frequency component of the signal (that we might be interested in), whereas compressed sensing (CS)  theory  tells  us  that  the  number  of  samples  needed  is ideally proportional to the amount of information in the signal. Note,  while  it  is  possible  to  estimate  both  data  and  pilots jointly, e.g. [4], this paper considers their estimation separately.

The sparseness of radio channels is the consequence of the environment  and  the  necessary  fidelity  of  the  representation. Some  channel  models  reduce  the  propagation  environment down to a few significant scatterers, each generating a single plane wave having a certain azimuth and delay at the receiver. Such  channels  would  appear  to  be  highly  compressible.    In order not to predetermine the results we will assume that the channel  is  continuous  in  the  delay  domain.    We  have  also assumed block-fading in time do not attempt to take advantage of potential compactness in the Doppler domain.  One reason is that in current systems, packet transmissions are independent in  time  from  another.    In  order  to  save  power,  the  receiver partially shuts down until it knows there is data to receive, and so this behavior will limit its ability to track Doppler shifts.

Consider  a  single  set  of d contiguous  OFDM  subcarriers, with N pilots  or  reference  symbols  as  a  subset  of  these subcarriers.  Now the pilots, here taken as unit gain symbols, are multiplied by the channel and received with thermal noise so

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where H is N x d DFT  matrix,  and θ is d x1 vector of  model coefficients  and n is N x1  vector  of  additive  white  Gaussian measurement noise.  The goal is to estimate θ given that y has been  observed.    Given  an  estimate  of θ , it  may  be  used  to predict  channels  at  the  other  frequencies  (or  subcarriers)  that contain  useful  data  rather  than  pilots.    In  the  compressed sensing framework, the basis is clearly Fourier, and θ are the channel  coefficients  in  the  time-delay  domain.    It  is  often assumed that θ is m -sparse, i.e. θ contains no more than m nonzero components.  While there are no exactly sparse signals in nature, θ can  be  considered  sparse  after  thresholding.    How large m actually is will be given for some measured channels.

One class of compressed sensing algorithms is called basis pursuit, which formulates the problem as a convex relation of the more difficult to solve l0 minimization.  A particular form of basis pursuit is Lasso [5]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The l1 norm, which is the sum of the absolute values of θ , is observed  on  the constraint, and this is  what  makes  the solutions sparse.  This estimator is Bayesian in the sense that c is  assumed known.  Unfortunately there is no way to include any prior information one has on the individual elements of θ , so  our  main  focus  will  be  on  a  class  of  greedy  algorithms, described next.

A second class of algorithms is based on a greedy approach and called orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP). This algorithm determines the non-zero elements of θ by successively choosing the columns of H that are most likely to be in the model given the algorithm's prior selections.  It was shown recently in [6] that the algorithm operating with random sensing  matrices  could  in  fact  reconstruct  the  sparse  signal with measurements in nearly linear proportion to signal sparsity m .  Several variants of OMP have been proposed, e.g. [7][8].  A particular version called P-OMP is Bayesian in that it  weights  the  selection  of  model  components  by  probability that this component  is  part of the model  [8]. Several researchers [17][18][19] have evaluated both basis pursuit and OMP,  finding opportunities for reducing the number of pilots. In this paper, we attempt to improve the performance of OMP at  low  SINR,  as  these  SINRs  are  most  prevalent  in  cellular systems, by incorporating previously transmitted pilots into the estimation process.

The  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows.    In Section II sparsity in the delay domain is analyzed using radio channel  measurements.    Section  III  discusses  the  MMSE estimator,  which  utilizes  the  perfectly  known  power  delay profile.  The performance of the MMSE estimator is used later as  upper  bound.    Section  IV  exposes  the  difficulties  using power-delay profile obtained by random sampling.  Section V proposes some practical estimators that utilize priors.  Section VI  compares  the  performance  of  standard  and  CS  estimators for OFDM with certain fixed number of pilots corresponding to LTE.

## II. SPARSITY IN TIME DELAY

For an OFDM  communication system, it suffices to represent  the  channel  as  a  delay  line  with d taps.    Now  if compressed sensing  will  reduce  the  pilot  overhead  or  reduce estimation  error  depends  on  the  channels.    It  is  generally believed that they are sparse in the delay domain, i.e. there are just  a  few  significant  values  of θ while  the  remainder of θ is nearly  zero.    Due  to  the  fact  that  scatterers  are  relatively  far from  the  receiver  the  2 nd order  statistics  and  delays  remain constant over a small area.  The result is a process that is wide sense stationary, and the delays are conditionally independent. The  channel  is  the  sum  of  many  plane  waves,  so θ has Gaussian statistics, and the covariance of θ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

completely defines the process.  The diagonal is defined as the power  delay  profile  (PDP),  and  the  expectation  is  over  the spatial area where the model is deemed valid.

Two  models  that  will  be  utilized  in  this  paper  are  the extended-typical-urban model  (ETU)  [20]  which  specifies PDP  with  9  impulses,  and  the  3GPP  spatial-channel-model (SCM) with the far-scatter option [12] which specifies a PDP with 6 impulses.  In order not to predetermine the outcome, the channel models are modified to fill all d delays, by converting the  impulses  into  continuous  PDP.    Each  impulse  in  the original  model  now  becomes  a  set  of  exponentially  decaying delays whose sum has the power of the original impulse. The RMS delay is set to 0.1 µ S.

While the standard models are sufficiently representative for normal channel estimation algorithms, realizing the benefit of compressed  sensing  algorithms  depends  critically  on  how sparse  channels  are.    Thus  new  analysis  of  measurements  is necessary.    Researchers  often  use  rms  delay  spread,  i.e.  the variance  of  power  weighted  delays,  as  a  single  metric  to characterize the frequency selectivity of the channel. However, high delay spread does not imply large m .    On  the other hand low delay spread does imply small m .  The metric 95% energy support used in [16], has similar deficiency with respect to m .  Nonetheless empirical evidence as illustrated in Figure 1, shows low measured delay spread, and most likely a small number of delays.  Even so it is not obvious how many delays there are at higher bandwidth.

We  report  the  number  of  delays η 95  necessary  to  capture 95%  of  the  signal  energy.    The  relative  residue  error  is therefore -13dBc.  Qualitatively, the channel estimation quality does not need to be that much better than the actual channel SINRs, which are mostly quite low.  A typical simulation of geometries shows that 75% of the locations being less than 10 dB SINR with 3 degree downtilt. For higher SNRs more of the signal power needs to be captured leading to larger number of delays.

A  small  set of  data  from  a  peer-to-peer  measurement campaign  in  a  rural  area  taken  at  2  GHz  over  a  6  MHz bandwidth  [16]  is  analyzed.    The  quantity η 95 is  plotted  in Figure  2,  versus  the  measured  rms  delay  spread.      There  are two outliers, with very high delay spread and high η 95,  which arise due to multiple reflections between aircraft hangers.   In most cases however the number of delays is low (&lt;15), on the order  of  what  has  been  selected  for  3GPP  models,  which  at least  partially  validates  the  critical  assumption  we  and  others have  been  making.    The  number  of  delays  also  shows  low correlation with delay spread.   The line drawn is the number of delays is the profile where exponentially decaying. Channels to the right, with large delays but small η 95, appear to be  better  served  by  CS  rather  than  algorithms  based  on uniform sampling.

The original ETU and SCM channel models specify a fixed number  of  delays  irrespective  of  bandwidth  or  cell  size.    In cellular  system,  increasing  bandwidth  might  tend  to  linearly increase the number  of  delays, but decreasing cell radii decreases  the  delay  spread  as  the  main  arrival  become  more prominent, leading to a reducing in the delays.  These are open issues which need to be investigated.

<!-- image -->

Figure  1.    Example  of  a  power  delay  profile  with  low  delay spread and small number of taps.

Figure 2. η 95 vs. measured delay spread with 6 MHz BW.  The straight line, gives the number  of taps to represent an exponential PDP with rms delay given by the x-coordinate.

<!-- image -->

## III. MMSE ESTIMATOR

The  optimal  linear  Bayesian  estimator  when  the  PDP S known exactly is discussed. Since the parameters are Gaussian,  the  estimator  is  also  the  MMSE  estimator  and achieves  the  Cramer-Rao  lower  bound  (the  lowest  meansquare  error  of  unbiased  estimators).    To  develop  a  practical algorithm S may  need  to  be  estimated,  but  having  perfect knowledge serves as an upper bound on performance.

The  estimator  is  the  conditional  expectation  of θ given y , and for this discussion let N equal d .  A useful alternative form of  the  MMSE estimator for the linear model obtained by the matrix inversion formula is [11]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 2 , k θ σ represents the k -th  element  diagonal  covariance matrix θ C . The parameter vector θ is length d and not sparse. Assume  that 0 0 1 2 / T n n N σ -≈ HC H I . On  the k -th diagonal element of G the is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider the following two cases: where the PDP on the given delay is much greater than, or much less than the noise.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

While  the  MMSE  is  always  full  rank,  we  can  consider  a reduced rank model of significant channel taps.  Let M contain the  set  of m column indices, and H M the eigenvectors of this model.  The reduced-rank estimator becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last approximation is useful at moderate and higher effective SNRs.  The noise in the resulting estimate is reduced by a factor of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

compared  to  an N dimensionality  estimator,  such  as  leastsquares.    In  summary  the  MMSE  has  knowledge  that  is generally unavailable, and utilizes it optimally.

The estimator (7) suggests a two-step process whereby the support, i.e. the set of significant channel taps, are determined followed by least-squares estimation.  In fact this will be the basis of the algorithms of Section V.  Indeed such a procedure attempts to obtain an optimal representation.  For a discretely sampled process the eigenvectors of its covariance matrix are the  orthonormal  functions  of  the  Karhunen-Loeve  expansion. The covariance matrix of our random channel is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus conditioned on a specific realization of channel taps, i.e. fixing  their  location  and  variance,  the  DFT  is  the  KarhunenLoeve expansion.  In the noiseless case, since the eigenvalues are  i.i.d.,  we  can  represent  the  process  to  any  fidelity,  as  the variance of the sum is the sum of the variances, starting with the  largest  eigenvalue.    The  noise  is  assumed  white  and therefore  appears  with  equal  power  in  all  dimensions.    Thus the model  consists of all eigenvectors whose  associated eigenvalues are  a  certain  threshold  relative  to  noise.    Clearly the  output  SNR  ceases  to  improve  when  the  next  largest eigenvalue has less signal power than the noise.  OMP and its variants attempt to select the correct set of eigenvectors in the presence  of  noise.    Utilizing  the  sample  PDP  obtained  from multiple sets of data, correlated or uncorrelated, improves the probability of making correct decisions.

## IV. OBTAINING THE PRIORS VIA RANDOM SAMPLING

As  a  prequel  to  proposing  practical  algorithms,  we  consider the  task  of  estimating  the  PDP  and  distinguishing  between signal and noise for randomly placed pilots.  The compressed sensing  framework  requires  a  special  sort  of  sampling,  such that the columns of the sensing matrix H are nearly orthogonal [3].  The Fourier matrix with randomly chosen columns meets this criterion.  To obtain priors, i.e. a PDP estimate, one must use the available random samples.  It has been shown that in contrast  to  uniform  sampling  where  aliasing  occurs  if  the signal frequency is above  ½  the sampling rate,  random sampling has no such limitation [9][10].

The disadvantage of random sampling is that strong leakage shows up in all frequency bins.  In fact even in the noiseless case  the  average  power  of  the  leakage  is  equal  to  the  signal power of itself.  Here, one can think of the inner product of a random  vector  and  the  measurement  vector.      A  single  tone will have a coherent gain of N 2 at its true frequency, and gain of N at all others.  For more general signals, weak components will  be  masked  by  the  leakage,  see  also  [14,  pg.  383].    For example,  Table  1  gives  the  ETU  PDP,  which  shows  that  the later  delays  are  weaker  than  the  rest,  and  would  be  therefore more difficult to detect.

There  are  two  ways  to  improve  the  PDP  estimate,  the method depending on whether the data are correlated or not. Assume that there are N a sets of N pseudo-randomly distributed pilots.  When these sets are completely correlated, i.e. they experience exactly the same propagation channel, the can be processed together effectively increasing N by factor of N a . However pilots are often uncorrelated or nearly uncorrelated due to time variations in the channel, thus incoherent averaging must be performed.

Consider the sample power delay profile at τ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define the random variable

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where I is  the  set  of  delays that do not contain signal.  Since x s ( τ ) is complex Gaussian by the central-limit theorem; therefore S I  is a Chi-square random variable with 2 N a degrees of freedom and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus  both  incoherent  and  coherent  averaging  will  improve peak detection.

Without  any  knowledge  of  the  distribution  of  the  signal power itself, using hypothesis testing, one chooses a maximum allowable false alarm rate, i.e. largest number of false positives we  are  able  to  accept  [14].    Therefore  a  peak  is  declared  a signal component (part of the signal support), if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α is the false alarm rate.

Figure  3  shows ˆ S with N =80,  and N a=5,  at  0  dB  SNR. Based  on  the  figure,  it  is  difficult  to  make  a  determination between signal peaks and spurious noise.  If a low false alarm rate is set some signal peaks will be missed.  In particular the signal component at 5 µ s is not discernable, and will apparently always be missed.

| Delay (nS)  Relative Power (dB)  0  -1  50  -1  120  -1  200  0  230  0  500  0  1600  -3  2300  -5  5000  -7   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 1: ETU power delay profile from [20].

Figure 3: ˆ S with N =80, and N a=5, 0 dB SNR.

<!-- image -->

## V. PRACTICAL ESTIMATORS USING THE PRIOR

The  reader  is  directed  to  [6]  for  a  full  description  of orthogonal  matching  pursuit  (OMP),  which  is  the  basis  of algorithms A2, A3, and eX-OMP.  Each of the new algorithms utilize N a  uncorrelated  (or  mostly  uncorrelated)  sets  of N pseudo-randomly pilots.

A1:    Form  the  sample  PDP  (10)  given N a sets  of  data.    Set α =0.001,  and  determine  set  M  of  col.  indices  by  (13),  and perform (7).

In the following algorithms the column selection operation of OMP  is  modified.    Specifically  in  the i -th  iteration  OMP determines  a  new  column m (i) ,  using  the  residue r (i) which holds the remaining un-modeled signal and noise, by projecting it onto the basis

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where G is the identity matrix unless otherwise specified.

A2:    Introduce  MMSE-like  weighting  into  the  col.  selection process of OMP.  Let Λ p  represent the thresholded PDP.  By setting a threshold we attempt to improve the SINR of the PDP (10).  If a power at a certain delay is below the threshold it is said to be noise, and assigned the average noise value.  Now for the i -th iteration of OMP let Λ r (i) represent the variance of the  noise  and  the  leakage  in  the  residue  r.    The  weighting matrix is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that Λ p remains fixed while Λ r (i) decrease each iteration.

A3:    Form  the  sample  PDP  (10)  given N a sets  of  data.    Set α =0.001, and determine signal peaks by (13).  The peaks are taken  as m (0) ,  rather  than  (14).    OMP  iterations  continue regularly thereafter.

eX-OMP:   Consider N a  OMPs  each  operating  independently on their own set of N pseudo-random pilots.  Instead of (14) perform the following:

1. Exchange and combine residues r at  each  iteration  to form a single PDP via incoherent addition.
2. Threshold by (13) to admit potentially multiple columns.

If none are selected, then chose the column corresponding to the largest delay.

Thus a single set of delays for all OMPs is created.  Estimation and subtraction are performed as usual individually.  Note that step  2,  is  similar  to  StOMP  [7].  The  complexity  of  this algorithm is O( N a mNd ).   Least squares can be solved in O( tN ) where t is  the  iteration.    eX-OMP  can  also  be  used  to efficiently solve the channel estimation of a MIMO receiver.

## IV. APPLICATION TO LTE

The  LTE  downlink  is  characterized  by  regularly  spaced pilots, spaced every third subcarrier. Three standard estimation  [ Error!  Reference  source  not  found. ,  pg.  170] algorithms: DFT, linear interpolator (LI), and linear interpolator with MMSE (LI-MMSE) will be compared to the new  algorithms  of  Section  V,  and  the  MMSE  estimator. Introducing  some  notation,  let  P  be  the  set  of  indices  of  the pilot symbols with cardinality N .    Let  D  be the set of indices associated with the data subcarriers.

Given the linear model (1), the DFT approach first estimates the delays via the IDFT )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P ˆ θ is N x1 vector and H P contains the rows of H which correspond to the pilot subcarriers.  The channel estimates at the data symbols are found via the DFT )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where H D  contains  the  rows  of H which  correspond  to  the desired  data  subcarriers.    Note  that  since N &lt; d ,  and  with  P uniformly  spaced,  we  have  upper  limit  on  detectable  delays, before aliasing occurs.  In LTE with 15 KHz subcarriers, and for d =600 and N =200, aliasing occurs when delays are greater than  11 µ S.    This  estimator  provides  no  noise  reduction; however  increasing N increases  the  largest  resolvable  delay, which might otherwise contribute to the effective noise-floor.

The  linear  interpolator  operates  in  the  frequency  domain. The channel of data symbols is simply a linear estimate of the two  adjoining  pilot  symbols.    This  estimator  is  very  easy  to implement, and assumes that the channel is smoothly varying between the pilots.  The best noise gain is a factor of 2 or 3dB, as  each  interpolated  frequency  is  the  linear  weight  of  two pilots.

Another straightforward estimator is LI-MMSE, which takes the noise variance (known perfectly), and the sample covariance  matrix  formed  from  previously  transmitted  pilots. This estimator is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P ˆ C is  low  resolution  with  dimensionality N x N rather than d x d .    Thereafter the LI is used to find the channel at the data  symbols.    Estimation  of P ˆ C is  full  rank,  and  therefore without  any  noise  reduction.    Incoherent  averaging  improves the statistical estimate, but not the SNR.  Therefore, no noise reduction is possible beyond that of the LI.  Clearly, if the true covariance matrix were available, there would be noise reduction.

To evaluate all the algorithms, the normalized mean square error (NMSE),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the expectation is obtained by averaging over many realizations of the channel, is used as a metric. The performance  of  the  standard  algorithms  is  given  in  Figure  4. The  NMSE of DFT approach is the same as the SNR itself. The  linear  interpolator  actually  does  2.5  dB  better  than  the DFT at low SNR, but does exhibit an error floor observed at higher SNRs due the fact that the channel isn't really varying linearly between pilots.  Using MMSE in combination with LI, improves  the  performance  at  low  SNR  as  expected.    The MMSE  performs  about  9  dB  better  than  DFT  due  to  the smaller number of parameters in the model, i.e. (8).

The goal of the Bayesian compressed sensing algorithms, is to be as close as possible to the MMSE  estimator's performance.  The amount of prior data is set at N c=8.  Figure 5 given the performance of the Bayesian estimators along with OMP.    OMP  in  this  case  provides  about  6  dB  of  noise reduction.  Algorithm  A1  estimates  the  parameters  found  by hypothesis testing.  At higher SNRs the NMSE saturates at -17 dB due to its inability to detect weak peaks.  So while A1 is simple, the tradeoff is that it is limited to low operating SNRs. The  new  OMP  based  algorithms  A2  and  A3  provide  some improvement, but eX-OMP's is even better.  Both A2 and A3 take advantage of the readily discernable peaks to give OMP a head  start,  which  produces  the  desired  improvement  over OMP at  low  SNRs.    In  A3 Λ r (i) becomes  smaller  with  each iteration, so the effect of the prior eventually  becomes insignificant.    eX-OMP  is  at  most  less  than  1  dB  from  the MMSE and makes better use of the uncorrelated priors.  Only eX-OMP  continues  to  use  all  the  data  by  subtracting  the known signal to reveal the weaker peaks.  Lasso, not shown, performs on par with OMP.  The true value of c is  used on a realization  basis  as  suggested  in  [13].  Analysis  shows  that Lasso tends to produce models that are not sparse enough.  It is possible to improve Lasso by optimizing over c ,  if  the true channel is also known, but if there is an optimal way to set it a priori is an open question.

The results thus far have been expressed in terms of NMSE, and  to  understand  how  it  affects  rate,  we  use  the  model  of Hassibi  and  Hochwald.    The model requires that the channel estimate be uncorrelated with the error.  Since OMP employs least  squares,  the  error  is  uncorrelated  with  the  estimate.      A lower  bound  on  the  ergodic  capacity  accounting  for  the estimate error is [1, eq. 20]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ρ is  the  SNR, 2 e σ is  the  NMSE, N s  is  the  number  of symbols in a coherence interval, and the expectation is taken over the realizations of θ .  Pilot spacing is adjusted to be every 1/6 subcarrier, for 8 × 8 MIMO.  Figure 6 shows the fraction of capacity  achieved  vs.  SNR  for  the  ideal,  linear-interpolator, and eX-OMP channel estimators.  The linear-interpolator fares much  worse  at N =100  than  for N =200,  making  the  DFT  a better  choice.      Nonetheless  eX-OMP  substantially  improves capacity at the lower SNRs.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4: Performance of standard channel estimation algorithms with N =200 for the SCM channel model.

Figure  5:  Performance  of  Bayesian  estimators  and  OMP. N =200, N a=8, for the ETU channel model.

<!-- image -->

Figure 6: Fraction of capacity vs. SNR for ideal and practical channel estimators with N =100.

<!-- image -->

## IV CONCLUSIONS

A limited number of wideband measurements were examined, and found to be represented by a small number of delays, even for cases of higher delay spread. These channels are therefore ideal  for  the  compressed  sensing  approach.  A new Bayesian compressed sensing algorithm called eX-OMP was developed. The new algorithm relies on additional data.  For the range of SNR  applicable  to  cellular  systems,  numerical  experiments show that only 8 additional sets of pilots are sufficient to yield performance of the MMSE estimator, which optimally trades off  channel-tracking  and noise-reduction.  eX-OMP performs better than simple estimators such as the linear-interpolator or moving-average  that  incorporate  a  fixed  trade-off  between noise and channel tracking capability.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We  would  like  to  thank  Reinaldo  Valenzuela  and  Sivarama Venkatesan for discussions on channel modeling and performance evaluation.

## REFERENCES

1. B. Hassibi and B. M. Hochwald, 'How much training is needed in multiple-antenna wireless links', IEEE Trans. Information Theor y, vol. 49, no. 4, April 2003.
2. T. Marzetta, 'How  much  training is required for multiuser MIMO,' 2006.
3. E. Candes and M. Wakin, 'An introduction to compressive  sampling,' IEEE  Communications  Mag ., 2008.
4. N.  Jindal,  A.  Lozano,  T.  L.  Marzetta,  'What  is  the value  of  joint  processing  of  pilots  and  data  in  block fading channels?,' Proc. Of ISIT , July 3, 2009.
5. R. Tibshirani, 'Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso,' J. Royal Statistical Society, Vol. 58. No. 1, pp. 267-288, 1996.
6. J. Tropp and A. Gilbert, 'Signal recovery from random measurements via orthogonal matching pursuit ,' IEEE Trans. On Info. Theory , Dec. 2007.
7. D.  L.  Donoho,  Y.  Tsaid,  I.  Drori,  and  J.-L.  Starck, 'Sparse  solution  of  underdetermined  linear  equations by  stagewise  Orthogonal  Matching  Pursuit  (StOMP),' 2007.
8. I.  Esnaola,  R.  Carrillo,  J.  Garcia-Frias,  and  K.  E. Barner,  'Orthogonal  matching  pursuit  based  recovery for  correlated  sources  with  partially  disjoint  subsets,' Proc of CISS , 2010.
9. E.  Masry,  'Random sampling of deterministic signals: statistical analysis of Fourier transform estimates,' IEEE Trans. On Sig. Proc ., Vol. 54, No. 5, May 2006.
10. A.  Tarczynski,  'Spectrum  estimation  of  nonuniformly sampled signals,' Proc. of Int. Conf. on DSP 2002 .
11. S.  Kay,  Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Estimation Theory, Prentice Hall, 1993.
12. A.  Molisch,  et.  al.,  'A  Wideband  Spatial  Channel Model for System-Wide Simulations,' IEEE Trans. On Veh. Tech ., March 2007.
13. E.  Larsson  and  Y.  Selen,  'Linear  regression  with  a sparse  parameter  vector,' IEEE Trans. On Sig. Proc. , Vol. 55, No. 2, Feb 2007.
14. A. Papoulis, Probability Random Variables and Stochastic Processes. Mc Graw Hill, 1991, pg. 267.
15. J.  Ling  and  U.  Tureli,  'Bayesian  link  margins  for opportunistic downlink packet systems,' IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , Dec. 2008.
16. J. Ling, D. Chizhik, D. Samarjia, R. Valenzuela, 'Peer to  peer  MIMO  measurements  in  a  rural  area,' IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , Sept. 2007.
17. G. Taubock and F. Hlawatsch, 'A compressed sensing technique  for  OFDM  channel  estimation  in  mobile environments: exploiting channel sparsity for reducing pilots," Proc of ICASSP , April 2008.
18. S. F. Cotter and B. D. Rao, "Sparse channel estimation via  matching pursuit with application to equalization," IEEE Trans. on Communications , vol.50, no.3, pp.374377, March 2002.
19. P.  Maechler,  P.  Greisen,  B.  Sporrer,  S.  Steiner,  N. Felber, A. Burg, 'Implementation of greedy algorithms for LTE sparse channel estimation," ASILOMAR, Nov. 2010.
20. 3GPP Technical Specification 36.101, 'User equipment radio transmission and reception', www.3gpp.org.