*

## Range Description for an Attenuated Conical Radon Transform with Fixed Central Axis and Opening Angle

Gihyeon Jeon *

School of Mathematics, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 41566, Republic of Korea

* Corresponding author: rydbr6709@knu.ac.kr

## Abstract

The conical Radon transform is an integral transform that maps a given function f to its integral over a conical surface. In this study, we invesgate the conical Radon transform with a fixed central axis and opening angle, considering the attenuation of radiation within the transform. Specifically, we explore the attenuated conical Radon transform. In this paper, we provide the range conditions for the attenuated conical Radon transform and its auxiliary transform. Range description of an operator is an important topic in mathematics, and it is useful for understanding the transform, completing incomplete data, improving reconstuction algorithm, correcting measurement error. The range conditions of attenuated conical Radon transforms are given in terms of the hyperbolic differential operator.

Keywords: Radon transform, Cone transform, Range description, Compton camera

## 1 Introduction

The conical Radon transform is an integral transform that assigns to a function f on R 3 its surface integral over a cone. Interest in this transform has increased significantly since the introduction of the Compton camera [1]. The Compton camera was initially devised for single-photon emission computed tomography. However, it has been applied in various fields, including astronomy, singlescattering optical tomography, and homeland security [2].

Studies on the Compton cameras and various conical Radon transforms are presented in [3-17]. However, most of these studies do not consider radiation attenuation, a crucial factor in image reconstruction. Neglecting the attenuation effect leads to inaccurate image reconstruction [18]. We thus consider the attenuated conical Radon transform, which is defined as follows: For µ &gt; 0 and fixed angle ψ ∈ (0 , π/ 2), the attenuated conical Radon transform C µ f of f ∈ C ∞ c ( R n × R ) is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( u , v ) = ( u 1 , . . . , u n , v ) ∈ R n × R and the variable is changed by r cos ψ ≡ z .

More research is needed on the attenuated conical Radon transform. M. Halrmeire et al. proposed the attenuated V-line transform, a two-dimensional variant of the attenuated conical Radon transform, and a reconstruction algorithm using circular detectors [18]. R. Gouia-Zarrad and S. Moon investigated the inversion formula for the n -dimensional attenuated conical Radon transform with a fixed opening angle and provided numerical results [19]. G. Jeon and S. Moon studied the inversion formula of the attenuated conical Radon transform with a fixed opening angle constucted using singular value decomposition [20]. The generalization of the attenuated conical Radon transform has been further investigated in [21, 22]. This study describes the range of the attenuated conical Radon transform and its auxiliary transform. The range conditions are expressed in terms of the hyperbolic differential operator.

The range of tomographic transforms, such as the Radon transform, is essential in tomographic imaging. Understanding the range of these transforms is crucial, as it provides significant insight into the measurement data and the underlying functions being reconstructed. Information about the range of tomographic transforms is useful for several reasons: it aids in comprehending the transforms themselves, completing incomplete data, improving reconstruction algorithms, and correcting measurement errors [23,24]. There have been various studies on the range of different transforms. G. Ambartsoumian studied the range of the two-dimensional circular Radon transform [25]. M. Agranovsky et al. provided range conditions for the spherical mean Radon transform [23]. A. Katsevich and R. Krylov presented inversion formulas and range conditions for the broken ray transform [26]. W. Baines studied the range of conical Radon transform [17], and we apply his ideas to the attenuated conical Radon transform.

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In the next subsection, we present definitions, notations, and lemmas. Section 2 outlines the main results regarding the range conditions for the operators C µ . Detailed proofs of these results are provided in Section 3.

## 1.1 Preliminary

The auxiliary operator A µ , analogous to C µ , is useful for characterizing the range of C µ . The operator A µ on C ∞ c ( R n × R ) is defined similarly as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 1: A cone C ( u , v ) of integration for n = 2

<!-- image -->

In the definition of A µ , the exponent of z is one less than that in C µ . The Fourier transform of a function f ∈ C c ( R n ) is denoted by

Note that a bounded function g can be considered a tempered distribution, and its Fourier transform exists. In addition, if smooth function g can be considered as a tempered distribution, then so is g ′ , and the Fourier transform of g ′ exists because for Schwartz function φ :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Linear differential operator L , defined as follows, is plays a significant role in describing the range of C µ and A µ :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, ∆ x is Laplacian with respect to x . Since ∂ j f ( ξ ) = i ξ j f ( ξ ), we have

where ( ξ , σ ) is the frequency domain variable corresponding to ( x , z ).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now introduce Lemma needed to prove main Theorems. The following Lemma is about the Fourier transform of two operators, C µ and A µ .

Lemma 1. For µ &gt; 0 and ( ξ , σ ) ∈ R n × R , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof of Lemma is given in Appendix.

## 2 Main Results

We now present the main results of this study. A necessary and sufficient condition for g ∈ C ∞ ( R n +1 ) is that L k g ( k ∈ N ) has compact support. The range conditions for the operators C µ are given in the following Theorems.

Theorem 1. Let n = 2 k -1 be odd (i.e., x ∈ R 2 k -1 ). A function g ∈ C ∞ ( R 2 k -1 × R ) is in the range of C µ on C ∞ c ( R 2 k -1 × R ) if and only if the following conditions are satisfied:

(i) L k g ( x, z ) has compact support.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the specific case where n is even, the operator A µ is used to demonstrate the range conditions of C µ .

Theorem 2. Let n = 2 k be even (i.e., x ∈ R 2 k ). A function g ∈ C ∞ ( R 2 k × R ) is in the range of C µ on C ∞ c ( R 2 k × R ) if and only if the following conditions are satisfied:

(i) L 2 k A µ g ( x, z ) has compact support.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Theorems regarding range conditions for A µ are analogous to those for C µ but are more straightforward, as shown in the following.

Theorem 3. Let n = 2 k -1 be odd (i.e., x ∈ R 2 k -1 ). For a function g ∈ C ∞ ( R 2 k -1 × R ) , g is in the range of A µ on C ∞ c ( R 2 k -1 × R ) if and only if L k -1 g has compact support.

In the specific case where n is odd, the range conditions of A µ are related to L 2 k -1 A µ g , similar to Theorem 2.

Theorem 4. Let n = 2 k be odd (i.e., x ∈ R 2 k ). For a function g ∈ C ∞ ( R 2 k × R ) , g is in the range of A µ on C ∞ c ( R 2 k × R ) if and only if L 2 k -1 A µ g has compact support.

Proofs are provided in the next section.

## 3 Proofs of our results

This section provides detailed proofs of the Theorems presented in Section 2.

## 3.1 Proof of Theorem 1

For f ∈ C ∞ c ( R 2 k -1 × R ), suppose g = C µ f . By definition of C µ , g is smooth. Since f has compact support, g is bounded and the Fourier transform of L k g is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

yielding

or equivalently

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since f has compact support, so is L k g ( x , z ). Besides, we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Conversely, suppose g ∈ C ∞ satisfies conditions (i) and (ii) , f can be defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since g is smooth, so is f . Additionally, f has compact support because g satisfies conditions (i) and (ii) . Multiplying both sides by -e µ cos ψ z , we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Differentiating this expression with respect to z yields:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking the Fourier transform, we get:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, the Fourier transform of C µ f is as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3.2 Proof of Theorem 2

Proofs of Theorems 2 and 1 are similar. For f ∈ C ∞ c ( R 2 k × R ), suppose g = C µ f . Since f has compact support, g is bounded, and the Fourier transform of L 2 k A µ g is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

yielding

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

or equivalently

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since f has compact support, so is L k A µ g . Besides, we find:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Conversely, suppose g ∈ C ∞ satisfies conditions (i) and (ii) , f can be defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since g is smooth, so is f . Additionally, f has compact support because g satisfies conditions (i) and (ii) . Multiplying both sides by -e -µ cos ψ z , we get:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and differentiating with respect to z , we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Taking the Fourier transform with respect to ( x , z ) yields:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, the Fourier transform of C µ f is as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## ̂ 3.3 Proof of Theorem 3

The proof of Theorem 3 is more straightforward than that of Theorems 1 and 2. For f ∈ C ∞ c ( R 2 k -1 × R ), suppose g = A µ f . By definition of A µ , g is smooth. Since f has compact support, g is bounded, and the Fourier transform of L k -1 g is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

k

-

1

f

(

ξ

, σ

)

.

Conversely, suppose L k -1 g has compact support. Let's define f as

= β 2 ̂ Hence, we obtain L k -1 g = β 2 k -1 f , which implies that L k -1 g has compact support.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since g is smooth, so is f . Additionally, f has compact support, because L k -1 g has compact support. Furthermore, we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, the Fourier transform of A µ f is as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to the proof of Theorem 3, for f ∈ C ∞ c ( R 2 k × R ) suppose g = A µ f . By definition of A µ , g is smooth. Since f has compact support, g is bounded and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, we obtain L 2 k -1 A µ g = ( β 2 k ) 2 f , which implies that L 2 k -1 A µ g has compact support. Conversely, suppose L 2 k -1 A µ g has compact support; f can be defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since g is smooth, so is f . In addition, f has compact support because L k g has compact support. Furthermore, we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the Fourier transform of A µ f is as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4 Conclusion

In this paper, we studied the range conditions for the operators C µ and A µ . We demonstrated that differential operator L is vital in describing the range conditions for C µ and A µ . Additionally, we showed that the range conditions for C µ and A µ vary depending on the dimension of the domain. Our results contribute significantly to the understanding of the attenuated conical Radon transforms. Furthermore, in a future study, we plan to address the inversion and range description of generalized attenuated conical Radon transforms.

## Acknowledgment

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF-2022R1C1C1003464 and RS-2023-00217116). Professor Sunghwan Moon provided valuable ideas and comments.

## Appendix

In this Appendix, we provide the proof of Lemma 1. The following identity is useful for the proof [27, p198]:

## Proof of Lemma 1

According to [19], we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where J ν is the Bessel function of the first kind of order ν . The integral of the above equation is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in the second line, we use the following identity [27, p198]: For Re a &gt; 0 and Re ν &gt; -1,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof for A µ f is similar. The Fourier transform of A µ f is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in the last line, we use identity (1). Moreover, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in the second line, we use the following identity [28, p29]: For Re a &gt; 0 and Re ν &gt; -1 2 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, the Fourier transform of A µ f is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## References

- [1] Manbir Singh. An electronically collimated gamma camera for single photon emission computed tomography. part i: Theoretical considerations and design criteria. Medical physics , 10(4):421427, 1983.
- [2] Fatma Terzioglu, Peter Kuchment, and Leonid Kunyansky. Compton camera imaging and the cone transform: a brief overview. Inverse Problems , 34(5):054002, 2018.
- [3] Rim Gouia-Zarrad and Gaik Ambartsoumian. Exact inversion of the conical Radon transform with a fixed opening angle. Inverse Problems , 30(4):045007, 2014.
- [4] Javier Cebeiro, M Morvidone, and MK Nguyen. Back-projection inversion of a conical Radon transform. Inverse Problems in Science and Engineering , 24(2):328-352, 2016.
- [5] Peter Kuchment and Fatma Terzioglu. Three-dimensional image reconstruction from compton camera data. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences , 9(4):1708-1725, 2016.

- [6] Sunghwan Moon. Orthogonal function series formulae for inversion of the conical Radon transform with a fixed central axis. Inverse Problems , 35(12):125007, 2019.
- [7] Sunghwan Moon and Markus Haltmeier. Analytic inversion of a conical Radon transform arising in application of compton cameras on the cylinder. SIAM Journal on imaging sciences , 10(2):535-557, 2017.
- [8] Mai K Nguyen, Tuong T Truong, and Pierre Grangeat. Radon transforms on a class of cones with fixed axis direction. Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General , 38(37):8003, 2005.
- [9] Tuong T Truong, Ma¨ ı Khuong Nguyen, and Habib Zaidi. The mathematical foundations of 3d compton scatter emission imaging. International journal of biomedical imaging , 2007(1):092780, 2007.
- [10] Kiwoon Kwon. An inversion of the conical Radon transform arising in the compton camera with helical movement. Biomedical engineering letters , 9(2):233-243, 2019.
- [11] Chang-Yeol Jung and Sunghwan Moon. Exact inversion of the cone transform arising in an application of a compton camera consisting of line detectors. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences , 9(2):520-536, 2016.
- [12] Fatma Terzioglu. Recovering a function from its integrals over conical surfaces through relations with the Radon transform. Inverse Problems , 39(2):024005, 2023.
- [13] Sunghwan Moon and Markus Haltmeier. The conical Radon transform with vertices on triple line segments. Inverse Problems , 36(11):115005, 2020.
- [14] Javier Cebeiro and Marcela Morvidone. SVD inversion for the bi-dimensional conical Radon transform. In Journal of Physics: Conference Series , volume 477, page 012022. IOP Publishing, 2013.
- [15] Voichit ¸a Maxim, Mirela Frande¸ s, and R´ emy Prost. Analytical inversion of the Compton transform using the full set of available projections. Inverse Problems , 25(9):095001, 2009.
- [16] Victor Palamodov. Reconstruction from cone integral transforms. Inverse Problems , 33(10):104001, 2017.
- [17] Weston Baines. Range description of a conical Radon transform. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11212 , 2021.
- [18] Markus Haltmeier, Sunghwan Moon, and Daniela Schiefeneder. Inversion of the attenuated v-line transform with vertices on the circle. IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging , 3(4):853-863, 2017.
- [19] Rim Gouia-Zarrad and Sunghwan Moon. Inversion of the attenuated conical Radon transform with a fixed opening angle. Mathematical Methods in the Applied Sciences , 41(18):8423-8431, 2018.
- [20] Gihyeon Jeon and Sunghwan Moon. Singular value decomposition of the attenuated conical Radon transform with a fixed central axis and opening angle. Integral Transforms and Special Functions , 32(10):812-822, 2021.

- [21] Markus Haltmeier and Daniela Schiefeneder. Variational regularization of the weighted conical Radon transform. Inverse problems , 34(12):124009, 2018.
- [22] Nguyen Ngoc Duy. Analysis of the weighted conical Radon transform. Journal of Physics Communications , 8(3):035004, 2024.
- [23] Mark Agranovsky, Peter Kuchment, and Eric Todd Quinto. Range descriptions for the spherical mean Radon transform. Journal of Functional Analysis , 248(2):344-386, 2007.
- [24] Peter Kuchment. The Radon transform and medical imaging . SIAM, 2013.
- [25] Gaik Ambartsoumian and Peter Kuchment. A range description for the planar circular Radon transform. SIAM journal on mathematical analysis , 38(2):681-692, 2006.
- [26] Alexander Katsevich and Roman Krylov. Broken ray transform: inversion and a range condition. Inverse Problems , 29(7):075008, 2013.
- [27] Frank Natterer. The mathematics of computerized tomography . SIAM, 2001.
- [28] Harry Bateman, Arthur Erd´ elyi, Wilhelm Magnus, and Fritz Oberhettinger. Tables of integral transforms , volume 1. McGraw-Hill New York, 1954.