## Complex Analysis of Channel Polarization on Discrete BMS Channels

Dongxiao Xu, Moritz Wiese, Holger Boche

Chair of Theoretical Information Technology Technical University of Munich

Munich, Germany

Emails: {dongxiao.xu, wiese, boche}@tum.de

## Abstract

We develop component evolution (CE), a framework based on complex function theory for finite-blocklength channel polarization on discrete binary-input memoryless output-symmetric (BMS) channels. In this view, the Bhattacharyya parameter is treated as a real-valued instance of a broader class of complex-valued channel functionals. CE systematically derives analytic expressions for the Bhattacharyya parameters of the bit-channels of a given discrete BMS channel at arbitrary polarization levels. CE also enables structural analysis, providing new evidence of extremality of the binary erasure channel (BEC) and binary symmetric channel (BSC), and revealing new channel-dependent recursions for a class of BSC bit-channels.

## Index Terms

Polar codes, channel polarization, code construction, complex analysis, Mellin transform, check-domain, variable-domain

## I. INTRODUCTION

Polar code construction for a given binary-input discrete memoryless channel (B-DMC) W was formulated in [1, Sec. IX] as a decision problem: given the blocklength N ≜ 2 k at polarization level k , an index i ∈ [ N ] , and a threshold γ ∈ [0 , 1] , determine whether i ∈ A γ , where A γ ≜ { i ∈ [ N ] : Z ( W ( i ) N ) &lt; γ } and Z ( W ( i ) N ) denotes the Bhattacharyya parameter of the bitchannel W ( i ) N . This problem can be formulated via density evolution (DE) [2], [3]. While exact for the binary erasure channel (BEC), DE becomes intractable for a rigorous mathematical analysis for general binary-input memoryless output-symmetric (BMS) channels, including the binary symmetric channel (BSC). Tal and Vardy's degrading and upgrading quantizations [4] enable efficient construction with provable bounds, while practical methods such as the Gaussian approximation [5], [6] and the partial-order [7]-[9] further reduce complexity. However, despite its importance for code construction, the structure of A γ remains poorly understood beyond degradation relations [10], [11]. In the infinite-blocklength limit, polar codes exhibit a fractal-like structure [12], but it remains unclear how these asymptotic properties translate to finite-length codes.

This motivates us to investigate the deterministic mechanism of channel polarization on discrete BMS channels at finite blocklength via complex analysis, in contrast to the martingale-based perspective from measure theory. From this perspective, channel polarization is essentially the evolution of entire functions on variable- and check-domains; boundary cases like the BEC arise only as limiting instances and are not representative of the general behavior. Viewing the Bhattacharyya parameter as a realvalued instance of a broader class of complex-valued channel functionals, we introduce a framework of component evolution (CE). CE models channel polarization as a complex dynamic system, offers a frequency-domain viewpoint complementary to DE, and provides a systematic procedure for deriving analytic expressions of Z ( W ( i ) N ) for every i ∈ [ N ] and a given discrete BMS channel W . Although the number of additive terms in Z ( W ( i ) N ) grows exponentially with polarization level k , these expressions are derived deterministically, and can be pre-evaluated and stored as lookup tables for classes of discrete BMS channels.

More importantly, CE is not only a machinery for deriving Z ( W ( i ) N ) , but also a framework for structural analysis, providing new evidence of extremality [13], [14] of the BEC and BSC through the lens of complex analysis, revealing new channeldependent recursions (e.g., for a class of BSC bit-channels)-thereby serving as both a symbolic derivation tool and a unifying analytical framework for analyzing polarization phenomenon.

## II. PRELIMINARIES AND NOTATION

Throughout, the letter a , a , a and | a | denote L -, G -, D - and | D | -density [14], respectively. Let ¯ x ≜ 1 -x , ∀ x ∈ [0 , 1] . The complex conjugate of z ∈ C is denoted by z ∗ . We consider W BEC ( ε ) with erasure ε ∈ (0 , 1) and W BSC ( p ) with crossover p ∈ (0 , 1 / 2) , and define ∆ ≜ log( p/ ¯ p ) &lt; 0 , C ≜ p ¯ p , M i ≜ (1 -2 p ) i , S i ≜ ¯ p i + p i , and D i ≜ ¯ p i -p i with i ∈ Z &gt; 0 . Define A s ≜ A ( s ) ≜ ¯ p 1 -s p s , B s ≜ B ( s ) ≜ p 1 -s ¯ p s , ∀ s ∈ C . It follows that: i ) C = A s B s ; ii ) B s = A 1 -s .

Fig. 1: Relations between the check-domain and variable -domain transforms on their SOAs and the corresponding entire entities in D - and | D | -densities.

<!-- image -->

## A. Deterministic DE view

Let b 1 . . . b k denote the k -bit binary expansion of i -1 for i ∈ [ N ] , i.e., ( i -1) 10 = ( b 1 . . . b k ) 2 , and let W b 1 ,...,b k ≜ W ( i ) N , then W ( i ) N can be obtained by repeating the following channel operations [11, Section 2.3], i.e.,

with the initial condition

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the original work of Arıkan [1, Section IV], such recursive relationship is regarded as a random tree process { K m ( ξ ) = W ξ 1 ...ξ m ; m ≥ 0 } where the bit-channel as random variable K m is driven by a sequence of i.i.d. equiprobable Bernoulli random variables { B m ∈ { 0 , 1 } ; m ≥ 0 } . Equivalently, conditioned on B 1 = b 1 , . . . , B m = b m , the bit-channel W b 1 ,...,b m up to the current level m is a realization of random variable W ξ 1 ...ξ m as outcome of the Bernoulli experiments. The apparent "randomness" of K m therefore arises only from uniformly sampling a path through the deterministic binary tree of bit-channels; in fact, the nature of each bit-channels W b 1 ,...,b m is completely determined by: i ) the initial channel W ; and ii ) the ordered application of the boxast - and varoast -convolutions. In this regard, for a given discrete BMS channel W , the solution of the Polar code construction defined in [1, Sec. IX] is unique once the threshold γ and blocklength N are fixed.

We assign operational meaning to 0 and 1 in terms of the the boxast - and varoast -convolution, respectively, i.e., b m ∈ { 0 , 1 } ≡ { boxast , varoast } , and also adopt the shorthand, e.g., W boxast W = W boxast . For instance, since (6 -1) 10 = (101) 2 , we write W (6) 8 as W 101 ≡ W ⊛ boxast ⊛ ≜ W ⊛ ⊛ boxast = ( W ⊛ boxast ) ⊛ ( W ⊛ boxast ) . Such an expression is clean and convenient to read: at level m = 3 , the bit-channel W ⊛ boxast ⊛ is obtained by conducting a selfvaroast -convolution on its preceding bit-channel W ⊛ boxast . Moreover, we write W (2) 8 = W 001 = W boxast 2 ⊛ which compactly denotes two successive selfboxast -convolutions followed by one selfvaroast -convolution.

## B. Channel models and densities

In this paper, we consider discrete BMS channels, although a few definitions and results can be extended to the nonsymmetric case. A discrete BMS channel has binary input alphabet X = {± 1 } , finite output alphabet Y , and transition probabilities p Y | X ( y | x ) , for which there exists a permutation π 1 on Y such that π -1 1 = π 1 and p Y | X ( y | 1) = p Y | X ( π 1 ( y ) | -1) for all y ∈ Y . It can be equivalently described via induced densities. One is the L -distribution [14, p.177] of the random variable (r.v.) L = l ( Y ) ≜ log p Y | X ( Y | 1) p Y | X ( Y |-1) conditioned on X = 1 . A related r.v. is D ≜ tanh ( L/ 2) whose distribution conditioned on X = 1 is called the D -distribution [14, p.180]. Another r.v. as tuple is ( H ( L ) , ln coth( | L | / 2)) whose distribution conditioned on X = 1 is called the G -distribution [14, p.182], where H ( · ) ∈ {± 1 } denotes the hard-decision function [14, (4.18)]. Their absolute values induce distributions too, e.g., the absolute value | D | induces the | D | -distribution. Accordingly, we denote the associated densities by the L -density a , D -density a , G -density a , | D | -density | a | . In this paper, we primarily work with the D - and | D | -densities, and the Bhattacharyya parameter Z ( W ( i ) N ) is written interchangeably as B ( a b 1 ...b k ) or B ( | a b 1 ...b k | ) .

Theorem II.1. [14, Theorem 4.27] The L -, D - and G -distributions corresponding to a BMS channel are symmetric.

Under symmetry, any density among ( L, D, G ) is completely determined by its absolute-value-induced density, e.g., the D -density is determined by the corresponding | D | -density [14, p.180].

Lemma II.2 ( | D | -density) . The | D | -density of a discrete BMS channel admits the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α i ∈ [0 , 1] , ∑ n i =0 α i = 1 and 0 ≡ z 0 &lt; z 1 &lt; . . . &lt; z n ≡ 1 , while δ ( · ) is the (Dirac) delta function and n ∈ Z &gt; 0 . Lemma II.3 ( D -density) . The D -density of a B-DMC admits the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where β j ∈ [0 , 1] , ∑ n j = -n β j = 1 , -1 ≡ z -n &lt; . . . &lt; 0 ≡ z 0 &lt; . . . &lt; z n ≡ 1 , and z -j = -z j for j = -n, . . . , n ∈ Z &gt; 0 . The relation of Dirac masses between the D - and | D | -density is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Under symmetry, the D -density is determined by the corresponding | D | -density, i.e., | a | ( z ) = a ( z )+ a ( -z ) , ∀ z ∈ (0 , 1] and | a | (0) = a (0) . For a symmetric a , a ( z ) / a ( -z ) = (1 + z ) / (1 -z ) , ∀ z ∈ [0 , 1] , cf. [14, (4.13)]. Combining both, we have a ( ± z ) = (1 ± z ) / 2 · | a | ( z ) , ∀ z ∈ (0 , 1] , thus, a (1) = | a | (1) and a ( -1) = 0 . By Lemma II.2, we obtain β ± i = (1 ± z i ) / 2 · α i for i = 1 , . . . , n -1 , while β -n = 0 , β 0 = α 0 , and β n = α n .

## C. Variable- and check-domain transforms

This subsection unifies the variable- and check-domain transforms in D - and | D | -densities and characterizes their strips of analyticity (SOA). The variable- resp. check-domain transforms correspond to a bilateral resp. unilateral Laplace transform in the L - resp. G -densities, cf. Definitions II.1 and II.2. These two definitions, together with Lemma II.4 and II.5 do not require symmetry; this is the only exception in this paper. A summary is provided in Table I. To avoid ambiguity, the term Fourier transform refers to its standard definition. Throughout the remainder of this paper, let X ∼ a , Z ≜ tanh( X/ 2) ∼ a , and ( S, Y ) ∼ a where S ≜ (1 -H ( X )) / 2 ∈ { 0 , 1 } under the standard mapping [14, p.175], and Y ≜ ln coth( | X | / 2) ; moreover, | Z | = tanh( | X | / 2) ∼ | a | .

TABLE I: Comparison of variable- and check-domain transforms across L -, D -, | D | -, and G -densities.

| Variable-domain transform  Check-domain transform (  µ  = 0  )  L  -density  a  F  a  (  s  )  -  D  -density  a  F  a  (  s  )  G  a  (0  , ν  )  &#124;  D  &#124;  -density  &#124;  a  &#124;  F  &#124;  a  &#124;  (  s  )  G  &#124;  a  &#124;  (0  , ν  )  G  -density  a  -  G  a  (0  , ν  )  SOA  ℜ  s  ∈  (0  ,  1)  ℜ  ν &gt;  0   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Definition II.1 (Variable-domain transform [14, Definition 4.52]) . The variable-domain transform of a is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma II.4. Let a be the D -density corresponding to a , then F a ( s ) = ∫ 1 -1 a ( z ) ( 1 -z 1+ z ) s d z ≜ F a ( s ) . Definition II.2 (Check-domain transform [14, Definition 4.53]) . The check-domain transform of a is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for µ ∈ { 0 , i π } and ν ∈ C where the integral exists.

Remark. The expression in the D -density is more convenient than that in the G -density, since: i ) tanh( · ) preserves the sign, i.e., H ( X ) = H ( Z ) ; ii ) and by its oddness, e -Y = | Z | . Hence, G a (0 , ν ) is independent of H ( · ) , which differs from the D -k -moment [14, Definition 4.57] with G a (0 , k ) = D k ( a ) iff k is even.

Lemma II.5. Let a be the D -density corresponding to a , then G a ( µ, ν ) = ∫ 1 -1 a ( z ) exp ( -µ 1 -H ( z ) 2 ) | z | ν d z ≜ G a ( µ, ν ) . In particular, G a (0 , ν ) = ∫ 1 -1 a ( z ) | z | ν d z .

We next present the variable-domain transforms in the D - and | D | -density within the SOA, i.e., s ∈ C with real part ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) .

Lemma II.6. F a ( s ) is holomorphic for every ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) , and by symmetry, F a ( s ) = F a (1 -s ) , cf. [14, p.199].

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-A.

for s ∈ C where the integral exists.

Corollary II.6.1. Let | a | be the | D | -density corresponding to a , then F a ( s ) = ∫ 1 0 | a | ( z ) ( 1 -z 2 ( 1+ z 1 -z ) s + 1+ z 2 ( 1 -z 1+ z ) s ) d z ≜ F | a | ( s ) , for every ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) .

Corollary II.6.2. The Bhattacharyya parameter is obtained by letting s = 1 / 2 , cf. [14, Proof of Lemma 4.64], i.e., B ( | a | ) = F | a | (1 / 2) = ∫ 1 0 | a | ( z ) √ 1 -z 2 d z .

We now extend this analysis to the check-domain transform originally defined in the G -density, relating it back to the D -and | D | -densities within the SOA, i.e., ν ∈ C with real part ℜ ν &gt; 0 .

Lemma II.7. G a (0 , ν ) is holomorphic for every ℜ ν &gt; 0 , and by symmetry, G a (i π, ν ) = G a (0 , ν +1) , cf. [14, p.200].

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma II.7 shows that, under symmetry, evaluating at µ = i π shifts the ν -argument of G a (0 , ν ) by 1 . Hence, we restrict our attention to µ = 0 in the sequel.

Corollary II.7.1. Let | a | be the | D | -density corresponding to a , then G a (0 , ν ) = ∫ 1 0 | a | ( z ) z ν d z ≜ G | a | (0 , ν ) , for every ℜ ν &gt; 0 .

## III. COMPONENT EVOLUTION UNDER THE boxast -CONVOLUTION

This section considers the | D | -density on the check-domain. We introduce the entire counterpart G | a | ( ν ) of G | a | (0 , ν ) , relate it to G | a | (0 , ν ) and boundary atoms, and analyze the effect of the check-domain boxast -convolution on those components.

## Lemma III.1. Define

Its Mellin transform [15, (3.1.1)]

is an entire function on C .

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-C.

Corollary III.1.1. G | a | (0 , ν ) = G | a | ( ν ) + α 0 · 0 ν + α n , ∀ℜ ν &gt; 0 ; while 1 ≡ G | a | (0 , 0) = G | a | (0) + α 0 + α n .

Remark. Here, 0 ν ≜ lim δ → 0 + δ ν defines the Hausdorff dimension function [16, Definition 1.2], i.e., 0 ν = 0 for ℜ ν &gt; 0 and 0 ν = 1 for ν = 0 . Hence, G | a | (0 , ν ) = G | a | ( ν ) + α n , ∀ℜ ν &gt; 0 ; see blue arrows in Fig. 1.

Next, we characterize the BEC and BSC via G | a | (0 , ν ) , G | a | ( ν ) and boundary atoms in the | D | -density; see Table II.

TABLE II: Comparison of the BEC and BSC in terms of | a | ( z ) , G | a | (0 , ν ) and G | a | ( ν )

| W  &#124;  a  &#124;  (  z  )  BD  {  α  0  &gt;  0  }  BD  {  α  n  &gt;  0  }  G  &#124;  a  &#124;  (0  , ν  )  ,  ∀ℜ  ν &gt;  0  G  &#124;  a  &#124;  (  ν  )  ,  ∀  ν  ∈  C  W  BEC(  ε  )  εδ  (  z  ) + ¯  εδ  (  z  -  1)  1  1  ¯  ε  0  W  BSC(  p  )  δ  (  z  -  (1  -  2  p  ))  0  0  (1  -  2  p  )  ν  (1  -  2  p  )  ν   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Example III.1 ( W BEC( ε ) in the | D | -density) . | a | ( z ) = εδ ( z ) + ¯ εδ ( z -1) , cf. [14, Example 4.23], i.e., n = 1 , α 0 = ε and α 1 = ¯ ε . G | a | (0 , ν ) = ¯ ε , ∀ℜ ν &gt; 0 . G | a | ( ν ) = 0 , ∀ ν ∈ C .

Example III.2 ( W BSC( p ) in the | D | -density) . | a | ( z ) = δ ( z -(1 -2 p )) , cf. [14, Example 4.24], i.e., n = 2 , α 0 = α 2 = 0 and z 1 = 1 -2 p ∈ (0 , 1) with α 1 = 1 . G | a | (0 , ν ) = G | a | ( ν ) , ∀ℜ ν &gt; 0 . G | a | ( ν ) = (1 -2 p ) ν , ∀ ν ∈ C .

Remark. For the BEC, only the boundary atom at z n ≡ 1 contributes to G | a | (0 , ν ) , whereas for the BSC, which possesses no boundary atoms, G | a | (0 , ν ) is completely determined by the interior contribution G | a | ( ν ) within its SOA.

Excluding atoms at z 0 ≡ 0 and z n ≡ 1 from G | a | ( ν ) may seem inconvenient, but is necessary. Channel polarization in DE is driven by alternating boxast - and varoast -convolutions [11, (2.11)]. The proposed CE-framework aims to exploit the multiplicative properties of the variable- resp. check-domain transform under the varoast - resp. boxast -convolution [14, p.199]. In fact, since polarization only requires self-convolution in each domain, e.g., a boxast = a boxast a in the check-domain [11, (2.9)], such multiplicativity reduces to squaring, e.g., the check-domain transform of a boxast is simply the square of that of a , cf. (9). Thus, the remaining challenge is to draw bilateral conversions between F a ( s ) (or equivalently F | a | ( s ) , cf. Corollary II.6.1) and G a (0 , ν ) (or equivalently G | a | (0 , ν ) , cf. Corollary II.7.1) across the check- and variable-domains. A natural candidate is the Parseval formula for the Mellin transform [15, (3.1.11)] which provides an integral relation between transform pairs and thereby leads to a MellinBarnes integral representation , which can then be evaluated by contour deformation via the residue theorem; see [17, Sec. 4]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for details. However, this approach requires sufficient analyticity of the integrand, which is violated in the presence of endpoint atom.

Indeed, the Dirac mass α 0 at z 0 ≡ 0 in the | D | -density introduces the term α 0 · 0 ν in G | a | (0 , ν ) , cf. Corollary II.7.1. When converting G | a | (0 , ν ) to F | a | ( s ) within its SOA, i.e., ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) via a Mellin-Barnes representation, this term is well defined only for ℜ ν &gt; 0 and does not admit a single-valued analytic continuation to ℜ ν ≤ 0 , thereby obstructing contour deformation across ℜ ν = 0 . To circumvent this issue, we instead work with the entire counterpart G | a | ( ν ) to F | a | ( s ) , and account for its contribution α 0 separately, cf. (36).

Therefore, both boundary atoms at z 0 ≡ 0 and z n ≡ 1 are removed from G | a | ( ν ) (and later from F a ( s ) in Lemma IV.1) and treated separately. As a result, the relation between G | a | (0 , ν ) and G | a | ( ν ) must account for the contributions of the Dirac masses α 0 and α n within the SOA, cf. Corollary III.1.1.

Likewise, the term β n · 0 s in F a ( s ) introduced by the Dirac mass β n at z n ≡ 1 in the D -density, cf. Lemma II.4, would obstruct contour deformation across ℜ s = 0 , when converting F a ( s ) to G a (0 , ν ) within its SOA, i.e., ℜ ν &gt; 0 . Recall from Lemma II.3 that this endpoint corresponds to α n = β n at z n ≡ 1 in the | D | -density. Accordingly, we work with the entire counterpart F a ( s ) of F a ( s ) , and account for its contribution α n separately in the reverse conversion, cf. (40).

Next, we investigate the effect of the boxast -convolution on G | a | (0 , ν ) within its SOA, its entire counterpart G | a | ( ν ) on the whole check-domain ν ∈ C , and Dirac masses of the boundary atoms at z 0 ≡ 0 and z n ≡ 1 in the | D | -density, respectively.

## Lemma III.2. Under the check-domain boxast -convolution,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-D.

Remark. n boxast denotes the number of atoms in the | D | -density after the boxast -convolution. For brevity, we write α boxast n ≡ α boxast n boxast .

Next, we illustrate the effect of boxast -convolutions on these components, using the BEC and BSC as representative examples.

Example III.3 ( W BEC( ε ) under boxast -convolutions) . Under one boxast -convolution, G | a boxast | (0 , ν ) = ¯ ε 2 , G | a boxast | ( ν ) = 0 , α boxast 0 = 2 ε -ε 2 and α boxast 1 = ¯ ε 2 . Thus, a single boxast -convolution maps W BEC( ε ) to another W BEC( ε boxast ) with erasure ε boxast = 1 -¯ ε 2 . Additionally, n boxast = 1 , z boxast 0 ≡ z 0 ≡ 0 , and z boxast 1 ≡ z 1 = 1 , trivially. By induction, we obtain an iteration formula of the erasure ε boxast m of W BEC( ε ) under the m -fold boxast -convolution, i.e., ε boxast ( m +1) = 1 -(¯ ε boxast m ) 2 . Therefore, as m →∞ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that W BEC( ε boxast ) converges double-exponentially in m to a fully erasing channel.

Example III.4 ( W BSC( p ) under boxast -convolutions) . Under one boxast -convolution, G | a boxast | ( ν ) = G 2 | a | ( ν ) = (1 -2 p ) 2 ν , i.e., α boxast 0 = α boxast 2 = 0 . In particular, we have 1 -2 p boxast = (1 -2 p ) 2 = z 2 1 , which implies that one boxast -convolution upon W BSC( p ) results in another W BSC( p boxast ) with crossover p boxast = 2 p ¯ p . Additionally, n boxast = 2 and z boxast 1 = z 2 1 . By induction, we obtain iteration formulae of the crossover p boxast m and z boxast m 1 of W BSC( p boxast m ) under the m -fold boxast -convolution, i.e., p boxast ( m +1) = 2 p boxast m ¯ p boxast m and z boxast ( m +1) 1 = ( z boxast m 1 ) 2 , respectively. Therefore, as m →∞ ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that W BSC( p boxast m ) converges double-exponentially in m to a purely noisy BSC.

## IV. COMPONENT EVOLUTION UNDER THE varoast -CONVOLUTION

This section considers the D -density on the variable-domain. We introduce the entire counterpart F a ,i ( s ) with i ∈ { 1 , 2 } of F a ( s ) , relate them to F a ( s ) and the boundary atoms, and analyze the effect of the variable-domain varoast -convolution on those components. The entity F a ( s ) is based on the new r.v. W ≜ (1 -Z ) / (1 + Z ) = e -X , linking X ∼ a and Z ∼ a , which will be used throughout the remainder of the paper.

## Lemma IV.1. Define

of which the Mellin transform

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where β ± i = (1 ± z i ) / 2 · α i , and w ± i = (1 ∓ z i ) / (1 ± z i ) for every i = 1 , . . . , n -1 , is an entire function on C .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Corollary IV.1.1. f a ( w ) admits the decomposition f a ( w ) = f a , 1 ( w ) + f a , 2 ( w ) with

The Mellin transform of f a ( w ) admits the decomposition F a ( s ) = F a , 1 ( s ) + F a , 2 ( s ) , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with w i ∈ (0 , 1) and w -i ∈ (1 , ∞ ) for every i = 1 , . . . , n -1 . Both F a , 1 ( s ) and F a , 2 ( s ) are entire functions on C .

Corollary IV.1.2.

F

a

,

2

(

s

) =

F

a

,

1

(1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The decomposition of F a ( s ) into F a , 1 ( s ) and F a , 2 ( s ) with symmetry F a , 2 ( s ) = F a , 1 (1 -s ) , cf. Corollary IV.1.2, simplifies the CE description in Theorem VI.1 by reducing the analysis to a single entire function, e.g., F a , 1 ( s ) . In analogy with Lemma III.1, the relation between F a ( s ) and F a ( s ) within the SOA must account for the exclusion of boundary atoms.

Remark. Since β 0 = α 0 , cf. Lemma II.3, and 0 s = 0 , ∀ℜ s &gt; 0 , then F a ( s ) = F a , 1 ( s ) + F a , 2 ( s ) + α 0 , ∀ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) ; see green arrows in Fig. 1.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, we characterize the BEC and BSC via F a ( s ) , F a , 1 ( s ) , F a , 2 ( s ) and boundary atoms in the | D | -density; see Table III.

| W  a  (  z  )  BD  {  β  0  &gt;  0  }  BD  {  β  n  &gt;  0  }  F  a  (  s  )  ,  ∀ℜ  s  ∈  (0  ,  1)  F  a  ,  1  (  s  )  ,  ∀  s  ∈  C  F  a  ,  2  (  s  )  ,  ∀  s  ∈  C  W  BEC(  ε  )  εδ  (  z  ) + ¯  εδ  (  z  -  1)  1  1  ε  0  0  W  BSC(  p  )  pδ  (  z  +(1  -  2  p  )) + ¯  p δ  (  z  -  (1  -  2  p  ))  0  0  F  a  ,  1  (  s  ) +  F  a  ,  2  (  s  )  ¯  p  1  -  s  p  s  p  1  -  s  ¯  p  s   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

TABLE III: Comparison of symmetric channels in terms of a ( z ) , F a ( s ) , F a , 1 ( s ) and F a , 2 ( s )

Example IV.1 ( W BEC( ε ) in the D -density) . a ( z ) = εδ ( z )+¯ εδ ( z -1) . F a ( s ) = β 0 w s 0 + β n w s n = ε · 1 s +¯ ε · 0 s = ε , ∀ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) , while F a , 1 ( s ) = F a , 2 ( s ) = 0 , ∀ s ∈ C .

Example IV.2 ( W BSC( p ) in the D -density) . a ( z ) = p · δ ( z +(1 -2 p )) + ¯ p · δ ( z -(1 -2 p )) . F a ( s ) = F a , 1 ( s ) + F a , 2 ( s ) = ¯ p 1 -s p s + p 1 -s ¯ p s , ∀ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) , while β 0 = β n = 0 . Additionally, B ( a ) = F a (1 / 2) = 2 √ p ¯ p , cf. [14, Proof of Lemma 4.65].

Remark. For the BEC, only the boundary atom at z 0 ≡ 0 contributes to F a ( s ) , whereas for the BSC, which possesses no boundary atoms, F a ( s ) is entirely determined by the interior parts F a , 1 ( s ) and F a , 2 ( s ) within the SOA.

Next, we investigate the effect of the varoast -convolution on these components in analogy with Lemma III.2.

Lemma IV.2. Under the variable-domain varoast -convolution,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where i ∈ { 1 , 2 } , F ψ, 1 ( s ) ≜ ∑ 1 ≤ j&lt;i ≤ n -1 β i β -j ( w i /w j ) s , F ψ, 2 ( s ) ≜ ∑ 1 ≤ i&lt;j ≤ n -1 β i β -j ( w i /w j ) s = F ψ, 1 (1 -s ) , and F ϕ ≜ ∑ n -1 i =1 β i β -i . All functions F a varoast ,i ( s ) , F ψ,i ( s ) , i ∈ { 1 , 2 } , admit analytic continuation to entire functions on C . Proof. Please refer to Section IX-G.

By isolating entire components G | a | ( ν ) and F a ,i ( s ) from G | a | (0 , ν ) and F a ( s ) , we highlight the asymmetry between the boxast - and varoast -convolutions: although each squares the domain transform within its own SOA, cf. (9) and (17), their effects on entire components and boundary atoms are not reciprocal, cf. (10)-(12) and (18)-(20). Under the varoast -convolution, the product F a , 1 ( s ) F a , 2 ( s ) yields additional entire components F ψ,i ( s ) and the DC component F ϕ , cf. Fig. 2, left. The symmetry F ψ, 2 ( s ) = F ψ, 1 (1 -s ) further simplifies the CE description in Theorem VI.2. Next, we show that these three can be obtained solely from F a , 1 ( s ) , evaluated along τ = 1 / 2 + i u via the Fourier transform, cf. Fig. 2, right.

-

s

,

)

s

∀

∈

C

.

Fig. 2: Left panel: Relations among F a ,i ( s ) , F ψ,i ( s ) , i ∈ { 1 , 2 } , with F ϕ . Right panel: Their acquisition via the Fourier transform along τ = 1 / 2 + i u .

<!-- image -->

Corollary IV.2.1. Let ϕ ( s ) ≜ F a , 1 ( s ) F a , 2 ( s ) . Let τ ≜ c +i u ∈ C with any c ∈ R fi xed, then

where the k -index runs over all fi nite ordered pairs ( i, j ) for every i, j = 1 , . . . , n -1 , with A ( c ) ij ≜ β i β -j ( w i /w j ) c ∈ R and ω ij ≜ log( w i /w j ) ∈ R . The Fourier transform of (21) is given as ϕ ( ω ) = 2 π ∑ ( n -1) 2 k =1 A ( c ) k · δ ( ω -ω k ) , from which

where |{ k : ω k = 0 }| = n -1 .

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-H.

Corollary IV.2.2. Let τ = 1 / 2 + i u ∈ C , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where |{ k : ω k &lt; 0 }| = |{ k : ω k &gt; 0 }| = ( n -1)( n -2) / 2 .

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-I.

Remark. Corollary IV.2.1 shows that for any c ∈ R , ˜ ϕ ( u ) is a finite sum of complex exponentials , from which F ϕ can be extracted as the DC component, while Corollary IV.2.2 shows that if c = 1 / 2 , it reduces to a finite sum of cosines with a DC offset , where the number of distinct cosine frequencies in (23) is the cardinality of {| log ( w i /w j ) | : 1 ≤ j &lt; i ≤ n -1 } , i.e., the number of distinct differences of log w 's, which is up to ( n -1)( n -2) / 2 . Moreover, a reduction from the generic upper bounds occurs iff there exist two distinct ordered pairs ( i, j ) = ( i ′ , j ′ ) with ω ij = ω i ′ j ′ &gt; 0 .

## Corollary IV.2.3. Let τ = 1 / 2 + i u ∈ C , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( c ) k and ω k are defined in Corollary IV.2.1.

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-J.

Next, we illustrate the effect of varoast -convolutions on these components, using the BEC and BSC as representative examples.

Example IV.3 ( W BEC( ε ) under varoast -convolutions) . According to Table III, ϕ ( s ) = F a , 1 ( s ) F a , 2 ( s ) = 0 ∀ s ∈ C , thus, F ϕ = F ψ, 1 ( s ) = F ψ, 2 ( s ) = 0 , ∀ s ∈ C . It follows that only α varoast m 0 and α varoast n m change along the m -fold varoast -convolution, while all other components remain zero for every m = 0 , 1 , 2 , . . . , cf. Table IV.

Example IV.4 ( W BSC( p ) under varoast -convolutions) . According to Table III, ϕ ( s ) = F a , 1 ( s ) F a , 2 ( s ) = C is constant in s , thus F ϕ = C and F ψ, 1 ( s ) = F ψ, 2 ( s ) = 0 , ∀ s ∈ C . Define α ≜ ¯ p 1 -c p c and β ≜ p 1 -c ¯ p c for any c ∈ (0 , 1) , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

TABLE IV: Component evolution under the m -fold variable-domain varoast -convolution for the BEC

| m  F  a  varoast  m  ,  1  (  s  )  F  a  varoast  m  ,  2  (  s  )  α  varoast  m  0  α  varoast  n m  n  varoast  m  F  varoast  ϕ m  F  varoast  ψ, m  1  (  s  )  F  varoast  ψ, m  2  (  s  )  0  0  0  ε  ¯  ε  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  ε  2  1  -  ε  2  1  0  0  0  2  0  0  ε  4  1  -  ε  4  1  0  0  0  3  0  0  ε  8  1  -  ε  8  1  0  0  0   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Note that these are merely convenient factorizations for W BSC( p ) , which per se do not depend on the choice of c . Therefore, we have ˜ A ( u ) ≜ A ( τ ) = α e i u ∆ and ˜ B ( u ) ≜ B ( τ ) = β e -i u ∆ . For m = 1 , the component evolution is trivial as given in Table V, where α varoast 0 = 2 C , i.e., a single varoast -convolution does not preserve the BSC class [18]. In what follows, we consider level m = 2 . By definition, ϕ varoast 2 ( τ ) = F a varoast 2 , 1 ( τ ) F a varoast 2 , 2 ( τ ) = C 3 (17 C +4( ˜ A 2 ( u )+ ˜ B 2 ( u ))) = 17 C 4 +4 C 3 ( α 2 e i2 u ∆ + β 2 e -i2 u ∆ ) ≜ ˜ ϕ varoast 2 ( u ) . By applying the Fourier transform, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̂ ϕ varoast 2 ( ω ) = 2 πC 4 (17 δ ( ω ) + 4 δ ( ω -2∆) + 4 δ ( ω +2∆)) , (28) which corresponds to the power spectral density (PSD) of a cosine with a DC offset, cf. Corollary IV.2.2. Therefore, the corresponding amplitudes and frequencies can be identified from (28): A 1 = A 2 = 4 C 4 , ω 1 = -2∆ &lt; 0 , ω 2 = 2∆ &gt; 0 . By substituting these values into (24) and (25) with c = 1 / 2 , we obtain F varoast 2 ψ, 1 ( s ) = 4 C 4 e 2∆( s -c ) = 4 C 3 A 2 ( s ) and F varoast 2 ψ, 2 ( s ) = 4 C 4 e -2∆( s -c ) = 4 C 3 B 2 ( s ) . By repeating the same procedure, we showcase results for m = 3 as follows.

̂ Hence, F varoast 2 ϕ = 1 2 π ̂ ϕ varoast 2 (0) = 17 C 4 . Moreover, if c = 1 / 2 , then α = β = C 1 / 2 , thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As shown in Table V, the m -fold varoast -convolution requires participation of all entire components defined in Lemma IV.2. One observes that a single varoast -convolution does not preserve the BSC class [18], since the DC component F ϕ in (22) contributes to the evolution of α varoast 0 via (19).

TABLE V: Component evolution under the m -fold variable-domain varoast -convolution for the BSC

| m  F  a  varoast  m  ,  1  (  s  )  F  a  varoast  m  ,  2  (  s  )  α  varoast  m  0  α  varoast  n m  n  varoast  m  F  varoast  ϕ m  F  varoast  ψ, m  1  (  s  )  F  varoast  ψ, m  2  (  s  )  0  A  s  B  s  0  0  2  C  0  0  1  A  2  s  B  2  s  2  C  0  2  C  2  0  0  2  A  4  s  +4  CA  2  s  B  4  s  +4  CB  2  s  6  C  2  0  3  17  C  4  4  C  3  A  2  s  4  C  3  B  2  s  3  (29)  (30)  (31)  (31)  6  (33)  (34)  (35)   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

The comparisons of the BEC and BSC in Sections III and IV further illustrate their roles as extremal channels [13] [14, Theorem 4.143]. In contrast to the BEC, the BSC exhibits a more intricate evolution under convolutions.

## V. CONVERSION BETWEEN THE VARIABLE-DOMAIN AND THE CHECK-DOMAIN

This section addresses the conversion between the variable- and check-domain, establishing links between F a ,i ( s ) with i ∈ { 1 , 2 } and G a (0 , ν ) in the D -density, and between G | a | ( ν ) and F | a | ( s ) in the | D | -density, within the SOA ℜ ν &gt; 0 and ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) ; see brown and purple arrows in Fig. 1.

Proposition V.1. Fix ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 2 ˜ F 1 ( a, b ; c ; z ) ≜ 2 F 1 ( a, b ; c ; z ) / Γ( c ) denotes the regularized Gauss hypergeometric function [19, (9.02)].

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-K.

Corollary V.0.1. Let s = 1 / 2 , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. By Corollary II.6.2, B ( | a | ) = F | a | (1 / 2) . Let s = 1 / 2 , it follows from (37) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proposition V.2. Fix ℜ ν &gt; 0 , then

with Γ(3 / 2) = √ π/ 2 . Moreover, for s = 1 / 2 , we have 1 -s = s , thus the two coefficients coincide and their sum simplifies to D ( t ) = 2 · A (1 / 2 , t ) = √ π/ 2 · 2 ˜ F 1 ( -1 / 2 , 3 / 2; 3 / 2 -t ; 1 / 2) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-L.

## VI. COMPONENT EVOLUTION-BASED CHANNEL POLARIZATION

This section establishes conversions between F a , 1 ( s ) and G | a | ( ν ) over the entire complex planes and across the D - and | D | -densities; see gray arrows in Fig. 1, and proposes the CE-based channel polarization of a given discrete BMS channel.

Theorem VI.1. Let ∀ s, ν ∈ C , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( s, t ) resp. G ( ν, t ) defined in Proposition V.1 resp. V.2 are entire functions on s ∈ C resp. on ν ∈ C for t ∈ Z ≥ 0 .

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-M.

Remark. Rather than focusing on the check- and variable transforms, Theorem VI.1 extends Proposition V.1 and V.2 to the entire complex planes and characterizes the relations between their entire counterparts: it derives F a , 1 ( s ) from infinitely many moments of G | a | ( ν ) and vice versa. However, this representation does not provide a numerically stable method for recovering one from the other via the alternating series. Instead, we demonstrate in Example VI.1 resp. VI.2 that G | a | ( ν ) resp. F a , 1 ( s ) can be identified via

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

respectively, provided that the expression of F a , 1 ( s ) resp. G | a | ( ν ) is available without evaluating G ( ν, t ) resp. A ( s, t ) , ∀ t ∈ Z ≥ 0 . Such conversion via identification is illustrated in Fig. 3. In what follows, we consider several bit-channels of the BSC to illustrate the conversion using this approach.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Example VI.1 ( W BSC( p ) : from F a varoast 2 , 1 ( s ) to G | a varoast 2 | ( ν ) ) . According to Table V, for m = 2 and t ∈ Z ≥ 0 , we have F a varoast 2 , 1 ( t ) = A 4 ( t ) + 4 CA 2 ( t ) and by symmetry F a varoast 2 , 2 ( -t ) = B 4 ( -t ) + 4 CB 2 ( -t ) = F a varoast 2 , 1 ( t +1) = A 4 ( t +1) + 4 CA 2 ( t +1) . By definition of A ( s ) , B ( s ) , C and ∆ &lt; 0 in Section II, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- image -->

|

|

Fig. 3: Left panel: Conversion from F a , 1 ( s ) to G | a | ( ν ) . Right panel: Conversion from G | a | ( ν ) to F a , 1 ( s ) .

from which identifying with (44) and (127) it follows that n varoast 2 = 3 , α varoast 2 1 = 4 CS 2 , α varoast 2 2 = S 4 , and w varoast 2 1 = e 2∆ &gt; w varoast 2 2 = e 4∆ , which implies that z varoast 2 1 = (1 -w varoast 2 1 ) / (1 + w varoast 2 1 ) = D 2 /S 2 &lt; z varoast 2 2 = D 4 /S 4 . Therefore, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, the only atom that does not contributes to G | a varoast 2 | ( ν ) is at z = z varoast 2 0 ≡ 0 with α varoast 2 0 = 6 C 2 , while α varoast 2 3 = 0 at z = z varoast 2 3 ≡ 1 , trivially, cf. Table V. These values, i.e., α varoast 2 0 resp. α varoast 2 3 , follow directly from (19) resp. (20), and are determined prior to conversion. One further verifies that ∑ 3 i =0 α varoast 2 i = 1 .

Remark. Example VI.1 converts W varoast 2 from the variable- to check-domain. Conditioned on the subsequent bit being equal to 0 , the bit-channel W varoast 2 evolves into W varoast 2 boxast , and the CE then continues via the boxast -convolution.

Example VI.2 ( W BSC( p ) : from G | a varoast 2 boxast | ( ν ) to F a varoast 2 boxast , 1 ( s ) ) . By applying (10) into (47) and (11) into α varoast 2 0 , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from which identifying with (45) and (125) it follows that n varoast 2 boxast = 4 , α varoast 2 boxast 1 = 16 C 2 S 2 2 , α varoast 2 boxast 2 = 8 CS 2 S 4 , α varoast 2 boxast 3 = S 2 4 and z varoast 2 boxast 1 = D 2 2 /S 2 2 &lt; z varoast 2 boxast 2 = D 2 D 4 / ( S 2 S 4 ) &lt; z varoast 2 boxast 3 = D 2 4 /S 2 4 , which also implies that w varoast 2 boxast 1 = 4 C 2 / ( S 2 2 + D 2 2 ) &gt; w varoast 2 boxast 2 = ( S 2 S 4 -D 2 D 4 ) / ( S 2 S 4 + D 2 D 4 ) &gt; w varoast 2 boxast 3 = 4 C 2 / ( S 2 4 + D 2 4 ) , while α varoast 2 boxast 4 = 0 trivially. One further verifies that ∑ 4 i =0 α varoast 2 boxast i = 1 . Therefore, we have F a varoast 2 boxast , 1 ( s ) = 2 s +4 C 2( s +1) S 1 -s 4 +8 C 2 s +1 S s 2 S 1 -s 6 +2 s C 4 s S 1 -s 8 . (50)

Remark. Example VI.2 converts W varoast 2 boxast from the checkto variable-domain after the boxast -convolution. Conditioned on the subsequent bit being equal to 1 , the bit-channel W varoast 2 boxast evolves into W varoast 2 boxastvaroast , and the CE then continues via the varoast -convolution.

Theorem VI.2. CE derives analytic expressions for the Bhattacharyya parameters of bit-channels at arbitrary levels for a given discrete BMS channel via Procedure 1.

## VII. CE ANALYSIS OF THE BSC AND BHATTACHARYYA PARAMETERS

In this section, we analyze a ≡ W BSC( p ) via Theorem VI.2, where the BSC serves as a representative discrete BMS channel. We explicitly derive analytic expressions for the Bhattacharyya parameters of all bit-channels of W BSC( p ) for levels k = 3 , 4 . CE reveals prefix/suffix-based recursions for the BSC, reducing the analysis of all bit-channels to a specific subclass, whose simplest case is further analyzed combinatorially and probabilistically, enabling a series-expansion approach that bypasses exponential complexity.

## Procedure 1 CE-Based Channel Polarization of a discrete BMS channel

```
Require: W ≡ a , b 1 . . . b k with b m ∈ { 0 , 1 } ≡ { boxast , varoast } Ensure: Z ( W b 1 ...b k ) 1: α 0 , α n , G | a | ( ν ) , F a , 1 ( s ) ← a ; F ϕ ← 0 ; F ψ, 1 ( s ) ← 0 2: state G ← ( G | a | ( ν ) , α 0 , α n ) ; state F ← ( F a , 1 ( s ) , α 0 , α n ) 3: state Cr ← ( F ϕ , F ψ, 1 ( s )) 4: for m = 1 , . . . , k do 5: switch b m do 6: case boxast 7: state boxast G ← CheckUpdate (state G ) ⊲ (10)(11)(12) 8: state G ← state boxast G 9: if m = k or b m +1 = varoast then 10: state F ← CheckToVar (state G ) ⊲ (42) 11: end if 12: end case 13: case varoast 14: state Cr ← CrossUpdate (state F [0]) ⊲ (22)(24) 15: state varoast F ← VarUpdate (state Cr , state F ) ⊲ (18)(19)(20) 16: state F ← state varoast F 17: if m<k and b m +1 = boxast then 18: state G ← VarToCheck (state F ) ⊲ (43) 19: end if 20: end case 21: end switch 22: if m = k then 23: B ( | a | ) ← Bhatt (state F [0] , state F [1]) ⊲ Corollary IV.1.3 24: end if 25: end for
```

## A. Prefixboxast - and suffixvaroast -based recursions

Example VII.1. At level k = 3 , the Bhattacharyya parameters are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The Bhattacharyya parameters at level k = 4 are provided in Section IX-Q. Their evaluations across different values of p ∈ (0 , 1 / 2) are illustrated in Fig. 4a, 4b, 5a and 5b.

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-Q.

Remark. Note that the boxast -convolution upon W BSC ( p ) results again in another W BSC ( p boxast ) with crossover p boxast = 2 C , cf. Example III.4. We denote this identification under the boxast -convolution via the parameter mapping 2 C ← p . One further verifies that for every i ∈ Z &gt; 0 , M 2 i ← M i , S i 2 +(2 C ) i ← S i , S i 2 -(2 C ) i ← D i and (1 -M 4 ) / 4 ← C . Let B ( | a ... | ) ≜ B | a ... | ( p ) . Therefore, the Bhattacharyya parameters of a boxast ... with prefix -boxast can be obtained from those of a ... via the corresponding parameter mapping, which suggests that the Bhattacharyya parameters of the fi rst 2 k -1 bit-channels at level k can be recursively derived from those of all bit-channels at level k -1 , i.e., B ( | a boxast ... | ) ≜ B | a boxast ... | ( p ) = B | a ... | (2 C ) . On the other hand, the Bhattacharyya parameters of a ... varoast with suffix -varoast can be obtained by squaring those of a ... , cf. [14, Lemma 4.64], which suggests that the Bhattacharyya parameters of the 2 k -1 bit-channels with even indices at level k can be directly derived from those of all bit-channels at level k -1 , i.e., B ( | a ... varoast | ) ≜ B | a ... varoast | ( p ) = B 2 | a ... | ( p ) . Such recursive structure of Bhattacharyya parameters is illustrated in Fig. 6. For example,

Fig. 5: Bhattacharyya parameters of bit-channels of W BSC( p ) for 2000 values of p ∈ (0 , 1 / 2) .

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fig. 6: Recursions of Bhattacharyya parameters: solid arrows (prefixboxast ) denote parameter mapping, while dashed lines (suffixvaroast ) denote squaring.

<!-- image -->

However, this recursive structure relies on the availability of the Bhattacharyya parameters of some base channels (of size 2 m -2 at level m ), which have neither prefixboxast nor suffixvaroast (or equivalently, they have both prefixvaroast and suffixboxast ), and are indicated by the hollow dots in Fig. 6. In general, the exact Bhattacharyya parameters of these base channels should first be obtained via the CE prescribed in Theorem VI.2, and typically exhibit a complicated structure, e.g., (57), (146), (148), and (150). Consequently, to derive the Bhattacharyya parameters of all bit-channels at level k , the CE should be applied to the last 2 m -1 bit-channels with prefix -varoast at each level m up to k , so as to preserve the characterization in terms of F a , 1 ( s ) , G | a | ( ν ) and boundary atoms, from which B ( | a | ) is derived.

## B. Prefixvaroast - and suffixboxast -based analysis

In this subsection, we analyze the simplest form among base channels a varoast ... boxast , i.e., a varoast q boxast ℓ with q ≥ 2 and ℓ ≥ 0 . After applying the q -fold varoast -convolution to a ≡ W BSC( p ) , we obtain characterizations of the resultant bit-channels, as stated next.

Lemma VII.1. Let q ≥ 2 , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r i ≜ 2 Q -2 i with Q ≜ 2 q -1 and i = 0 , . . . , Q -1 .

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-N.

Next, applying ℓ successive boxast -convolutions yields the following characterizations.

Lemma VII.2. Let q ≥ 2 , and ℓ ≥ 0 , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where J QL ≜ { ( j r Q -1 , . . . , j r 0 ) ∈ Z Q ≥ 0 : ∑ Q -1 i =0 j r i = L ≜ 2 ℓ , Q ≜ 2 q -1 } with |J QL | = ( L + Q -1 Q -1 ) , α j ≜ ∑ Q -1 i =0 i · j r i , r i ≜ 2 Q -2 i , and R j ≜ L ! ∏ Q -1 i =0 j r i ! ∏ Q -1 i =0 ( 2 Q i ) j r i . Proof. Please refer to Section IX-O.

Remark. Since G | a varoast q boxast ℓ | ( ν ) has the structure of a generating function [20, Section 24.1.2], the multinomial coefficient ( L ; j r 0 , . . . , j r Q -1 ) appears in R j and, together with α j , forms the coefficients of both F a varoast q boxast ℓ , 1 ( s ) and G | a varoast q boxast ℓ | ( ν ) . This brings difficulty in deriving B ( | a varoast q boxast ℓ | ) at level q + ℓ via Procedure 1, as the cardinality |J QL | grows as Θ ( 2 ℓ ( Q -1) ) and becomes intractable for large ℓ .

In what follows, we show that by exploiting this multinomial structure, B ( | a varoast q boxast ℓ | ) at level q + ℓ can be linked, via a series expansion, to infinitely many even moments generated by G | a varoast q | ( ν ) at level q .

Proposition VII.1. Let Q ≜ 2 q -1 , L ≜ 2 ℓ with q ≥ 2 , ℓ ≥ 0 . Let X Q ≜ tanh( | Q -K | · | ∆ | ) ∈ [0 , 1) with K ∼ Bin(2 Q,p ) . Let X QL ≜ ∏ L i =1 X Q, ( i ) where X Q, (1) , . . . , X Q, ( L ) are i.i.d. copies of X Q , then

where β κ = (2 κ -3)!! / (2 κ κ !) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Please refer to Section IX-P.

Remark. The second proof of the second equality in (67) provides an alternative interpretation of the power series expansion: it arises not only from the Taylor expansion of √ 1 -z , but also from the moment generating function (MGF) of a product of i.i.d. random variables X Q, ( i ) induced by repeated boxast -convolutions.

Proposition VII.1 shows that applying ℓ -fold boxast -convolution only corresponds to raising each even moment to the power L . This brings a significant benefit in evaluating B ( | a varoast q boxast ℓ | ) at level q + ℓ , provided that the expression of G | a varoast q | ( ν ) at level q is available, thereby bypassing the exponential grow of |J QL | . Moreover, tighter upper bounds of B ( | a varoast q boxast ℓ | ) can be obtained systematically by truncating the series expansion at higher order. Since G | a varoast q | (2 κ ) = E [ X 2 κ Q ] , it also reveals that B ( | a varoast q boxast ℓ | ) depends not on the scalar B ( | a varoast q | ) = 2 2 Q C Q , but on all even moments of X Q .

## VIII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we developed CE as a complex-analytic framework for finite-blocklength channel polarization on discrete BMS channels. By viewing the Bhattacharyya parameter as a real-valued instance of a broader class of complex-valued channel functionals, CE yields a systematic procedure for deriving analytic expressions for the Bhattacharyya parameters of the bit-channels of a given discrete BMS channel at arbitrary polarization levels. Beyond its importance in exact channeldependent code construction, the framework provides structural insights, including further evidence of the extremality of the BEC and BSC, as well as new channel-dependent recursions for a class of BSC bit-channels.

## IX. APPENDICES

## A. Proof of Lemma II.6

Observe that (5) is a form of the bilateral Laplace transform , of which the region of convergence (ROC) consists of those values of s for which a( x )e -sx is absolutely integrable , i.e., ∫ + ∞ -∞ | a( x )e -sx | d x &lt; ∞ . Recall that if a is a symmetric L -density, then a( -x ) = e -x a( x ) for all x ∈ R , cf. [14, Definition 4.11]. Therefore, F a ( s ) = ∫ + ∞ 0 a( x )(e -sx +e ( s -1) x )d x . Let s ≜ σ +i t . The integrand is absolutely integrable if and only if ∫ + ∞ 0 a( x ) | e -sx +e ( s -1) x | d x &lt; ∞ . If σ ∈ [0 , 1] , then for all x ≥ 0 , | e -sx | = e -σx ≤ 1 and | e ( s -1) x | = e ( σ -1) x ≤ 1 , thus, ∫ + ∞ 0 a( x ) | e -sx +e ( s -1) x | d x ≤ 2 ∫ ∞ 0 a( x ) dx &lt; ∞ . Therefore, { s ∈ C : 0 &lt; ℜ s &lt; 1 } is the strip of absolute convergence of F a ( s ) , over which F a ( s ) is holomorphic.

## B. Proof of Lemma II.7

Let µ = 0 and recall that if a is a symmetric G -density, then a (0 , y ) = a (1 , y ) coth( y/ 2) for all y ∈ [0 , + ∞ ] , cf. [14, (4.21)]. Therefore, G a (0 , ν ) = ∫ + ∞ 0 g ( y ) · e -νy d y , which is a form of the unilateral Laplace transform , with g ( y ) ≜ a (1 , y )(coth( y/ 2)+ 1) = 2 · a (1 , y ) / (1 -e -y ) . A necessary condition for existence of such integral is that g ( y ) must be locally integrable on y ∈ [0 , ∞ ) . Indeed,

which follows from that 1 -e -x ≥ ( 1 -e -1 ) · min(1 , x ) for all x ≥ 0 . Note that for the G -distribution [14, p.183], i.e., A ( s, y ) = A (0 , y ) · BD { s =0 } + A (1 , y ) · BD { s =1 } , we have A (0 , 0) ≥ 0 and A (1 , 0) = 0 . These conditions correspond, respectively, to lim x → + ∞ A ( x ) ≤ 1 and lim x →-∞ A ( x ) = 0 for A ∈ A L , cf. [14, p.178]. In another words, a (0 , y ) has a Dirac mass at y = 0 of magnitude A (0 , 0) , while a (1 , y ) has no Dirac mass at y = 0 . Moreover, both a (0 , y ) and a (1 , y ) have Dirac masses at y = + ∞ of magnitude 1 2 (1 -lim x → + ∞ A (0 , x ) -lim x → + ∞ A (1 , x )) . For the second integral in the RHS of (68),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

follows from a being a G -density. For the first integral in the RHS of (68), since a (1 , y ) has no Dirac mass at y = 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( a ) follows from the symmetry a (1 , y ) = a (0 , y ) tanh( y/ 2) for every y &gt; 0 , while ( b ) uses tanh( x ) ≤ x for every x ≥ 0 . Combining (69) and (70) yields ∫ + ∞ 0 | g ( y ) | d y &lt; + ∞ . Consequently, for every ν = σ +i t with σ ≥ 0 ,

thus, G a (0 , ν ) converges absolutely for ℜ ν ≥ 0 and is holomorphic for ℜ ν &gt; 0 . For µ = i π , G a (i π, ν ) = G a (0 , ν + 1) by symmetry [14, p. 200]. Since ℜ ( ν +1) &gt; 0 whenever ℜ ν ≥ 0 , it follows that G a (i π, ν ) also converges absolutely for ℜ ν ≥ 0 .

## C. Proof of Lemma III.1

Since f | a | ( z ) = ∑ n -1 i =1 α i · z · δ ( z -z i ) by Lemma II.2, atoms of | a | ( z ) at z 0 ≡ 0 and z n ≡ 1 (if present) are not reflected in f | a | ( z ) . The expression G | a | ( ν ) = ∑ n -1 i =1 α i z ν i follows from the fact that the Mellin transform of z · δ ( z -a ) with a &gt; 0 equals a ν for every ν ∈ C , as a consequence of the translational property of the Mellin transform [15, (3.1.7)]. Since each z ν i = e ν log z i for every z i ∈ (0 , 1) , with i = 1 , . . . , n -1 , is entire on C , G | a | ( ν ) is entire too.

## D. Proof of Lemma III.2

Let a and b be independent symmetric L -densities with X ∼ a and Y ∼ b , then tanh( | X | / 2) ∼ | a | and tanh( | Y | / 2) ∼ | b | . By property of the check-domain boxast -convolution [14, p.195], Z = 2tanh -1 (tanh( X/ 2) tanh( Y/ 2)) ∼ a boxast b , hence for a = b , thus, a = b , i.e., a boxast b = a boxast , we have tanh( | Z | / 2) = tanh( | X | / 2) tanh( | Y | / 2) ∼ | a boxast | . Recall Corollary II.7.1, i.e., G | a | (0 , ν ) = ∫ 1 0 | a | ( z ) z ν d z , then

By Corollary III.1.1, we write G | a boxast | (0 , ν ) = G | a boxast | ( ν ) + α boxast 0 · 0 ν + α boxast n , which is holomorphic for ℜ ν &gt; 0 by Lemma II.7. In the sequel, we discuss α boxast 0 , α boxast n and G | a boxast | ( ν ) individually. The mass of the atom at z = 0 after the boxast -convolution equals the total weight of all pairs ( i, j ) with z i z j = 0 , thus α boxast 0 = α 2 0 +2 α 0 · ∑ i ≥ 1 α i = α 2 0 +2 α 0 (1 -α 0 ) = 2 α 0 -α 2 0 , while the mass of the atom at z = 1 after the boxast -convolution equals the total weight of all pairs ( i, j ) with z i z j = 1 , which is only possible with z i = z j = 1 , i.e., α boxast n = α 2 n . If there is no atom at z = 1 , the interior part after the boxast -convolution is G 2 | a | ( ν ) . If an atom at z = 1 is present, its interaction with the interior atoms contributes α n α i z ν i for i = 1 , . . . , n -1 , each occurring twice. Consequently, G | a boxast | ( ν ) = G 2 | a | ( ν ) + 2 α n G | a | ( ν ) · { α n &gt; 0 } , which admits an analytic continuation to an entire function on C .

## E. Proof of Lemma IV.1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

BD

To prove Lemma IV.1, we need the following Lemma IX.1.

Lemma IX.1 (Sec.II.2.5. in [21]) . Let h ( x ) ∈ C 1 be an continuously differentiable function, having the simple roots x k with h ′ ( x k ) = 0 for each k , then for every compactly supported and infinitely differentiable test functions ϕ ( x ) ∈ C ∞ c ,

̸

where the sum is taken over all simple roots of h ( x ) . It can also be written in the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, we prove Lemma IV.1. By substituting β ± i = (1 ± z i ) / 2 · α i for all i = 1 , . . . , n and β 0 = α 0 , we have

Let us first discuss the summand (1 + z i ) / 2 · δ ( z -z i ) . Let w = (1 -z ) / (1 + z ) ∈ [0 , ∞ ) . In order to apply Lemma IX.1, define h ( w ) ≜ (1 -w ) / (1 + w ) -z i . Solving h ( w ) = 0 for the unique root, i.e., w = w i ≜ (1 -z i ) / (1 + z i ) , and computing the derivative, i.e., h ′ ( w ) = -2 / (1 + w ) 2 , we have δ ( z -z i ) = δ ( h ( w )) = δ ( w -w i ) / | h ′ ( w i ) | = (1 + w i ) 2 / 2 · δ ( w -w i ) . In the same vein, δ ( z -z -i ) = (1 + w -i ) 2 / 2 · δ ( w -w -i ) with w -i = w -1 i and δ ( z -z 0 ) = 2 δ ( w -w 0 ) , i.e., δ ( z ) = 2 δ ( w -1) . Putting it together, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where w = w n ≡ 0 resp. w = w 0 ≡ 1 is attained by the atom at z n ≡ 1 resp. z 0 ≡ 0 . Therefore, by definition of f a ( w ) for every w ∈ (0 , ∞ ) , they do not contribute to M{ f a } ( s ) . In particular,

where β ± i = (1 ± z i ) / 2 · α i and w ± i = (1 ∓ z i ) / (1 ± z i ) for every i = 1 , . . . , n -1 . Since each w s i = e s log w i for every w i ∈ (0 , 1) ∪ (1 , ∞ ) , with i = 1 , . . . , n -1 , is entire on C , M{ f a } ( s ) is entire too.

## F. Proof of Corollary IV.1.2

Proof. Recall that by symmetry we have (3), i.e., β ± i = (1 ± z i ) / 2 · α i for all i = 1 , . . . , n -1 , then β -i /β i = (1 -z i ) / (1+ z i ) . By definition, w i = (1 -z i ) / (1 + z i ) , then β -i = β i w i . Substituting it into the definition of F a , 2 ( s ) , we have ∀ s ∈ C ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## G. Proof of Lemma IV.2

Let a and b be independent symmetric L -densities with X ∼ a and Y ∼ b , then ˜ X ≜ tanh( X/ 2) ∼ a and ˜ Y ≜ tanh( Y/ 2) ∼ b . By property of the check-domain varoast -convolution [14, p.195], Z = X + Y ∼ a varoast b . Let W 1 ≜ (1 -˜ X ) / (1 + ˜ X ) = e -X and W 2 ≜ (1 -˜ Y ) / (1 + ˜ Y ) = e -Y , then W 3 ≜ (1 -˜ Z ) / (1 + ˜ Z ) = e -Z = e -( X + Y ) = W 1 W 2 . Hence for a = b , thus, a = b , i.e., a varoast b = a varoast , we have F a varoast ( s ) = F 2 a ( s ) , cf. [14, p.199], which is holomorphic for ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) by Lemma II.6.

When expanding terms and grouping from F 2 a ( s ) , we have F 2 a , 1 ( s ) = ( ∑ i β i w s i ) 2 = ∑ i,j β i β j ( w i w j ) s , where all products w i w j ∈ (0 , 1) since w i , w j ∈ (0 , 1) , hence it entirely contributes to F a varoast , 1 ( s ) . In the same vein, F 2 a , 2 ( s ) contributes to F a varoast , 2 ( s ) . Additionally, 2 α 0 F a , 1 ( s ) and 2 α 0 F a , 2 ( s ) arise from 2 · ( α 0 · 1 s ) · ( F a , 1 ( s ) + F a , 2 ( s )) . The convolved atoms w 0 · w remain in the same w -range as before the varoast -convolution, hence, e.g., 2 α 0 F a , 1 ( s ) contributes to F a varoast , 1 ( s ) . On the other hand, the cross term 2 F a , 1 ( s ) F a , 2 ( s ) is split as

In the sequel, we discuss α varoast 0 , α varoast n , F a varoast , 1 ( s ) and F a varoast , 2 ( s ) individually. If there is already an atom at w = w 0 ≡ 1 with weight β 0 = α 0 , then β 2 0 = α 2 0 contributes to α varoast 0 . Additionally, the mass of this atom at w = w 0 ≡ 1 after the varoast -convolution equals the total weight of all pairs ( i, j ) with w i w j = 1 . Since for every i = 1 , . . . , n -1 , w i · w -i = w i · w -1 i = 1 , each occurring twice with the same weight β i β -i . Putting it together, α varoast 0 = α 2 0 +2 ∑ n -1 i =1 β i β -i . The mass of atom at w = w n ≡ 0 after the varoast -convolution equals the total weight of all pairs ( i, j ) with w i w j = 0 , which occurs each time when at least one operand is zero, thus α varoast n = α n + α n -α 2 n = 2 α n -α 2 n .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where each ordered pair ( i, j ) contributes to F a varoast , 1 ( s ) or F a varoast , 2 ( s ) depending on whether w i /w j ≷ 1 . With monotonicity of the interior atoms for every i, j = 1 , . . . , n -1 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 2 F ψ, 1 ( s ) ≜ 2 ∑ 1 ≤ j&lt;i ≤ n -1 β i β -j ( w i /w j ) s resp. 2 F ψ, 2 ( s ) ≜ 2 ∑ 1 ≤ i&lt;j ≤ n -1 β i β -j ( w i /w j ) s contributes to F a varoast , 1 ( s ) resp. F a varoast , 2 ( s ) . By symmetry, we further have F ψ, 2 ( s ) = F ψ, 1 (1 -s ) , hence (81) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, ϕ ( s ) = ϕ (1 -s ) as well as F a varoast , 2 ( s ) = F a varoast , 1 (1 -s ) , too. On the other hand, the case i = j , i.e., 2 F ϕ ≜ 2 ∑ n -1 i =1 β i β -i , contributes to α varoast 0 , coinciding with earlier analysis. Moreover, since for every i, j = 1 , . . . , n -1 , w i /w j ∈ (0 , ∞ ) both F ψ, 1 ( s ) and F ψ, 2 ( s ) , thus ϕ ( s ) , admit an analytic continuation to entire functions on C .

## H. Proof of Corollary IV.2.1

Let τ ≜ c +i u ∈ C with any c ∈ R fi xed and rewrite (81) as ˜ ϕ ( u ) ≜ ∑ i,j A ( c ) ij · e i ω ij u , where ω ij ≜ log( w i /w j ) ∈ R resp. A ( c ) ij ≜ β i β -j ( w i /w j ) c ∈ R is regarded as the frequency resp. amplitude attached to the ordered pair ( i, j ) , both are fixed once c is chosen. Let P ≜ { ( i, j ) : 1 ≤ i, j ≤ n -1 } and fix any bijection κ : P → { 1 , . . . , M } with |P| = M ≜ ( n -1) 2 . For any k -index with k ≜ κ ( i, j ) ∈ { 1 , . . . , M } , denote ω k ≜ ω ij and A ( c ) k ≡ A ( c ) ij . Define the swap involution ¯ k ≜ κ ( j, i ) then

ω ¯ k = -ω k and A ( c ) ¯ k ≡ A ( c ) ji . Note that ¯ k = k if and only if i = j indicating diagonal indices with ω ii = 0 and A ( c ) ii = β i β -i . In the sequel, we interchangeably write A ij ≜ A ( c ) ij without superscript for brevity. With this convention,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## which when evaluated at ω = 0 yields ̂ ϕ (0) = 2 π ∑ k : ω k =0 A k = 2 π ∑ n -1 i =1 A ii = 2 π F ϕ , resulting in (22). I. Proof of Corollary IV.2.2

Every pair ( i, j ) produces a term at frequency ω ij , and the swapped pair ( j, i ) produces a terms at frequency ω ji = -ω ij with coefficient A ji = β j β -i ( w j /w i ) c ∈ R , By symmetry β -i = β i w i , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the two coefficients are equal, i.e., A ji = A ij if and only if c = 1 / 2 . With such choice, the pair ( i, j ) together with its swapped counterpart contributes to A ij · e i ω ij u + A ji · e i ω ji u = 2 A ij cos( ω ij u ) ∈ R . By enumerating two off-diagonal index sets with 1 ≤ j &lt; i ≤ n -1 or 1 ≤ i &lt; j ≤ n -1 , each of size ( n -1)( n -2) / 2 , and using the k -index convention, we obtain (23). Additionally, it makes no difference to write the second terms as 2 ∑ k : ω k &gt; 0 A ( c ) k · cos( ω k u ) since the cosine function is even .

## J. Proof of Corollary IV.2.3

To retrieve F ψ,i ( s ) with i ∈ { 1 , 2 } from the spectrum of ˜ ϕ ( u ) in Corollary IV.2.3, we first establish the following lemma.

- 1) ∀ s / ∈ L : F ψ, 1 ( s ) = -Φ -( s ) , ∀ℜ s &gt; c ; F ψ, 2 ( s ) = Φ + ( s ) , ∀ℜ s &lt; c .

Lemma IX.2. Define ψ ( s ) ≜ ϕ ( s ) -F ϕ , ∀ s ∈ C , and the Cauchy-type integral [22, (7.2.1)] Φ( s ) ≜ 1 2 π i ∫ L ψ ( τ ) τ -s d τ for s / ∈ L and s ∈ C , where L ≜ { τ = c +i u, u ∈ R } with c ∈ (0 , 1) and the positive orientation upward, then

- 2) ∀ t ∈ L : the Plemelj formulae [22, Lemma 7.2.1] give boundary values of Φ , i.e., Φ ± ( t ) = ± 1 2 ψ ( t ) + 1 2 π i -∫ L ψ ( τ ) τ -t d τ . 3) F ψ, 1 (1 -s ) = F ψ, 2 ( s ) required by the symmetric a holds true if c = 1 / 2 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, -∫ denotes the principal value integral . Proof. By definition, ψ ( s ) = F ψ, 1 ( s ) + F ψ, 2 ( s ) , ∀ s ∈ C , which is entire on C . Let τ ≜ c + i u , then we have h ( w ) = 1 2 π i ∫ c +i ∞ c -i ∞ ϕ ( τ ) w -τ d τ = 1 2 π i ∫ c +i ∞ c -i ∞ ψ ( τ ) w -τ d τ + F ϕ · δ ( w -1) , ∀ c ∈ (0 , 1) , which can be further decomposed as

Therefore, F ψ, 1 ( s ) = ∫ 1 0 h -( w ) w s -1 d w = 1 2 π i ∫ c +i ∞ c -i ∞ ψ ( τ ) ( ∫ 1 0 w s -τ -1 d w ) d τ = -1 2 π i ∫ c +i ∞ c -i ∞ ψ ( τ ) τ -s d τ , where the inner w -integral converges if and only if ℜ s &gt; ℜ τ = c ; while F ψ, 2 ( s ) = ∫ ∞ 1 h + ( w ) w s -1 d w = 1 2 π i ∫ c +i ∞ c -i ∞ ψ ( τ ) (∫ ∞ 1 w s -τ -1 d w ) d τ = 1 2 π i ∫ c +i ∞ c -i ∞ ψ ( τ ) τ -s d τ , where the convergence of inner w -integral holds true if and only if ℜ s &lt; ℜ τ = c . Let L be the vertical line, i.e., L ≜ { τ ≜ c +i u, u ∈ R } with c ∈ (0 , 1) fi xed and the positive orientation upward . Define the Cauchy-type integral . i.e.,

which is sectionally analytic off L , i.e., s / ∈ L . Therefore, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By applying the Plemelj formulae , we obtain boundary values of the Cauchy-type integral for every t ∈ L , i.e.,

where -∫ denotes the principal value integral defined by -∫ L ψ ( τ ) dτ τ -t ≜ lim ε → 0 ∫ L -L ε ψ ( τ ) dτ τ -t where L ε is the part of L that has length 2 ε and is centered around t . In the sequel, the specific choice of c ∈ (0 , 1) is determined in order to fulfill the symmetry imposed by F ψ, 2 ( s ) = F ψ, 1 (1 -s ) in (82). Recall that ψ ( s ) ≜ ϕ ( s ) -F ϕ and ϕ ( s ) = ϕ (1 -s ) , then ψ ( s ) = ψ (1 -s ) . Let σ ≜ 1 -τ , then the image of L under τ ↦→ 1 -τ yields L ′ ≜ { σ = (1 -c ) -i u, u ∈ R } with (1 -c ) ∈ (0 , 1) fi xed and the positive orientation downward , thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, we prove Corollary IV.2.3. Recall in (83) that ϕ ( τ ) = k A k · e ω k ( τ -c ) . Substituting it into (87), we obtain

for which L ′ = -L if c = 1 / 2 , which implies that Φ(1 -s ) = -Φ( s ) for every s / ∈ L . Therefore, F ψ, 1 (1 -s ) = -Φ -(1 -s ) = -( -Φ + ( s )) = F ψ, 2 ( s ) .

where L ≜ { τ ≜ c +i u, u ∈ R } with the positive orientation upward . If ω k &lt; 0 resp. ω k &gt; 0 , then e ω k τ decays exponentially as ℜ τ → + ∞ resp. ℜ τ →-∞ . Consequently, if ω k &lt; 0 resp. ω k &gt; 0 , closing the contour at right resp. at left , the semicircle contribution vanishes. Let us first discuss the first case, i.e., ω k &lt; 0 , under contour deformation at right. If ℜ s &gt; c , since e ω k τ is entire in τ ∈ C , there exists only one simple pole at τ = s to the right of L , by Cauchy's residue theorem , we have ∫ L e ω k τ τ -s dτ = -2 π i · Res τ = s e ω k τ τ -s = -2 π i · e ω k s ; while if ℜ s &lt; c , no pole is enclosed, thus, ∫ L e ω k τ τ -s dτ = 0 . In the same vein, for the case ω k &gt; 0 under contour deformation at left, if ℜ s &lt; c , ∫ L e ω k τ τ -s dτ = 2 π i · e ω k s ; while if ℜ s &gt; c , ∫ L e ω k τ τ -s dτ = 0 . Putting it together,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By substituting (93) into (88) and (89), respectively, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, as shown in Lemma IV.2, both F ψ, 1 ( s ) and F ψ, 2 ( s ) admit an analytic continuation to entire functions on C , hence (94) resp. (95) is analytically continued to ℜ s ≤ c resp. ℜ s ≥ c , resulting in (24) resp. (25). Here, c = 1 / 2 is chosen to guarantee F ψ, 1 (1 -s ) = F ψ, 2 ( s ) required by the symmetry of a , cf. Lemma IX.2.3. To see this, we rewrite (24) as F ψ, 1 ( s ) = ∑ k : ω ¯ k &gt; 0 A ( c ) k · e -ω ¯ k ( s -c ) . Hence,

With c = 1 / 2 , e ω ¯ k (2 c -1) = 1 and A ( c ) k = A ( c ) ¯ k , cf. (85), then F ψ, 1 (1 -s ) = ∑ k : ω ¯ k &gt; 0 A ( c ) ¯ k · e ω ¯ k ( s -c ) = F ψ, 2 ( s ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## K. Proof of Proposition V.1

To prove Proposition V.1, we need the following Lemma IX.3 and its Corollary IX.3.1.

Lemma IX.3. Fix ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) . Define

of which the Mellin transform

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is initially defined and holomorphic for ℜ ν &gt; 1 , where A ( α, β ) ≜ 2 -α · Γ( α +1) 2 ˜ F 1 ( α -1 , α +1;1 -β + α ; 1 / 2) . K s ( ν ) admits an analytic continuation to a meromorphic function on C whose only singularities are simple poles at ν = 1 , 0 , -1 , -2 , . . . .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We first justify the strip of analyticity (SOA) of the Mellin transform M{ g s } ( ν ) , i.e., K s ( ν ) = K ( s, ν ) ≜ ∫ + ∞ 0 g s ( z ) · z ν -1 d z . Fix ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) . As z → 0 + , ( 1+ z 1 -z ) s = 1 + 2 sz + O ( z 2 ) and ( 1 -z 1+ z ) s = 1 -2 sz + O ( z 2 ) , hence g s ( z ) = (1 + O ( z 2 )) /z ∼ z -1 for small z . Consequently, the integrand behaves like g s ( z ) z ν -1 ∼ z ν -2 . The integral ∫ δ 0 z ν -2 dz for small δ &gt; 0 converges absolutely [17, A.2] if and only if ℜ ν -2 &gt; -1 , i.e., ℜ ν &gt; 1 . On the other hand, g s ( z ) ∼ 2 s -1 (1 -z ) 1 -s +2 -s (1 -z ) s as z → 1 -. Since ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) , i.e., both exponents ℜ (1 -s ) and ℜ s are positive, by definition of the Hausdorff dimension function [16, Definition 1.2], we have lim z → 1 -g s ( z ) = 2 s -1 · 0 1 -s +2 -s · 0 s = 0 . By definition, g s ( z ) = 0 for z ≥ 1 , so there is no contribution from infinity. Therefore, K s ( ν ) converges absolutely and possesses its SOA [15, Sec. 3.1.1] as ℜ ν &gt; 1 . Moreover,

where J ( α, β ) ≜ ∫ 1 0 z -( β +1) (1 -z ) α (1 + z ) 1 -α d z with α ∈ { s, 1 -s } and β ∈ { ν, 1 -ν } . Recall that the Gauss hypergeometric function [20, (15.3.1)] possesses an integral representation, i.e., ∫ 1 0 x b -1 (1 -x ) c -b -1 (1 -zx ) -a d x = B( b, c -b ) 2 F 1 ( a, b ; c ; z ) which converges absolutely for ℜ c &gt; ℜ b &gt; 0 . By identifying that a = α -1 , b = -β , c = 1 -β + α , and z = -1 , hence J ( α, β ) = B( -β, α + 1) 2 F 1 ( α -1 , -β ; 1 -β + α ; -1) . By using the Pfaff transformation [20, (15.3.4)], 2 F 1 ( α -1 , -β ; 1 -β + α ; -1) = 2 1 -α 2 F 1 ( α -1 , α +1;1 -β + α ; 1 / 2) , thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is valid initially where the integral representation converges, i.e., ℜ β &lt; 0 and ℜ α &gt; -1 (which holds true for α ∈ { s, 1 -s } with ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) ). In the sequel, we show the analytic continuation of J ( α, β ) in β (or ν ). Putting β = 1 -ν , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 2 ˜ F 1 ( a, b ; c ; z ) ≜ 2 F 1 ( a, b ; c ; z ) / Γ( c ) denotes the regularized Gauss hypergeometric function [19, (9.02)], for which the limits exists as c →-m , where m is a non-negative integer [20, (15.1.2)]. Note that Γ( ν -1) is meromorphic with simple poles at ν = 1 , 0 , -1 , -2 , . . . , while Γ( α +1) with ℜ α &gt; -1 contributes no simple poles. Therefore, J ( α, 1 -ν ) is a meromorphic function on C of ν with simple poles from Γ( ν -1) at ν = 1 , 0 , -1 , -2 , . . . . Therefore, K s ( ν ) extends analytically from initial ℜ ν &gt; 1 to ν ∈ C with these simple poles. In particular,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( α, β ) ≜ 2 -α · Γ( α +1) 2 ˜ F 1 ( α -1 , α +1;1 -β + α ; 1 / 2) with α ∈ { s, 1 -s } and β ∈ { ν, 1 -ν } . Putting β = ν gives K s (1 -ν ) = Γ( -ν )( A (1 -s, ν ) + A ( s, ν )) as well an analytic continuation with simple poles at the non-negative integers ν = 0 , 1 , 2 , . . . .

Corollary IX.3.1. Fix s ∈ C with ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) and k ∈ R \{ Z ≥ 0 } , then t ↦→K s (1 -k -i t ) ∈ L ( -∞ , ∞ ) .

Proof. By Lemma IX.3 and writing ν = k +i t with fixed k ∈ R \{ Z ≥ 0 } , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where G ( α, ν ) ≜ Γ( -ν ) / Γ(1 -ν + α ) · 2 F 1 ( α -1 , α +1;1 -ν + α ; 1 / 2) with α ∈ { s, 1 -s } fixed. Thus, the ν -dependence arises from the third parameter of 2 F 1 ( α -1 , α + 1; 1 -ν + α ; 1 / 2) and the Gamma-ratio. In the sequel, we show their asymptotic behaviors separately. For the Gauss hypergeometric part, note that c = 1 -ν + α = (1 -k + α ) -i t with other parameters a = α -1 , b = α +1 and z = 1 / 2 fi xed. By [23, Sec. 15.12 (ii)(c)], let a, b, z ∈ R or C and fixed, if ℜ z = 1 / 2 and | arg c | ≤ π -δ with δ an arbitrary small positive constant, then for every fixed m ∈ Z ≥ 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as | c | → ∞ . In our case, let u ≜ 1 -k + α as a constant. As | t | → ∞ , then arg c = arctan( -t/u ) tends to ± π/ 2 depending on the sign of t and u . Therefore, for a sufficiently large | t | , we write | arg c | ≤ π/ 2 -ε with ε an arbitrary small positive constant, which clearly fulfill the condition | arg c | ≤ π -δ . By taking m = 1 , we have 2 F 1 ( a, b ; c ; z ) = 1 + O ( c -1 ) as | c | → ∞ . In our case, we have 2 F 1 ( α -1 , α + 1; 1 -ν + α ; 1 / 2) = 1 + O (( u -i t ) -1 ) as | t | → ∞ , which implies | 2 F 1 ( α -1 , α +1;1 -ν + α ; 1 / 2) | = 1 + O ( | t | -1 ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, Γ( z + a ) / Γ( z + b ) ∼ z a -b for a, b ∈ R or C as z →∞ in the sector | arg z | ≤ π -δ , cf. [23, (5.11.12)] [20, (6.1.47)]. In our case, let z ≜ -ν = -k -i t and identify a = 0 and b = 1+ α , then Γ( z ) / Γ( z +(1+ α )) = z -(1+ α ) (1+ O ( z -1 )) . Since | t |→∞ , we further have | Γ( z ) / Γ( z +(1+ α )) | = O ( | t | -(1+ ℜ α ) ) , which implies a polynomial decay of the Gamma-ratio on the vertical line ℜ ν = k . Putting it together, we have | G (1 -s, ν ) | = O ( | t | -(1+ ℜ (1 -s )) ) and | G ( s, ν ) | = O ( | t | -(1+ ℜ s ) ) . Therefore, as | t |→∞ ,

Since ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) implying 1 + min( ℜ s, 1 -ℜ s ) &gt; 1 , hence t ↦→K s (1 -k -i t ) ∈ L ( -∞ , ∞ ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, we prove Proposition V.1. Recall that F | a | ( s ) = ∫ 1 0 | a | ( z ) ( 1 -z 2 ( 1+ z 1 -z ) s + 1+ z 2 ( 1 -z 1+ z ) s ) d z , which is holomorphic for ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) by Lemma II.6. By Lemma III.1 and IX.3, we have F | a | ( s ) = α 0 · 1 · BD { α 0 &gt; 0 } + α n · 0 · BD { α n &gt; 0 } + ∫ + ∞ 0 f | a | ( z ) · g s ( z ) d z . By the Parseval formula for the Mellin transform [15, (3.1.11)], we obtain

where by Corollary IX.3.1 (1 ) ( ) is meromorphic on C with simple poles = Z . More precisely,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( α, β ) is defined in Lemma IX.3. Additionally, G | a | ( ν ) is entire by Lemma III.1. The integrand of (106) is I ( s, ν ) ≜ G | a | ( ν ) K ( s, 1 -ν ) . For fixed s ∈ C with ℜ s ∈ (0 , 1) , I ( s, ν ) is holomorphic except at simple poles ν = t ∈ Z ≥ 0 solely from Γ( -ν ) with residue Res ν = t Γ( -ν ) = ( -1) t +1 /t ! . In what follows, we show that the integral of I ( s, ν ) over the right semicircular part tends to 0 as R →∞ . Let the large semicircle, denoted as C N , be ν ≜ R · e i θ ≜ σ +i t of radius R = N +1 / 2 and θ ∈ [ π/ 2 , -π/ 2] . We will show that lim N →∞ ∫ C N I ( s, ν ) d ν → 0 via asymptotics of G | a | ( ν ) and K s (1 -ν ) , respectively. By Lemma III.1, G | a | ( ν ) = ∑ n -1 i =1 α i z ν i with | z i | &lt; 1 and α i ∈ [0 , 1] , then | G | a | ( ν ) | ≤ ∑ n -1 i =1 α i · e log z i ·ℜ ν ≤ C 1 e -c 1 R for some positive constants C 1 and c 1 . By Corollary IX.3.1, |K s (1 -ν ) | = C 2 · R -c 2 with some positive constants C 2 and c 2 &gt; 1 . Therefore, | ∫ C I ( s, ν ) d ν | ≤ πR · sup ν ∈ C | I ( s, ν ) | ≤ C 3 R 1 -c 2 e -c 1 R with some positive constant C 3 , where since c 2 &gt; 1 the first term R 1 -c 2 decays polynomially, while e -c 1 R decays exponentially. Therefore, lim N →∞ ∫ C N I ( s, ν ) d ν → 0 and by the residue theorem [24, Theorem 3.2.1], we have ∫ c + i ∞ c -i ∞ I ( s, ν ) dν = -2 π i · ∑ ∞ t =0 Res ν = t I ( s, ν ) . Consequently, by closing the contour at right , the Mellin-Barnes integral equals the sum of these residues, i.e. ∫ + ∞ 0 f | a | ( z ) · g s ( z ) d z = -∑ ∞ t =0 Res ν = t I ( s, ν ) = -∑ ∞ t =0 ( -1) t +1 t ! ( A (1 -s, t ) + A ( s, t )) G | a | ( t ) . L. Proof of Proposition V.2

K s -ν ∈ L -∞ , ∞ ν t ∈ ≥ 0 K ---

To prove Proposition V.2, we need the following Lemma IX.4.

## Lemma IX.4. Fix ℜ ν &gt; 0 . Define

of which the Mellin transform

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

has no non-empty SOA, where B ( α, ν ) ≜ Γ(1 -α ) 2 ˜ F 1 ( ν, ν -1; 2 + ν -α ; 1 / 2) . Nevertheless, H ν ( s ) admits an analytic continuation to a meromorphic function on C whose singularities are simple poles at s = Z \{ 1 } .

Proof.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with M ( α, ν ) ≜ ∫ 1 0 w -α (1 -w ) ν (1 + w ) -ν d w with α ∈ { s, 2 -s, 1 -s, 1 + s } . By the integral representation of the Gauss hypergeometric function ( a = ν , b = 1 -α , c = 2 + ν -α and z = -1 ), we have M ( α, ν ) = B(1 -α, ν +1) 2 F 1 ( ν, 1 -α ; 2 + ν -α ; -1) . By using the Pfaff transformation [20, (15.3.4)], 2 F 1 ( ν, 1 -α ; 2 + ν -α ; -1) = 2 -ν 2 F 1 ( ν, ν +1;2+ ν -α ; 1 / 2) , thus,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is valid initially where the integral representation converges if ℜ α &lt; 1 and ℜ ν &gt; -1 . The latter is fulfilled by assumption, while the former requires ℜ s &gt; 1 when α = 2 -s resp. ℜ s &lt; 1 when α = s . Since the absolute convergence requires simultaneously ℜ s ≷ 1 , which is impossible, there exists no non-empty SOA for H ( s, ν ) . Nevertheless, H ( s, ν ) admits an analytic continuation in ℜ α &lt; 1 to C . To further justify that, let

then clearly φ ν ( w ) = φ ν, 1 ( w ) + φ ν, 2 ( w ) and M{ φ ν, 1 } ( s ) = M (2 -s, ν ) is holomorphic in ℜ s &gt; 1 , while M{ φ ν, 2 } ( s ) = M ( s, ν ) is holomorphic in ℜ s &lt; 1 . As w → 0 + with | w | &lt; 1 , we have φ ν, 1 ( w ) = w -1 e -2 ν ∑ ∞ k =0 w 2 k +1 / (2 k +1) = w -1 -2 ν + O ( w ) which is algebraic . By [25, Lemma 4.3.6], M{ φ ν, 1 } ( s ) can be analytically continued as a meromorphic function into ℜ s ≤ 1 with poles at s = -( m -1) with m ∈ Z ≥ 0 , i.e., s = 1 , 0 , -1 , . . . . On the other hand, as w →∞ with | w | ≥ 1 , we have φ ν, 2 ( w ) = w -1 -2 ν · w -2 + O ( w -3 ) which is algebraic too. By [25, Lemma 4.3.3], M{ φ ν, 2 } ( s ) can also be analytically continued into ℜ s ≥ 1 as a meromorphic function with poles at s = m +1 with m ∈ Z ≥ 0 , i.e., s = 1 , 2 , . . . . Therefore, we can conclude that these continued functions are at worst meromorphic functions on C ( [25, p.115] provides a similar discussion). Putting α = 2 -s resp. α = s , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Γ( s -1) is meromorphic with simple poles at s = 1 , 0 , -1 , . . . , and Γ(1 -s ) is meromorphic with simple poles at s = 1 , 2 , . . . , while Γ( ν +1) with ℜ ν &gt; 0 and 2 ˜ F 1 ( · ) in both contribute no simple poles. These observations are consistent with our earlier analysis based on the decay behaviors as w → 0 + and ∞ . Moreover, we now show that the singularity at s = 1 is removable . Let s ≜ 1 + ε with ε → 0 + , c 0 ≜ ν +1 , and F ( c ) ≜ 2 ˜ F 1 ( ν, ν +1; c ; 1 / 2) . Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that F ( c ) is entire on c ∈ C , thus, F ( c 0 ± ε ) = F ( c 0 ) ± F ′ ( c 0 ) ε + O ( ε 2 ) , while Γ( ε ) possesses the Laurent expansion about ε = 0 , i.e., Γ( ε ) = ε -1 -γ +( γ 2 + π 2 / 6) / 2 · ε + O ( ε 2 ) with γ as Euler's constant , thus, Γ( ± ε ) = ± ε -1 -γ + O ( ε ) . Putting it together,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is finite, since the ε -1 singularities from Γ( ± ε ) are canceled exactly. Therefore, H ( s, ν ) as a whole extends analytically from s ∈ ∅ to s ∈ C with simple poles at s = Z \{ 1 } . In particular,

where B ( α, ν ) ≜ Γ(1 -α ) 2 ˜ F 1 ( ν, ν + 1; 2 + ν -α ; 1 / 2) with with α ∈ { s, 2 -s, 1 -s, 1 + s } . Putting α = 1 -s resp. α = 1 + s gives H (1 -s, ν ) = 2 -ν Γ( ν +1)( B (1 + s, ν ) + B (1 -s, ν )) as well an analytic continuation with simple poles at s ∈ Z \{ 0 } .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, we prove Proposition V.2. Recall that G a (0 , ν ) = ∫ 1 -1 a ( z ) | z | ν d z , which is holomorphic for ℜ ν &gt; 0 by Lemma II.7. By Lemma IV.1 and IX.4, we have G a (0 , ν ) = α n · 1 ν · BD { α n &gt; 0 } + α 0 · 0 ν · BD { α 0 &gt; 0 } + ∫ + ∞ 0 f a ( w ) φ ν ( w )d w . By Corollary IV.1.1 and Lemma IX.4, then f a ,i ( w ) φ ν,j ( w ) = 0 , ∀ i, j ∈ { 1 , 2 } and i = j , thus, ∫ + ∞ 0 f a ( w ) φ ν ( w )d w = ∑ i ∈{ 1 , 2 } ∫ + ∞ 0 f a ,i ( w ) φ ν,i ( w )d w . By the Parseval formula for the Mellin transform , we obtain

where M ( α, ν ) is defined in Lemma IX.4. In particular,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Additionally, M (1 + s, ν ) and M (1 -s, ν ) are meromorphic on C , with simple poles at s = 0 , 1 , 2 , . . . and s = 0 , -1 , -2 , . . . , respectively. Moreover, F a , 1 ( s ) and F a , 2 ( s ) are entire by Corollary IV.1.1. Closing the contour of the first resp. the second integral in (121) at right resp. at left, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since Res s = t Γ( -s ) = ( -1) t +1 /t ! and Res s = -t Γ( s ) = ( -1) t /t ! , then

where G ( ν, t ) ≜ 2 -ν · Γ( ν +1) 2 ˜ F 1 ( ν, ν +1;1 + ν -t ; 1 / 2) .

## M. Proof of Theorem VI.1

By definition of F a , 1 ( s ) in (16) and definition of G | a | ( ν ) in (8) where β i = (1 + z i ) / 2 · α i , w i = (1 -z i ) / (1 + z i ) and z i ∈ (0 , 1) for every i = 1 , . . . , n -1 , we write (42) explicitly in terms of α i and z i , i.e.,

Therefore, to prove (42), it suffices to prove

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( s, t ) = 2 -s Γ( s +1) 2 ˜ F 1 ( s -1 , s +1;1 -t + s ; 1 / 2) . For | z | &lt; 1 , the binomial series converges absolutely for every s ∈ C , i.e., (1 + z ) s = ∑ ∞ k =0 ( s k ) z k , cf. [26, Theorem 245], thus, (1 -z ) s (1 + z ) 1 -s = ∑ ∞ t =0 a t ( s ) z t holds true for | z | &lt; 1 with a t ( s ) ≜ ∑ t k =0 ( -1) k ( s k )( 1 -s t -k ) = ( -1) t ∑ t k =0 ( -1) k ( -s ) k ( s -1) t -k k !( t -k )! , where the binomial coefficients are represented using (rising) Pochhammer's Symbol [23, (1.2.6)], i.e., ( s k ) = ( -1) k ( -s ) k k ! for s ∈ C and k ∈ Z ≥ 0 . Therefore, to prove (45), it suffices to prove

Using the identity ( a ) n -k = ( -1) k ( a ) n (1 -a -n ) k for 0 ≤ k ≤ n , cf. [27, p.32], we obtain a t ( s ) = ( -1) t ( s -1) n t ! 2 F 1 ( -t, -s ; 2 -s -t ; -1) by recognizing that ∑ t k =0 ( -t ) k ( -s ) k (2 -s -t ) k ( -1) k k ! = 2 F 1 ( -t, -s ; 2 -s -t ; -1) where the series terminates at k = t . Using the Pfaff transformation [20, (15.3.4)], then a t ( s ) = ( -1) t ( s -1) n t ! 2 t 2 F 1 ( -t, 2 -t ; 2 -s -t ; 1 / 2) = ( -1) t t ! 2 t Γ( s +1) Γ( s -t +1) 2 F 1 ( -t, 2 -t ; s -t +1;1 / 2) . Next by applying the Euler transformation [20, (15.3.3)], then a t ( s ) = ( -1) t t ! 2 t Γ( s +1) Γ( s -t +1) · 2 1 -s -t · 2 F 1 ( s +1 , s -1; s -t +1;1 / 2) = ( -1) t t ! 2 1 -s Γ( s +1) 2 ˜ F 1 ( s -1 , s +1;1 -t + s ; 1 / 2) , resulting in the RHS of (126). This completes the proof of (42). In the following, we prove (43) in the same vein. By definition of F a , 1 ( s ) in (16) and definition of G | a | ( ν ) in (8) as well as symmetry in Corollary IV.1.2, we write (43) explicitly in terms of α i and w i ≜ (1 -z i ) / (1 + z i ) ∈ (0 , 1) for every i = 1 , . . . , n -1 , cf. Lemma IV.1, i.e.,

Therefore, it suffices to prove

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where G ( ν, t ) = 2 -ν · Γ( ν +1) 2 ˜ F 1 ( ν, ν +1;1+ ν -t ; 1 / 2) . For | w | &lt; 1 , (1 -w ) ν (1+ w ) -ν = ∑ ∞ t =0 b t ( ν ) w t holds true for every ν ∈ C with b t ( ν ) ≜ ∑ t k =0 ( -1) t -k ( ν t -k )( -ν k ) = ( -ν ) n t ! ∑ t k =0 ( -t ) k ( ν ) k (1+ ν -t ) k ( -1) k k ! , where the identity ( s k ) = ( -1) k ( -s ) k k ! for s ∈ C

and k ∈ Z ≥ 0 , ( a ) n -k = ( -1) k ( a ) n (1 -a -n ) k for 0 ≤ k ≤ n are applied. This expression can be written as ( -ν ) n t ! 2 F 1 ( -t, ν ; 1 + ν -t ; -1) by recognizing that ∑ t k =0 ( -t ) k ( ν ) k (1+ ν -t ) k ( -1) k k ! = 2 F 1 ( -t, ν ; 1+ ν -t ; -1) . Additionally, since ( -ν ) n t ! = 1 t ! Γ( -ν + t ) Γ( -ν ) = ( -1) t t ! Γ( ν +1) Γ( ν -t +1) , we obtain b t ( ν ) = ( -1) t t ! Γ( ν +1) Γ( ν -t +1) 2 F 1 ( -t, ν ; ν -t +1; -1) . By using the Pfaff transformation and the Euler transformation , we obtain 2 F 1 ( -t, ν ; ν -t +1; -1) = 2 t 2 F 1 ( -t, 1 -t ; ν -t +1;1 / 2) = 2 t · 2 -( ν + t ) 2 F 1 ( ν +1 , ν ; ν -t +1;1 / 2) . Putting it together, we obtain b t ( ν ) = ( -1) t t ! G ( ν, t ) , completing the proof of (44).

## N. Proof of Lemma VII.1

By induction from Table V, we obtain F a varoast q , 1 ( s ) = ∑ Q -1 i =0 ( 2 Q i ) C i A r i ( s ) . Recall that by definition A ( s ) = C 1 / 2 · e ∆( s -1 / 2) , then A r ( s ) = C r/ 2 · ( S r -D r ) s -1 / 2 ( S r + D r ) 1 / 2 -s . Substituting A r ( s ) with r = 2 Q -2 i into F a varoast q , 1 ( s ) , we obtain (63). By (43) in Theorem VI.1, we obtain (62). It is evident from Corollary III.1.1 and IV.1.3 that for any bit-channel of a ≡ W BSC( p ) , we have B ( | a ... | ) = 1 -G | a ... | (0) + 2 F a ... , 1 (1 / 2) . Starting from G | a ... | (0) , we have

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the binomial theorem is applied. Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

completing the proof of (64).

## O. Proof of Lemma VII.2

By Lemma III.2 and VII.1, after applying the ℓ -fold boxast -convolution to (62), we have G | a varoast q boxast ℓ | ( ν ) = G L | a varoast q | ( ν ) with L ≜ 2 ℓ , thus the RHS of (65). Next, we prove that the LHS of (65) equals the RHS. By definition of R j , α j and r i , we have ∑ j ∈J QL R j · C α j ∏ Q -1 i =0 ( S j r i (1 -ν ) r i D j r i ν r i ) = ∑ j ∈J QL L ! ∏ Q -1 i =0 j r i ! ∏ Q -1 i =0 ( ( 2 Q i ) C i S (1 -ν ) r i D ν r i ) j r i = ( ∑ Q -1 i =0 ( 2 Q i ) C i S 1 -ν r i D ν r i ) L where the last equality is obtained by the multinomial theorem . By (42) in Theorem VI.1, we obtain (66).

## P. Proof of Proposition VII.1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the Taylor series of 1 - √ 1 -z = ∑ ∞ κ =1 β κ z κ with β κ ≜ (2 κ -3)!! / (2 κ κ !) &gt; 0 for every | z | &lt; 1 is applied. Note that ( -1)!! ≡ 1 by convention. This completes the proof of the first equality of (67). By Lemma VII.2, the even moments generated by G | a varoast q | ( ν ) can be expressed as

̸

Let X Q ≜ tanh( | Q -K | · | ∆ | ) with K ∼ Bin(2 Q,p ) . Define L ≜ 2 ℓ and let X Q, (1) , . . . , X Q, ( L ) be i.i.d. copies of X Q , then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X QL ≜ ∏ L i =1 X Q, ( i ) ∈ [0 , 1) and ( a ) uses independence of the L copies. Therefore,

Substituting this result into the first equality of (67) yields the second equality. In what follow, we provide a second proof of the second equality via the MGF. First, we write X 2 QL = e 2 log X QL = e 2 ∑ L i =1 log X Q, ( i ) = e 2 ∑ L i =1 Y i with Y i ≜ log tanh( | Q -Z i | · | ∆ | ) and Z i i . i . d . ∼ Bin(2 Q,p ) . Since all r.v.s Y i with i = 1 , . . . , L are i.i.d, they possess the unique MGF, i.e., M Y i ( t ) ≡ M Y ( t ) = E [e tY ] with Y ≜ log X Q = log tanh( | Q -K | · | ∆ | ) . By properties of the MGF [28, (8.39)], we have M log X QL ( t ) = ∏ L i =1 M Y i ( t ) = M L Y ( t ) , thus, M 2 log X QL ( t ) = M L Y (2 t ) . Using the power series expansion of the exponential function and the definition of MGF, we have M e X ( t ) = ∑ ∞ κ =0 t κ κ ! E [e nX ] = ∑ ∞ κ =0 t κ κ ! M X ( κ ) for a r.v. X . By applying this property to X 2 QL , we have

On the other hand, recall the fractional power representation [29, p.vii], i.e., λ α = α Γ(1 -α ) ∫ ∞ 0 ( 1 -e -λt ) t -α -1 d t for λ &gt; 0 and α ∈ (0 , 1) . Let α = 1 / 2 and λ = 1 -X with a r.v. X &lt; 1 , then √ 1 -X = 1 2 √ π ∫ ∞ 0 ( 1 -e -t e tX ) t -3 / 2 d t . Therefore, E [ √ 1 -X ] = 1 2 √ π ∫ ∞ 0 (1 -e -t M X ( t )) t -3 / 2 d t . Let X = X 2 QL ∈ [0 , 1) , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since M Y ( t ) = ∑ 2 Q i =0 ( 2 Q i ) p i ¯ p 2 Q -i e t · log tanh( | Q -i |·| ∆ | ) = ∑ 2 Q i =0 ( 2 Q i ) p i ¯ p 2 Q -i tanh t ( | Q -i | · | ∆ | ) , then M Y (2 κ ) = G | a varoast q | (2 κ ) . Moreover, one verifies β κ = Γ ( κ -1 2 ) 2 √ πκ ! . Putting it together, this completes the second proof.

Example IX.1. At level k = 4 , the Bhattacharyya parameters are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Note that we have the following recurrence relations: S 2 i -D 2 i = 4 C i , S 4 i -D 4 i = 8 C i S 2 i , S i S j -D i D j = 2 C i S j -i , and S i S j + D i D j = 2 S i + j with j &gt; i ∈ Z &gt; 0 . Additionally, D 2 ≡ M 1 , 2 S 2 ≡ 1 + M 2 , 4 C = 1 -M 2 and S 2 ≡ 1 -2 C . Let τ = 1 / 2 + i u . Some intermediate results of importance of each bit-channel at level k = 3 and k = 4 are summarized as follows.

i ) for a boxast 3 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

b) for a boxast 3 varoast :

ii ) for a boxast 2 varoast :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a) for a boxast 2 varoastboxast :

b) for a boxast 2 varoast 2 :

iii ) for a boxastvaroastboxast :

a) for a boxastvaroastboxast 2 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

b) for a boxastvaroastboxastvaroast :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a

F

a

boxastvaroastboxastvaroast

,

1

(

s

) =

F

boxastvaroastboxast

,

1

(

s

) + 2

α

0

F

a

boxastvaroastboxast

,

1

(

s

)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

iv ) for a boxastvaroast 2 :

b) for a boxastvaroast 3 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a) for a boxastvaroast 2 boxast :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

v ) for a varoastboxast 2 :

a) for a varoastboxast 3 :

b) for a varoastboxast 2 varoast :

vi ) for a varoastboxastvaroast :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a) for a varoastboxastvaroastboxast :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

b) for a varoastboxastvaroast 2 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

vii ) for a varoast 2 boxast : from Table V and Example VI.2, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a) for a varoast 2 boxast 2 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

b) for a varoast 2 boxastvaroast :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

viii ) for a varoast 3 : from Table V, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

a) for a varoast 3 boxast :

b) for a varoast 4 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## REFERENCES

[1] Erdal Arikan. Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacity-achieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels. IEEE Transactions on information Theory, 55(7):3051-3073, 2009.

[2] Ryuhei Mori and Toshiyuki Tanaka. Performance and construction of polar codes on symmetric binary-input memoryless channels. In 2009 IEEE International symposium on information theory, pages 1496-1500. IEEE, 2009.

[3] Ryuhei Mori and Toshiyuki Tanaka. Performance of polar codes with the construction using density evolution. IEEE Communications Letters, 13(7):519521, 2009.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- [4] Ido Tal and Alexander Vardy. How to construct polar codes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 59(10):6562-6582, 2013.
- [5] Peter Trifonov. Efficient design and decoding of polar codes. IEEE transactions on communications, 60(11):3221-3227, 2012.
- [6] Jincheng Dai, Kai Niu, Zhongwei Si, Chao Dong, and Jiaru Lin. Does gaussian approximation work well for the long-length polar code construction? IEEE Access, 5:7950-7963, 2017.
- [7] Christian Schürch. A partial order for the synthesized channels of a polar code. In 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 220-224. IEEE, 2016.
- [8] Marco Mondelli, S Hamed Hassani, and Rüdiger L Urbanke. Construction of polar codes with sublinear complexity. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 65(5):2782-2791, 2018.
- [9] Gaoning He, Jean-Claude Belfiore, Ingmar Land, Ganghua Yang, Xiaocheng Liu, Ying Chen, Rong Li, Jun Wang, Yiqun Ge, Ran Zhang, et al. Betaexpansion: A theoretical framework for fast and recursive construction of polar codes. In GLOBECOM 2017-2017 IEEE Global Communications Conference, pages 1-6. IEEE, 2017.
- [10] Joseph M Renes, David Sutter, and S Hamed Hassani. Alignment of polarized sets. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 34(2):224-238, 2015.
- [11] Satish Babu Korada. Polar codes for channel and source coding. PhD thesis, Verlag nicht ermittelbar, 2009.
- [12] Bernhard C Geiger. The fractality of polar and reed-muller codes. Entropy, 20(1):70, 2018.
- [13] Mine Alsan. Channel polarization and polar codes. Technial Report, Information Theory Laboratory, School of Computer Communications Sciences, 2012.
- [14] Tom Richardson and Ruediger Urbanke. Modern coding theory. Cambridge university press, 2008.
- [15] Richard B Paris and David Kaminski. Asymptotics and mellin-barnes integrals, volume 85. Cambridge University Press, 2001.
- [16] Norbert Südland and Gerd Baumann. On the mellin transforms of dirac's delta function, the hausdorff dimension function, and the theorem by mellin. Fractional Calculus and Applied Analysis, 7(4):409-420, 2004.
- [17] George Fikioris. Mellin-transform method for integral evaluation: introduction and applications to electromagnetics . Springer Nature, 2022.
- [18] Hsin-Po Wang, Ting-Chun Lin, Alexander Vardy, and Ryan Gabrys. Sub-4.7 scaling exponent of polar codes. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 69(7):4235-4254, 2023.
- [19] Frank Olver. Asymptotics and special functions. AK Peters/CRC Press, 1997.
- [20] Milton Abramowitz and Irene A Stegun. Handbook of mathematical functions: with formulas, graphs, and mathematical tables, volume 55. Courier Corporation, 1965.
- [21] Izrail' Moiseeviˇ c Gel'fand, Izrail' Moiseeviˇ c Gel'fand, and Georgij Evgen'eviˇ c. Generalized functions. Vol. 1, Properties and operations. Academic Press, 1969.
- [22] Mark J Ablowitz and Athanassios S Fokas. Complex variables: introduction and applications . Cambridge University Press, 2003.
- [23] NIST Digital Library of Mathematical Functions . https://dlmf.nist.gov/, Release 1.2.4 of 2025-03-15.
- [24] Elias M Stein and Rami Shakarchi. Complex analysis, volume 2. Princeton University Press, 2010.
- [25] Norman Bleistein and Richard A Handelsman. Asymptotic expansions of integrals. Ardent Media, 1975.
- [26] Thomas John I'Anson Bromwich. An introduction to the theory of infinite series, volume 335. American Mathematical Soc., 2005.
- [27] D. Rainville. Special Functions. Macmillan, 1960.
- [28] Hisashi Kobayashi, Brian L Mark, and William Turin. Probability, random processes, and statistical analysis: applications to communications, signal processing, queueing theory and mathematical finance. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
- [29] René L Schilling, Renming Song, and Zoran Vondracek. Bernstein functions: theory and applications, volume 37. Walter de Gruyter, 2012.