## Long-range interactions assisted shortcuts to adiabaticity and battery charging in open quantum critical systems

Shishira Mahunta 1 and Victor Mukherjee 1

1 Department of Physical Sciences, IISER Berhampur, Berhampur 760003, India

In this work we show that long-range interactions can be significantly beneficial for implementing shortcuts to adiabaticity (STA) in many-body open quantum critical systems driven out of equilibrium, as well as for charging quantum batteries in the presence of dissipation. In sharp contrast to short range interactions where passage through criticality may demand STA control with non-zero interactions between infinitely distant spins, using the example of a Kitaev chain with long-range couplings, we find that the corresponding control may involve involve interaction strength with decays algebraically with distance. In case of non-unitary control, the advantage of long-range interactions manifest through reduction in the cost of STA. We further propose a modified STA technique aimed at charging a quantum battery in the presence of dissipation, in which case long-range interactions may enhance the resultant ergotropy. Our results establish long-range interactions as a valuable resource for quantum control, with direct implications for quantum technologies.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Quantum systems driven out of equilibrium form a versatile area of research [1], owing to their fundamental nature, as well as their for potential applications in quantum technologies [2, 3] and condensed matter physics [4]. Recent progress in experimental research has resulted in significant advancements in our ability to control the dynamics of quantum systems for various tasks [5], including for preparation of desired quantum states [6, 7], for engineering novel phases of matter such as discrete [8] and continuous [9] time crystals, and for designing quantum technologies [10]. However, quantum systems driven out of equilibrium are in general associated with non-adiabatic excitations [11]. This can be detrimental, for example, for quantum annealing [12], or for modeling high-performing quantum technologies, including quantum computers [13] and quantum engines [14]. Consequently, studies on control in quantum systems, such as through shortcuts to adiabaticity (STA) [15], in order to reduce non-adiabatic excitations in driven quantum systems, are crucial for designing high-performing quantum technologies [14].

STA has been studied rigorously in closed quantum systems, where this technique may involve applying a control counterdiabatic (CD) Hamiltonian in order to ensure that the system remains in the instantaneous ground state of a time-dependent bare Hamiltonian at all times [16]. On the other hand, studies on STA in open quantum systems have received far less attention. Yet, their importance cannot be overstated, owing to the ubiquitous presence of dissipation in nature, and also due to the relevance of open quantum systems driven out of equilibrium in quantum condensed matter physics [17] and quantum technologies [18]. STA in open quantum systems can entail designing a control protocol such that the system follows a particular target eigenstate of the Liouvillian [19]. Alternatively, control can be desgined to ensure that the system remains in it's instantaneous thermal equilibrium corresponding to a particular temperature at all times, even in the presence of a time-dependent Hamiltonian [20]. As recently reported in Ref. [21], in contrast to STA in unitary dynamics where this protocol may involve many-body control terms only close to criticality [22], in the case of many-body open quantum systems control of entropy may result in the STA protocol involving many-body interacting control terms even away from criticality. Therefore rigorous studies on practically implementable STA protocols in many-body open quantum systems are crucial for designing near-term quantum technologies. To this end, in this work we study STA in a long-range Kitaev (LRK) model driven through quantum critical points, in the presence of a Fermionic bath. Our main motivation is to study whether the complexity of control can be controlled by tuning the range of interaction present in the bare Hamilotnian. Notably, we show that in sharp contrast to STA in the presence of nearest neighbor interactions where the unitary control terms may involve infinite-range interactions at the critical point [22], here long-range interactions (LRIs) result in a CD Hamiltonian involving interaction strength which decays algebraically with distance. The same can contribute to reduction of the cost of STA in the case of non-unitary control. We further use the protocol developed here to model a quantum battery in the presence of dissipation. Importantly, we show that depending on the inherent critical features of the model, LRIs may assist in enhancing the ergotropy of the quantum battery.

Notably, LRIs have attracted significant attention in recent years [23], and have been used for studying STA in closed quantum systems [24], for designing highperforming quantum engines [25], quantum batteries [26], and have also found to be highly relevant for designing discrete [27] and continuous [28] time crystals in the absence of disorder.

The paper is organized as follows: in Sec. II we present the model and dynamics; generic considerations are discussed in Sec. II A, followed by an analysis of the LRK model in Sec. II B. We study the unitary part of the STA protocol in Sec. III, and the non-unitary control in Sec.

IV. Analysis of the heat and power associated with STA are presented in Secs. VA and VB, respectively. We apply the protocol developed here to model a dissipation induced quantum battery with STA-enhanced ergotropy in Sec. VI. Finally we conclude in Sec. VII.

## II. MODEL AND DYNAMICS

## A. STA in generic long-range interacting systems

We now consider a quench across a quantum critical point in the presence of LRIs, with the interaction range controllable by a tuning parameter α . In general, one can expect the corresponding energy gap E ( α ) to be a function of the parameter α as well, such that E ( α ) → 0 close to criticality [29]. This in turn leads to non-adiabatic excitations in quantum critical systems driven out of equilibrium [11], thus necessitating the implementation of STA control protocols [22]. In general, the STA control terms can be expected to be functions of E ( α ) (see below, and also Refs. [16] and [20]), with the unitary control strength decreasing with increasing energy gaps [30]. Consequently, we expect setups where one can tune E ( α ) by varying α can be ideal for implementation of practically realizable STA protocols, through appropriate choices of the parameter α .

We exemplify the above using a detailed analysis of a LRK chain driven across quantum critical points. Importantly, a LRK chain is associated with two critical points with significantly different dispersion relations. In one case E ( α ) increases with increasing range of interactions (i.e., decreasing α ). As we discuss below, this allows us to implement STA with less demanding unitary control fields, through suitable choices of α . On the other hand, the other critical point is associated with E ( α ) increasing with decreasing range of interactions (i.e., increasing α ), which can negate the advantages associated with LRIs. In addition, we show that the above property of the LRK chain can also enable us to model a quantum battery with high ergotropy for longer ranges of interactions, through population inversion implemented by a modified STA protocol.

## B. Long-range Kitaev chain

We consider a LRK chain comprising spinless fermions on a one-dimensional lattice with long-range coupling. The Hamiltonian is given by [23, 31, 32]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here c † j ( c j ) are Fermionic creation (annihilation) operators at site j , and n j = c † j c j denotes the number operator. The parameter J represents the nearest-neighbor hopping amplitude, while µ ( t ) is the time-dependent chemical potential. We consider an interaction which decays algebraically with the distance between sites i and j , with an exponent α &gt; 0; α → ∞ limit corresponds to nearest neighbor interactions in which case LRK chain reduces to the transverse field Ising chain [32, 33], while smaller values of α corresponding to enhancement in the range of interactions. Introducing the momentum-space Fermionic operators

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with antiperiodic boundary conditions c j + L = -c j , the Hamiltonian decouples into independent momentum sectors. In the Nambu basis: Ψ † k = ( c † k , c -k ), the Hamiltonian assumes the Bogoliubov-de Gennes form,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with H 0 k ( t ) = [( µ +2 J cos k ) σ z + i f α ( k ) σ x ], and f α ( k ) denotes the Fourier transform of the long-range pairing function:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the occupation-number basis {| 0 k , 0 -k ⟩ , | 0 k , 1 -k ⟩ , | 1 k , 0 -k ⟩ , | 1 k , 1 -k ⟩} one can write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We note that while the unitary dynamics couples only the even-parity subspace, the inclusion of dissipation necessitates working in the full four-dimensional basis [34, 35]. Diagonalizing Eq. (4) via a Bogoliubov transformation yields the quasiparticle spectrum

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

while the remaining two eigenvalues satisfy ˜ E (2) k = ˜ E (3) k = 0. In order to have non diverging energy spectrum in k-space, we only consider α &gt; 1 [23, 31]. As seen from Eq. (5), the energy gap vanishes for the modes k = π and k = 0 at the critical points µ = 2 J and µ = -2 J , respectively [36]. Throughout this work we set J = 1 / 2, the Planck constant ℏ and the Boltzmann constant k B are set to unity, and the chemical potential µ ( t ) = t τ is varied linearly in time with a quench rate τ .

We first focus on the long-wavelength behavior of the quasiparticle dispersion E k ( α ) near the critical points µ = ± 1. Close to µ = -1, the Taylor expansion of E k ( α ) around k → 0 leads to,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ϵ -= µ + 1 denotes the distance from the criticality, A α = 2 ∣ ∣ cos ( πα 2 ) Γ(1 -α ) ∣ ∣ and B α = ζ ( α -1). Here, Γ( x ) and ζ ( x ) denote the Gamma and Riemann zeta functions, respectively. Owing to the change in the form of E k ( α ) at α = 2 (see Eq. (6)), and following Refs. [23, 31], below we refer to 1 &lt; α &lt; 2 as the long-range regime, while α &gt; 2 constitute the short-range regime. α = 2 denotes the boundary between short and longrange regimes, and is associated with a logarithmic correction (see Appendix A for details).

Close to µ = +1, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for both long-range and short-range regimes. Here ϵ + = µ -1, q = π -k and ˜ B α = η ( α -1), with η ( s ) denoting the Dirichlet eta function. Further, in sharp contrast to the case of µ → -1 where E k ( α, µ → -1) increases with decreasing α , here ˜ B α , and hence E k ( α, µ → +1), monotonically increases with increasing α for α ≥ 1 and approaches 1 as α →∞ . This suggests qualitative differences between the dynamics of system close to the two critical points, as we verify below through rigorous analysis.

We assume that the setup is coupled to a Fermionic bath [34], such that an adiabatic dynamics with τ →∞ results in each momentum mode remaining in its instantaneous thermal state

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

at any time t . Here | n k t ⟩ are the instantaneous eigenstates of H 0 k ( t ), λ k n = e -β ˜ E n ( k ) / Z k , and Z k = 2+ e -βE k + e βE k denotes the partition function (see Eqs. (4) and (5)).

In general a quench with a finite τ would result in the setup going out of thermal equilibrium with the Fermionic bath. However, here we consider control in the form of STA in order to enforce the trajectory (8), even in the presence of finite τ . To this end, following Refs. [20] and [21], we assume each mode of the system evolves according to a Lindblad type master equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is the counterdiabatic Hamiltonian with respect to H 0 k ( t ) [16, 22]. The control Lindblad operators in the instantaneous eigen basis of H 0 k ( t ) are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

denotes the rate of transition from the | n k t ⟩⟨ n k t | state to the state | m k t ⟩⟨ m k t | for the mode k , with r being the rank of ρ ( t ). | m k t ⟩ , | n k t ⟩ denote any of the four instantaneous eigenstates for the k -th mode, given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, | ξ k 1 ( t ) ⟩ is the ground state, | ξ k 2 ( t ) ⟩ and | ξ k 3 ( t ) ⟩ are degenerate second excited states, and | ξ k 4 ( t ) ⟩ is the highest excited state. Further, the free Fermionic nature of the system allow us to write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

Below we examine separately the role of LRIs in determining the unitary CD Hamiltonian H k CD , which ensures adiabatic evolution across the critical point in the closed system, and the dissipative control terms that, together with H k CD , constrains the dynamics to follow the target trajectory Eq. (8).

## III. CD DRIVE ACROSS A QCP WITH LRIS

Now we investigate the effect of LRIs on H k CD (Cf. Eq. (10)). Following the standard construction of transitionless driving for free-fermionic systems exhibiting quantum phase transitions [16, 22], the corresponding H k CD in the momentum space can be written as (see Appendix B)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Fourier transforming Eq. (17) to real space yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here ˆ O m denotes the operators acting on sites separated by a distance m , while h m ( µ, α ) denotes the strength of the associated CD field. In the short-range limit α → ∞ , the pairing function reduces to f α ( k ) → sin k, and Eq. (17) reproduces the nearest-neighbor transversefield Ising model results derived in Ref. [22]. In that limit, the CD coefficients decay exponentially with distance, h m ( µ ) ∼ e -m/ξ ( µ ) with ξ ( µ ) being the correlation length of transverse-field Ising model. However, as we show below, the long-range structure of f α ( k ) may lead to a qualitatively different spatial structure of the CD field, especially near criticality.

## A. CD drive across the critical point µ = -1

## 1. Long-range regime ( 1 &lt; α &lt; 2 )

We first analyze the behavior of the CD coupling coefficient h m ( ϵ -, α ) near the critical point µ = -1 in the long range regime (1 &lt; α &lt; 2). Using Eqs. (6) and (18), and the Taylor series expansion of the of the function f α ( k ) (see Appendix A), one gets

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

(i) Away from criticality ( ϵ -= 0) : Introducing a scaling variable y = m/m ϵ , m ϵ = ( A α / | ϵ -| ) 1 / ( α -1) and performing the change of variable k = x/m ϵ , Eq. (19) can be written in the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The asymptotic behavior of h m follows from the limits of the scaling function Φ α ( y ). For distances much longer than the crossover scale ( y ≫ 1 or m ≫ m ϵ ), the factor sin( yx ) becomes rapidly oscillatory. As a result, the contributions from large x cancel out, and the integral is dominated by the smallx region, resulting in Φ α ( y ) ≈ ∫ ∞ 0 dx x α -1 sin( yx ). Therefore we finally get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, for the distance much smaller than the crossover scale ( y ≪ 1 or m ≪ m ϵ ), the dominant contribution of the scaling function, Φ α ( y ) comes from the large x region. Therefore the integral in Eq. (20) can be approximated as ∼ ∫ ∞ 0 dxx 1 -α sin( yx ) which reduces to,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where C ( α ) = 1 4 π (1 -α ) tan ( πα 2 ) (see also Appendix B). We verify the above analytical forms (Eqs. (21) and (22)) with numerically obtained values of h m in Fig. 1; as seen in the main panel of Figs. 1(a), the crossover between the two scaling forms h m ∼ m -(2 -α ) for m ≪ m ϵ and h ∼ m -α for m ≫ m ϵ occurs at m ∼ m ϵ .

(ii) At the criticality ( ϵ -= 0) : At the critical point µ = -1 we have (see Eq. (19))

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the limit of m ≫ 1, we get (see Appendix B for a detailed derivation) back the result Eq. (22):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In sharp contrast to the case of nearest neighbor interactions where introduction of STA demands infinite-range control terms at the critical point (see Ref. [22]), here the CD couplings h m decay algebraically with an exponent continuously tunable by α , thus emphasizing the significant advantage offered by LRIs, as also verified numerically in the inset of the Fig. 1(a). This is a direct consequence of the energy gap closing sublinearly in the long-range regime for µ →-1.

## 2. Short-range regime ( α &gt; 2 )

We now analyze the behavior of the CD coupling h m ( ϵ -, α ) in the short-range regime α &gt; 2. Following Eq. (18), in this regime one gets

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As shown in Appendix B, in the limit of m &gt;&gt; 1 Eq. (24) finally leads us to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, away from the critical point the CD couplings are exponentially localized in real space, with a decay length ξ ( -) CD = ζ ( α -1) | ϵ -| . At the critical point ( ϵ -= 0), the exponential factor in Eq. (25) approaches unity and the CD couplings saturate to the constant value

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

analgous to that seen earlier for transverse Ising model with nearest neighbor interactions in the limit of α →∞ [22]. The above analytical results are verified numerically in Fig. 1(b).

## B. CD drive across the critical point µ = +1

We now analyze the behavior of the CD coupling near the second critical point µ = +1. Repeating the same steps as in Section III A 2 yields a staggered modulation of the CD coupling:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we have used sin[ m ( π -q )] = ( -1) m +1 sin( mq ) and ϵ + = µ -1 (see Appendix B for more details). Analogous to that seen close to the µ = -1 criticality, the magnitude of the CD couplings are exponentially localized in real space in this case as well, with a m dependent sign. The corresponding decay length is ξ (+) CD = η ( α -1) | µ -1 | . At the critical point ( ϵ + = 0), the exponential factor in Eq. (27) becomes unity and the CD couplings saturate to the constant magnitude

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The above analytical results Eqs. (27) and (28) are verified numerically in Fig. 1(c).

## C. Variation of h m with range of interaction α

We plot the magnitude of the CD field h m (see Eq. (18)) close to the critical points µ = ± 1, as a function of the interaction exponent α , in Fig. 2. Notably, | h m | decreases as the system moves from the short-range regime ( α &gt; 2) toward the long-range regime (1 &lt; α &lt; 2) for µ = -1. This stems from the enhancement of E k ( α ) with decrease in α for k → 0, thus showing the advantage of LRIs for suppressing non-adiabatic excitations in the this regime. On the other hand, the enhancement of E k ( α ) with increasing α for k → π results in the opposite trend being observed near the second critical point µ = +1, where short-range interactions require stronger control fields.

We summarize the behavior of the counterdiabtic coupling across the critical points, µ = ± 1 in long and short regimes in Table-I.

## IV. STA IN THE PRESENCE OF DISSIPATION

In this section we investigate how LRIs modify the CD control associated with the dissipative dynamics. The system evolves according to the Lindblad master equation [Eq. (9)], where the dissipative STA protocol is implemented through time-dependent Lindblad operators A ( k ) mn ( t ) and the corresponding transition rates γ ( k ) mn ( t ). The explicit expressions for A ( k ) mn and γ ( k ) mn are summarized in Appendix C. The forms of γ ( k ) mn 's remain similar to that evaluated for the nearest neighbor interaction case in Ref. [21], albeit with the introduction of the parameter f α . As we discuss below, this in turn results in non-trivial dependence of the control terms on the range of interactions.

## A. Impact of LRIs on the dissipative control strength

We analyze the effect of the long-range exponent α on transition rates γ ( k ) mn across the critical points µ = ± 1, focusing on different temperature regimes. We first consider µ = -1, where the gap closes at k = 0 and the spectrum is non-linear.

(i) Low-temperature regime: The variation of γ ( k ) mn 's in the low temperature regime are shown in Figs. 3a - 3d. In the limit of βE k ≫ 1, the system remains close to its instantaneous ground state. Consequently, excitation rates from the ground state to higher excited states (e.g., γ 21 , γ 41 , ) are exponentially suppressed for large β , except in the vicinity of the gap-closing point ( E k → 0) (see Figs. 3(a), 3(b) and Eq. (C6)). This suppression is more pronounced for small α , owing to larger values of E k (1 &lt; α &lt; 2 , µ = -1) ∝ k ( α -1) in this regime (see also Appendix A). In contrast, de-excitation rates from higher energy levels (e.g., γ 12 , γ 14 ) scale as γ ( k ) mn ∝ e βE k E k ,

Figure 1. (a) Comparison between the numerically evaluated CD coupling h m ( µ, α ) and the analytical predictions in the long-range regime. The main panel shows the behavior close to criticality µ = -1 ( ϵ -= 0 . 3, α = 1 . 4); the CD coupling exhibits a crossover from a detuned asymptotic decay described by Eq. (21) to a power-law behavior Eq. 22, controlled by the characteristic length scale m ϵ = ( A α / | ϵ | ) 1 / ( α -1) . The inset shows the critical scaling at ϵ -= 0 for α = 1 . 4 and α = 1 . 6 (see Eq. (23)). (b) Comparison between numerical and analytical results for the CD coupling in the short-range regime, showing exponentially localized behavior close criticality µ = -1 (see Eq. 24) (main panel) and the corresponding critical behavior at epsilon 0 = 0 (see Eq. 26) (inset). (c) Comparison between numerical and analytical results for the CD coupling near µ = +1, showing the behavior away from criticality (see Eq. 27) (main panel) and at criticality ϵ + = 0 (see Eq. 28) (inset). Numerical results are obtained from direct integration of Eq. (18).

<!-- image -->

Table I. Behavior of the CD coupling strength h m ( µ, α ) in the long-range (LR) (1 &lt; α &lt; 2) and short-range (SR) ( α &gt; 2) regimes.

̸

Figure 2. Dependence of h m ( µ, α ), obtained through numerical integration of Eq. (18), on the interaction exponent α near µ = ± 1. Here ϵ ± = 0 . 1.

| Critical point  Regime  At criticality (  ϵ  ±  = 0  ) Away from criticality (  ϵ  ±  = 0  )  µ  =  -  1  LR (1  &lt; α &lt;  2)  h  m  ∼  m  -  (2  -  α  )  m  ≪  m  ϵ  :  h  m  ∼  m  -  (2  -  α  )  m  ≫  m  ϵ  :  h  m  ∼  m  -  α  SR (  α &gt;  2)  h  m  →  constant  h  m  ∼  e  -  m/ξ  (  -  )  CD  µ  = +1  LR and SR  h  m  ∼  (  -  1)  m  +1  h  m  ∼  (  -  1)  m  +1  e  -  m/ξ  (+)  CD   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- image -->

(see Eq. (C7)), and thus become strongly enhanced as the system relaxes toward the ground state.

## (ii) High-temperature regime:

In the high-temperature limit of βE k →∞ , the system approaches a maximally mixed state with nearly equal population of all energy levels, resulting in small values of γ mn as seen in Figs. 3(e) and 3(f). Several dissipative control terms { viz. γ ( k ) 12 , γ ( k ) 23 , γ ( k ) 21 , γ ( k ) 41 , γ ( k ) 42 } ∼ 1 /E k ( α ), thereby decreasing with increasing range of interactions (i.e., decreasing α ). On the other hand, the remaining rates become largely insensitive to α in this limit (see Appendix C).

We now turn to the critical point µ = +1, where the gap closes linearly for k → π , ∀ α , both in high as well as low temperature regimes. Unlike the µ = -1 case, in this case the low-energy spectrum increases as the system crosses over from long-range to short-range interactions (i.e., with increasing α ). As a consequence, transition rates that scale as γ ( k ) mn ∼ 1 /E k ( α ) (eg. γ ( k ) 41 , γ ( k ) 31 = γ ( k ) 21 , γ ( k ) 23 = γ ( k ) 32 ) decrease with increasing α , thereby indicating the requirement of stronger rates of dissipative control for longer interaction ranges (see Fig.( 3)); the remaining γ 's become insensitive to α , as also seen for µ → -1. Furthermore, analogous to the µ = -1 case, high temperatures correspond to small values of γ ( k ) mn 's, owing to thermal mixing.

Figure 3. (a)-(d) Main panels show the transition rates γ ( k ) mn ( t ) as a function of the time-dependent chemical potential µ ( t ) driven across the critical point µ = -1, for k = 0 . 1). The insets display γ ( k ) mn ( t ) with µ ( t ) driven across the critical point µ = +1, for k = 3 . 0. Results are presented for different values of the LRI exponent α in low temperature regime β = 10. (e),(f) Same as above, but in the high-temperature regime β = 0 . 01.

<!-- image -->

## V. POWER AND HEAT CURRENT UNDER STA PROTOCOL

In this section we investigate the effect of the LRIs on the energetic costs associated with the STA protocol, quantified by the heat and power generated in this process.

## A. Heat Current

Following Refs. [20, 21, 37], the heat current under the STA protocol is defined as I STA = Tr( ˙ ρH STA ), where H STA = H 0 + H CD is the total Hamiltonian. Using the master equation (9) [38], the heat current becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and we have used Tr([ ρ, H STA ] H STA ) = 0. Following Eq. (9) and Refs. [21] and [39], the bare heat current can be decomposed into independent momentum-mode contributions as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In contrast, the counterdiabatic contribution I CD vanishes (see appendix D for details), implying that the CD Hamiltonian does not directly generate any heat current by itself. In the continuum thermodynamic limit, using Eqs. (5) and (8), the total heat can be evaluated as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(i) Low temperature regime: In low temperature limit of βE k &gt;&gt; 1 we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here the contribution from the modes with E k ≫ 1 /β are exponentially suppressed, so that the dominant contribution to I STA arises from the low-energy critical modes only. This in turn results in the heat current being strongly reduced when the system is driven far from the critical region.

As shown in Fig. 4(a), the strongly α -dependent dispersion relation close to µ = -1 result in lower magnitudes of heat currents for smaller α in this regime, thus once again showing the beneficial effects of LRIs in this regime. On the other hand, the opposite is true close to µ = +1, where magnitudes of heat currents increase with increasing ranges of interactions (see Appendix D).

(ii) High-temperature regime: In the hightemperature limit of βE k ≪ 1, we get an α -independent form of I STA (see Eq. (31) and Fig. 4b):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The absence of any critical features in this case can be attributed to strong thermal fluctuations dominating over quantum fluctuations in the high-temperature regime, thereby effectively washing out any signature of the quantum criticality.

## B. Power

The total power generated during the STA dynamics can be written as [38]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the bare contribution to the power P 0 can be decomposed into independent momentum-mode,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For a system evolving according to the master equation [Eq. (9)], the P ( k ) 0 can be written as P ( k ) 0 = ∑ n λ ( k ) n ˙ ˜ E ( k ) n , while P CD = 0 for an exact CD protocol (see appendix D for detail). In the continuum thermodynamic limit Eq. (34) we therefore get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with (see Eqs. (5) and (8))

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(i) Low-temperature regime.

In the low-temperature limit, βE k ≫ 1 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here E k &gt; 0 for all k . Consequently, the sign of P STA is determined by the ( µ +cos k ) factors in Eq. (39), weighted by the corresponding E -1 k . The different dispersion relations close to the two critical points result in critical signatures in the form of local maxima in |P STA | to be strongly present only for short-range case ( α &gt; 2) close to µ = -1, while the same remains present for all values of α close to µ = 1. In addition, P STA changes sign close to µ = -1, while P STA increases with increasing α close to µ = 1 (see Fig. 4(c) and Appendix D). The absence of pronounced critical signatures for small α close to µ = -1 can be attributed to E k vanishing slowly in this case in the long-range regime.

(ii) High-temperature regime. In the limit of βE k ≪ 1 we have tanh( βE k / 2) ≃ βE k 2 , which, analogous to the case of heat currents, result in an α -independent form of P STA without any signature of criticality (see Fig. 4(b))

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We summarize the results for power dissipation P STA and heat produced, I STA under STA protocol in Table II.

## VI. CHARGING A QUANTUM BATTERY THROUGH CONTROLLED DISSIPATION

Till now we have focussed on application of STA to drive a quantum critical system along its instantaneous thermal states. In contrast, now we show that the same technique, with some modifications, can be applied to charge a quantum battery [40] through controlled dissipation, thereby emphasizing the versatile nature of the STA protocol studied here. In particular, we consider an evolution such that each mode is driven along the following trajectory:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ Z k = ∑ n e β ˜ E ( n ) k is the normalization constant. Thus in contrast to the state considered in Eq. (8), here the modified target state Eq. (41) is non-thermal, with higher energy states associated with higher occupation probabilities. As before, the global state of the system is given by ˜ ρ ( t ) = ⊗ k ˜ ρ k ( t ) .

In order to realize an evolution constrained along the trajectory Eq. (41), we consider the master equation (9). The counterdiabatic Hamiltonian H CD Eq.(10) guarantees transport along the instantaneous eigenstates | n k t ⟩ , while the Lindblad jump operators A ( k ) mn result in transitions between these instantaneous eigenstates; consequently these control terms remain unchanged under the current protocol. However, in contrast to the STA technique discussed above, now one needs to modify the rates γ k mn to ˜ γ k mn = ˜ λ m r ˜ λ n in order to engineer a dissipationinduced quantum battery with non-zero ergotropy. Following the dispersion relation given in Eq. (5), the rates of dispersion are modified as follows: ˜ γ ( k ) pn = γ ( k ) qn , ˜ γ ( k ) np = γ ( k ) nq for p, q = 1 , 4 , p = q and n = 2 , 3, ˜ γ ( k ) mn = γ ( k ) nm for m,n = 1 , 4; m = n , and ˜ γ ( k ) 23 = ˜ γ ( k ) 32 = γ ( k ) 23 = γ ( k ) 32 .

Figure 4. (a) Heat current I STA in the low-temperature regime β = 10. (b) Heat current I STA (main) and power P STA (inset) in the high-temperature regime β = 0 . 1. (c) Power P STA in the low-temperature regime β = 10.

<!-- image -->

Table II. Heat current I STA and power dissipated P STA near the critical points µ = ± 1 in different temperature and interaction regimes.

| Observable  T  Criticality  Variation with  α  I  STA  Low-  T  µ  =  -  1  Suppressed for smaller  α  µ  = +1  Enhanced for smaller  α  High-  T  µ  =  ±  1  Does not depend on  α  P  STA  Low-  T  µ  =  -  1  Shows local maxima in  &#124;P  STA  &#124;  for larger values of  α  µ  = +1  Enhanced for smaller  α  High-  T  µ  =  ±  1  Does not depend on  α   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

̸

## A. Ergotropy

Ergotropy is the maximum amount of work that can be extracted from a quantum state ρ ( t ) by a unitary operation without altering the von Neumann entropy of the state. In the present case the instantaneous total ergotropy is given by [41-44]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here Π k ( t ) = U ( t )˜ ρ k ( t ) U † ( t ) with U ( t ) = e iϕ ( t ) ( | ξ k 1 ( t ) ⟩⟨ ξ k 4 ( t ) | + | ξ k 4 ( t ) ⟩⟨ ξ k 1 ( t ) | ) (see Eq. (13)) denotes the passive state corresponding to the populationinverted state ˜ ρ k ( t ), for an arbitrary phase factor ϕ ( t ). In the present case Π k ( t ) coincides with the instantaneous thermal state ρ th k ( t ) at time t [45, 46]. Using this construction together with the spectral decomposition of the Hamiltonian, the ergotropy of each mode can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The dependence of the ergotropy on α for different values of µ is shown in Fig. 5(a). The relation E k ∝ k α -1 for 1 ≤ α ≤ 2 close to µ = -1 results in long-range advantage in charging a quantum battery in this regime, signified by increasing values of ergotropy for decreasing α . On the other hand, the linear dispersion relation of E k for all α results in an ergotropy which is weakly dependent on α for µ ≈ 1.

As shown in Fig. 5(b), lower temperatures correspond to higher ergotropy for all α , thus highlighting the importance of low temperatures for charging a quantum battery. On the other hand, thermal mixing at high tem-

̸

Figure 5. (a) Ergotropy W ( t ) with µ for different values of α at inverse temperature β = 1. The ergotropy increases with increasing range of interactions. (b) Variation of the ergotropy W ( t ) with µ for different values of β , for α = 1 . 2. Lower temperatures result in higher values of ergotropy.

<!-- image -->

peratures suppresses population imbalance and reduces the extractable work.

Interestingly, despite the system being driven across critical points, the ergotropy exhibits no signatures of criticality. This may be attributed to the control protocol studied here, which ensures that the system is evolved through a particular trajectory, irrespective of the presence of criticality.

## B. Power and Heat current

Following Sec. (V) and Ref.-[21], the power for the mode k can be written as ˜ P ( k ) 0 = ∑ n ˜ λ k n ˙ E k n = ˙ E k ( ˜ λ 1 -˜ λ 4 ) = -P ( k ) 0 , while the corresponding heat current is given by ˜ I ( k ) 0 = ∑ n ˙ ˜ λ k n E k n = E k ( ˙ ˜ λ 1 -˙ ˜ λ 4 ) = -I ( k ) 0 . As before, the modified CD Hamiltonian does not directly contribute to the power or the heat current in this case as well. Consequently, we finally get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## VII. CONCLUSIONS

We studied shortcuts to adiabaticity (STA) in an open long-range quantum critical system, through suitable engineered unitary and non-unitary operators. We show that for suitable choices of parameters, LRIs can be significantly beneficial for controlling excitations in open quantum critical systems driven out of equilibrium, as well as for charging a quantum battery through a STA inspired quantum control technique.

In this work we have considered the LRK chain, which shows two different dispersion relations close to the two quantum critical points µ = ± 1; the energy gap E k ( α ) increases with increasing range of interactions for µ = -1, which in turn results in the long range advantages discussed above. In particular, for LRIs quantified by 1 &lt; α &lt; 2, the CD Hamiltonian strength h m denoting the strength of interactions between particles separated by a distance m decays algebraically with m both away from criticality, as well as at the criticality. This is in sharp contrast with the behavior seen for short range interactions obtained for α &gt; 2, in which case h m assumes a m -independent constant value at criticality, analogous to that seen earlier for the transverse Ising chain in Ref. [22]. This result provides a clear way of harnessing LRIs for engineering practically realizable exact STA protocols in quantum critical systems, which otherwise can be expected to be impossible to implement, owing to the requirement of infinite-range interactions at criticality. In case of control in the presence of dissipation, LRIs assist in STA through reduction in the costs of control, quantified by decrease of magnitude of heat current with decreasing values of α . Finally we propose a modified STA protocol, which aims at using the setup as a quantum battery, through population inversion. We show that longer ranges of interactions are beneficial in this case as well, through enhancement of ergotropy for lower values of α , for µ ≈ -1.

In sharp contrast to the beneficial effects of LRIs discussed above, range of interactions have distinctly different effects close to µ = 1. Here E k ( α ) assumes linear dispersion relation for all α &gt; 1, with E k ( α ) decreasing with decreasing α . This in turn results in vanishing of the long-range advantages observed earlier for µ →-1.

The above discussed effects of LRIs and criticality become more pronounced for lower values of temperatures. On the other hand, thermal fluctuations dominate at high temperatures, thereby washing away all effects of α and criticality. Further, as discussed in Appendix E, inspite of the local form of the control Lindblad operators in the momentum space, the real space representation of the same involves multi-body interaction terms even away from criticality, for all values of α . This can be attributed to the requirement for control of entropy, which in general can be expected to involve non-local control terms.

Finally, we note that the STA protocol presented in this work can be expected to be implementable in currently existing experimental platforms, including in ion traps [47] and quantum simulators [48, 49], and can be highly relevant for quantum control in many-body open quantum systems [50], as well as for applications in quantum technologies [51], including finite-time quantum engines [18] and quantum batteries [52].

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

VM acknowledges A. del Campo for fruitful discussions on related works. VM also acknowledges support from Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF) through ARG (Project No. ANRF/ARG/2025/002531/PS).

## Appendix A: Low-momentum expansion of the pairing function and quasiparticle spectrum

In this appendix, we derive the low-momentum behavior of the function f α ( k ) [Eq. (3)] and the quasiparticle spectrum E k [Eq. (6)] near the critical modes k = 0 and k = π .

## 1. Expansion around µ = -1

Near the critical point µ = -1, where the gap closes at k = 0, we have [31, 33, 53, 54]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Defining ϵ -= µ +1 and expanding µ +cos k ≃ ϵ --k 2 / 2, the quasiparticle spectrum reduces to (see Fig. 6)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 6. Quasiparticle spectrum E k of the LRK model for different α at µ = -1. The inset shows the dispersion near k = π , and at µ = +1 where the spectrum remains linear for all α .

<!-- image -->

## 2. Expansion around µ = +1

Near the second critical point µ = +1, the gap closes at k = π . Writing q = π -k , the pairing function expands as [55]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where η ( s ) = (1 -2 1 -s ) ζ ( s ) is the Dirichlet eta function. Defining ϵ + = µ -1 and expanding µ + cos( π -q ) ≃ ϵ + + q 2 / 2, the spectrum becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, unlike the case µ = -1, the quasiparticle spectrum at µ = +1 remains linear for all α &gt; 1.

## Appendix B: CD drive for the LRK chain

In this section we briefly derive the CD Hamiltonian for the LRK chain in Fermionic representation, and its corresponding real space representation

## 1. Momentum-space representation

The momentum-space representation of the long-range Kitaev chain (Eq.1) reads

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with H k ( µ ) = ( µ + cos k ) σ z + f α ( k ) σ x and the quasiparticle spectrum is E k ( µ, α ) = √ ( µ +cos k ) 2 + f 2 α ( k ) .

Each momentum sector therefore corresponds to an effective two-level Hamiltonian H k = d ⃗ k · ⃗ σ with d ⃗ k = ( f α ( k ) , 0 , µ +cos k ) . For a generic two-level Hamiltonian the adiabatic gauge potential is given by [22, 56]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since ∂ µ ( µ +cos k ) = 1 and ∂ µ f α ( k ) = 0, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus the adiabatic gauge potential becomes

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which results in the counterdiabatic Hamiltonian Eq. (17):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2. Real-space representation of H CD

To obtain the real-space form of the CD Hamiltonian we first note the identity

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting this into Eq. (B5) gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now express the Fermionic operators in real space using the inverse Fourier transform

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Introducing the separation m = j -l and reorganizing the sums, the above expression can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting this result back into the CD Hamiltonian(Eq. B7) and performing the summation over momentum, one obtains Eq. (18).

## 3. Derivation for the CD coupling h m

Here, we derive the form of CD coupling h m ( µ, α ) across the criticality µ = ± 1, discussed in Sec. III.

(a) µ = -1 , 1 &lt;α&lt; 2 : Putting ϵ -= 0 in Eq. (19) one gets

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Making the scaling substitution q = mk we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The above integral converges for large m and using the standard identity [57]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with β = 2 -α , we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Γ(2 -α ) = (1 -α )Γ(1 -α ), one finally obtains Eq. (23) in the main text.

(b) µ →-1 , α &gt; 2 : The integral (Eq.(24))

.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is dominated by the momentum region near k = 0. Therefore the upper limit of integration can be extended to infinity. Factoring out B 2 α from the denominator gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the standard integral [57]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we obtain Eq. (25).

(c) µ → +1 , α : Now, we derive the CD coupling h m ( µ, α ) near second critical point µ → +1, where the gap closes at k = π . Small q = π -k expansions of pairing function and quasi particle spectrum are given in Eqs. (A3)-(A4) and using them in Eq.(18), one finds

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where we have used the sine factor as, sin( mk ) = sin[ m ( π -q )] = ( -1) m +1 sin( mq ). Proceeding exactly as in the µ = -1, α &gt; 2 case and defining: κ + = | ϵ + | ˜ B α . we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the same standard integral(see Eq.(B15) we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, substituting ˜ B α = η ( α -1) gives us Eq. (27).

## Appendix C: Lindblad operators and dissipation rates

In this appendix, we provide the engineered Lindblad operators, A ( k ) mn and transition rates γ ( k ) mn . Without loss of generality, we focus on the one of operators, A ( k ) 12 as follows,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Following [21] we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The γ ( k ) mn s for the mode k are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In low temperature limit, βE k ≫ 1 the γ ( k ) mn reduces to;

Similarly,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Following Eqs. (C1) - (C3) we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proceeding as above, one can show that the different Lindblad operators introduced in Eqs. (11) and (13) are given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the high-temperature regime βE k ≪ 1 we have tanh( βE k / 2) ≈ βE k / 2. Consequently, in this case the engineered transition rates γ ( k ) mn that scale as tanh( βE k / 2) /E k , such as γ 21 and γ 23 , become independent of the energy E k , and hence of the long-range exponent α (see Fig. 3f).

## Appendix D: Heat currents and Power

Heat Current: As defined in the Eq.(29), the CD contribution to heat dissipation is given as,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the CD Hamiltonian H CD (C.f Eq.(10)) one gets,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

One can further simplify I CD as [21],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we have used, Φ mm = ⟨ m t | ∂ t m t ⟩ .

Power: Next, we evaluate the power dissipated P CD = Tr[ ρ ( t ) ˙ H CD ( t )] due to the CD Hamiltonian H CD in presence of a non-unitary evolution by considering the desired path for the system to be the instantaneous thermal state ρ ( t ) = ∑ l λ l ( t ) | l t ⟩⟨ l t | . One can use the completeness re- lation, ∑ l | l t ⟩⟨ l t | = 1 to get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, the normalization condition ⟨ l | l ⟩ = 1 leads to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we use Eq.(D2) and Eq.(D3) to evaluate the time derivative of the H CD ( t ) (C.f Eq.(10)),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, we can use Eq.(D4) to evaluate P CD as follows[21],

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Appendix E: Real-space structure of the non-unitary CD terms

In this appendix we analyze the real-space structure of the dissipative control terms and examine how LRIs affect their spatial profile. Starting from the momentumspace master equation [Eq. (9)], we focus on a representative contribution of the form ∑ k γ ( k ) 12 ( A ( k ) 12 ) † A ( k ) 12 ρ k . This generates terms such as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the kernel K (12) 1 k is given by (see Eq.(14))

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 7. Variation of the non-unitary control strength J 12 with D for different values of the long-range exponent α in the vicinity of the critical points (a) µ = -1 and (b) µ = +1, in the low-temperature regime ( β = 10). Insets show the corresponding behaviors in the high-temperature regime ( β = 0 . 01).

<!-- image -->

Upon Fourier transforming to real space, the above term takes the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where D = ( n + m + q ) -( p + r + s ), represents an effective spatial separation between fermionic operators. Here we assume { n, m, p, q, r, s } such that n &gt; p &gt; r &gt; m &gt; q &gt; s . For a constant D , and in the thermodynamic limit, Eq. (E3) yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the real-space control strength given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- [1] [G. Schaller, Lecture Notes in Physics: Open Quantum Systems Far from Equilibrium (Springer Cham, 2014).](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-03877-3)
- [2] S. Bhattacharjee and A. Dutta, Quantum thermal machines and batteries (2020), arXiv:2008.07889 [quant-ph].
- [3] S. Campbell, I. D'Amico, M. A. Ciampini, J. Anders, N. Ares, S. Artini, A. Auff` eves, L. Bassman Oftelie, L. P. Bettmann, M. V. S. Bonan¸ ca, T. Busch, M. Campisi, M. F. Cavalcante, L. A. Correa, E. Cuestas, C. B. Dag, S. Dago, S. Deffner, A. Del Campo, A. DeutschmannOlek, S. Donadi, E. Doucet, C. Elouard, K. Ensslin, P. Erker, N. Fabbri, F. Fedele, G. Fiusa, T. Fogarty, J. Folk, G. Guarnieri, A. S. Hegde, S. Hern´ andezG´ omez, C.-K. Hu, F. Iemini, B. Karimi, N. Kiesel, G. T. Landi, A. Lasek, S. Lemziakov, G. Lo Monaco, E. Lutz, D. Lvov, O. Maillet, M. Mehboudi, T. M.

The terms on the r.h.s. of Eq. (E5) can be expected to vanish in the limit of large D , as also verified numerically in Fig. 7, thus implying one can restrict D (12) 1 to small values only. Fig. (8) illustrates the behavior of the control strength J 12 as a function of the distance from criticality for different values of α , for a fixed D (= 1). As shown in Fig. (8), J 12 increases with increasing range of interactions (i.e., decreasing α ). Notably, the effect of α is suppressed close to criticality, which can be attributed to converging values of γ 12 for different values of α , at the critical points (see Figs. 3a, 3e, and Eq. (E2)). The insets of Fig. (8) show that, in the high-temperature regime, J 12 is significantly reduced, which is consistent with the fact that thermal mixing suppresses population gradients, thereby reducing the need for strong dissipative control.

Mendon¸ ca, H. J. D. Miller, A. K. Mitchell, M. T. Mitchison, V. Mukherjee, M. Paternostro, J. Pekola, M. Perarnau-Llobet, U. Poschinger, A. Rolandi, D. Rosa, R. S´ anchez, A. C. Santos, R. S. Sarthour, E. Sela, A. Solfanelli, A. M. Souza, J. Splettstoesser, D. Tan, L. Tesser, T. Van Vu, A. Widera, N. Yunger Halpern, and K. Zawadzki, Roadmap on quantum thermodynamics, Quantum Science and Technology 11 , 012501 (2026).

- [4] D. Jacek, Dynamics of a quantum phase transition and relaxation to a steady state, Advances in Physics 59 , 1063 (2010), https://doi.org/10.1080/00018732.2010.514702.
- [5] N. W¨ urkner, Y. Kuriatnikov, K. Kumaran, M. V. Ramana, J. Schmiedmayer, A. Kugi, M. Pr¨ ufer, and A. Deutschmann-Olek, Identification and optimal control strategies for the transversal splitting of ultra-cold

Figure 8. (a) Shows variation of the non-unitary control strength J 12 as the chemical potential µ ( t ) is ramped across the critical point µ = -1, for different values of the long-range exponent α , at fixed D = 1, in the low (main plot) and high (inset) temperature regimes, with β = 10 and β = 0 . 01, respectively. (b) Evolution of J 12 as µ ( t ) is swept across the critical point µ = +1, at fixed D = 1, in the low (main plot) and high (inset) temperature regimes, with β = 10 and β = 0 . 01, respectively.

<!-- image -->

[bose gases, arXiv:2510.07113 (2025).](https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.07113)

- [6] M. M. M¨ uller, R. S. Said, F. Jelezko, T. Calarco, and S. Montangero, One decade of quantum optimal control in the chopped random basis, Reports on Progress in Physics 85 , 076001 (2022).
- [7] Z. Ou, Q. Xu, and X. Zhou, Experimental realization of remote two-qubit state preparation using single-particle operations, Phys. Rev. A 112 , 032625 (2025).
- [8] A. Sarkar, Anurag, J. A. Mondal, R. Singh, A. A. Makki, A. K. Rathi, R. J. Nicholl, S. Chakraborty, K. I. Bolotin, and S. Ghosh, Observation of tunable discretetime-crystalline phases, Phys. Rev. Appl. 25 , L021001 (2026).
- [9] P. Kongkhambut, J. Skulte, L. Mathey, J. G. Cosme, A. Hemmerich, and H. Keßler, Observation of a continuous time crystal, Science 377 , 670 (2022), https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.abo3382.
- [10] J. Koch, K. Menon, E. Cuestas, S. Barbosa, E. Lutz, T. Fogarty, T. Busch, and A. Widera, A quantum engine in the bec-bcs crossover, Nature 621 , 723 (2023).
- [11] A. Dutta, G. Aeppli, B. K. Chakrabarti, U. Divakaran, T. F. Rosenbaum, and D. Sen, Quantum phase transitions in transverse field spin models: from statistical physics to quantum information (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2015).
- [12] A. Rajak, S. Suzuki, A. Dutta, and B. K. Chakrabarti, Quantum annealing: an overview, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 381 , 20210417 (2022), https://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/articlepdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2021.0417/1326707/rsta.2021.0417.pdf.
- [13] N. N. Hegade, K. Paul, Y. Ding, M. Sanz, F. Albarr´ anArriagada, E. Solano, and X. Chen, Shortcuts to adiabaticity in digitized adiabatic quantum computing, Phys. Rev. Appl. 15 , 024038 (2021).
- [14] A. Hartmann, V. Mukherjee, W. Niedenzu, and W. Lechner, Many-body quantum heat engines with shortcuts to adiabaticity, Phys. Rev. Research 2 , 023145 (2020).
- [15] E. Torrontegui, S. Ib´ a˜ nez, S. Mart´ ınez-Garaot, M. Modugno, A. del Campo, D. Gu´ ery-Odelin, A. Ruschhaupt,

X. Chen, and J. G. Muga, Chapter 2 - shortcuts to adiabaticity, in Advances in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics , Vol. 62, edited by E. Arimondo, P. R. Berman, and C. C. Lin (Academic Press, 2013) pp. 117 - 169.

- [16] M. V. Berry, Transitionless quantum driving, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and Theoretical 42 , 365303 (2009).
- [17] A. Schnell, C. Weitenberg, and A. Eckardt, Dissipative preparation of a Floquet topological insulator in an optical lattice via bath engineering, SciPost Phys. 17 , 052 (2024).
- [18] L. M. Cangemi, C. Bhadra, and A. Levy, Quantum engines and refrigerators, Physics Reports 1087 , 1 (2024), quantum engines and refrigerators.
- [19] G. Vacanti, R. Fazio, S. Montangero, G. M. Palma, M. Paternostro, and V. Vedral, Transitionless quantum driving in open quantum systems, New Journal of Physics 16 , 053017 (2014).
- [20] S. Alipour, A. Chenu, A. T. Rezakhani, and A. del Campo, Shortcuts to Adiabaticity in Driven Open Quantum Systems: Balanced Gain and Loss and NonMarkovian Evolution, Quantum 4 , 336 (2020).
- [21] S. Mahunta and V. Mukherjee, Shortcuts to adiabaticity in open quantum critical systems, Physical Review B 111 , 064301 (2025).
- [22] A. del Campo, M. M. Rams, and W. H. Zurek, Assisted finite-rate adiabatic passage across a quantum critical point: Exact solution for the quantum ising model, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 , 115703 (2012).
- [23] N. Defenu, G. Morigi, L. Dell'Anna, and T. Enss, Universal dynamical scaling of long-range topological superconductors, Physical Review B 100 , 184306 (2019).
- [24] S. Campbell, G. De Chiara, M. Paternostro, G. M. Palma, and R. Fazio, Shortcut to adiabaticity in the lipkin-meshkov-glick model, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 , 177206 (2015).
- [25] A. Solfanelli, G. Giachetti, M. Campisi, S. Ruffo, and N. Defenu, Quantum heat engine with long-range advantages, New Journal of Physics 25 , 033030 (2023).

- [26] S. Puri, T. K. Konar, L. G. C. Lakkaraju, and A. S. De, Floquet driven long-range interactions induce superextensive scaling in quantum batteries, arXiv:2412.00921 (2025).
- [27] A. Russomanno, F. Iemini, M. Dalmonte, and R. Fazio, Floquet time crystal in the lipkin-meshkov-glick model, Phys. Rev. B 95 , 214307 (2017).
- [28] V. K. Kozin and O. Kyriienko, Quantum time crystals from hamiltonians with long-range interactions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123 , 210602 (2019).
- [29] S. Sachdev, Quantum Phase Transitions (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 1999).
- [30] K. Takahashi, Transitionless quantum driving for spin systems, Phys. Rev. E 87 , 062117 (2013).
- [31] A. Dutta and A. Dutta, Probing the role of long-range interactions in the dynamics of a long-range kitaev chain, Physical Review B 96 , 125113 (2017).
- [32] D. Vodola, L. Lepori, E. Ercolessi, A. V. Gorshkov, and G. Pupillo, Kitaev chains with long-range pairing, Physical Review Letters 113 , 156402 (2014).
- [33] D. Vodola, L. Lepori, E. Ercolessi, and G. Pupillo, Longrange ising and kitaev models: phases, correlations and edge modes, New Journal of Physics 18 , 015001 (2016).
- [34] M. Keck, S. Montangero, G. E. Santoro, R. Fazio, and D. Rossini, Dissipation in adiabatic quantum computers: lessons from an exactly solvable model, New Journal of Physics 19 , 113029 (2017).
- [35] S. Bandyopadhyay, S. Laha, U. Bhattacharya, and A. Dutta, Exploring the possibilities of dynamical quantum phase transitions in the presence of a markovian bath, Scientific Reports 8 , 11921 (2018).
- [36] A. Y. Kitaev, Unpaired majorana fermions in quantum wires, Physics-Uspekhi 44 , 131 (2001).
- [37] H. Spohn, Entropy production for quantum dynamical semigroups, Journal of Mathematical Physics 19 , 1227 (1978).
- [38] R. Alicki, The quantum open system as a model of the heat engine, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General 12 , L103 (1979).
- [39] A. Hartmann, V. Mukherjee, G. B. Mbeng, W. Niedenzu, and W. Lechner, Multi-spin counter-diabatic driving in many-body quantum Otto refrigerators, Quantum 4 , 377 (2020).
- [40] D. Rossini, G. M. Andolina, D. Rosa, M. Carrega, and M. Polini, Quantum advantage in the charging process of sachdev-ye-kitaev batteries, Phys. Rev. Lett. 125 , 236402 (2020).
- [41] F. Campaioli, F. A. Pollock, F. C. Binder, L. C´ eleri, J. Goold, S. Vinjanampathy, and K. Modi, Enhancing the charging power of quantum batteries, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 , 150601 (2017).
- [42] S. Bhattacharjee and A. Dutta, Quantum thermal machines and batteries, The European Physical Journal B 94 , 239 (2021).
- [43] A. E. Allahverdyan, R. Balian, and T. M. Nieuwenhuizen, Maximal work extraction from finite quantum systems,

Europhysics Letters 67 , 565 (2004).

- [44] R. Alicki and M. Fannes, Entanglement boost for extractable work from ensembles of quantum batteries, Phys. Rev. E 87 , 042123 (2013).
- [45] W. Pusz and S. L. Woronowicz, Passive states and kms states for general quantum systems, Communications in Mathematical Physics 58 , 273 (1978).
- [46] A. Lenard, Thermodynamical proof of the gibbs formula for elementary quantum systems, Journal of Statistical Physics 19 , 575 (1978).
- [47] J. Roßnagel, S. T. Dawkins, K. N. Tolazzi, O. Abah, E. Lutz, F. Schmidt-Kaler, and K. Singer, A single-atom heat engine, Science 352 , 325 (2016).
- [48] H. Bernien, S. Schwartz, A. Keesling, H. Levine, A. Omran, H. Pichler, S. Choi, A. S. Zibrov, M. Endres, M. Greiner, V. Vuleti´ c, and M. D. Lukin, Probing manybody dynamics on a 51-atom quantum simulator, Nature 551 , 579 (2017).
- [49] A. D. King, S. Suzuki, J. Raymond, A. Zucca, T. Lanting, F. Altomare, A. J. Berkley, S. Ejtemaee, E. Hoskinson, S. Huang, E. Ladizinsky, A. J. R. MacDonald, G. Marsden, T. Oh, G. Poulin-Lamarre, M. Reis, C. Rich, Y. Sato, J. D. Whittaker, J. Yao, R. Harris, D. A. Lidar, H. Nishimori, and M. H. Amin, Coherent quantum annealing in a programmable 2,000 qubit ising chain, Nature Physics 18 , 1324 (2022).
- [50] P. W. Claeys, M. Pandey, D. Sels, and A. Polkovnikov, Floquet-engineering counterdiabatic protocols in quantum many-body systems, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123 , 090602 (2019).
- [51] V. Mukherjee and U. Divakaran, The promises and challenges of many-body quantum technologies: A focus on quantum engines, Nature Communications 15 , 3170 (2024).
- [52] F. Campaioli, F. A. Pollock, and S. Vinjanampathy, Quantum batteries, in Thermodynamics in the Quantum Regime: Fundamental Aspects and New Directions (Springer, 2019) pp. 207-225.
- [53] F. W. J. Olver, D. W. Lozier, R. F. Boisvert, and C. W. Clark, NIST Handbook of Mathematical Functions (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 2010).
- [54] M. Abramowitz and I. A. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions with Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables (Dover, New York, 1964).
- [55] A. Solfanelli, G. Giachetti, M. Campisi, S. Ruffo, and N. Defenu, Quantum heat engine with long-range advantages, New Journal of Physics 25 , 033030 (2023).
- [56] M. Kolodrubetz, D. Sels, P. Mehta, and A. Polkovnikov, Geometry and non-adiabatic response in quantum and classical systems, Physics Reports 697 , 1 (2017), geometry and non-adiabatic response in quantum and classical systems.
- [57] I. S. Gradshteyn and I. M. Ryzhik, Table of Integrals, Series, and Products , 7th ed., edited by D. Zwillinger and V. Moll (Academic Press, Burlington, MA, 2007).