## Mixing doubly stochastic quantum channels with the completely depolarizing channel

John Watrous

Institute for Quantum Computing and School of Computer Science University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.

July 16, 2008

## Abstract

It is proved that every doubly stochastic quantum channel that is properly averaged with the completely depolarizing channel can be written as a convex combination of unitary channels. As a consequence, we find that the collection of channels expressible as convex combinations of unitary channels has non-zero Borel measure within the space of doubly stochastic channels.

## 1 Introduction

Let X and Y be finite-dimensional complex Hilbert spaces, and let L ( X ) and L ( Y ) denote the sets of linear operators acting on these spaces. By a super-operator one means a linear mapping of the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Such a super-operator is said to be admissible if and only if it is both completely positive and preserves trace. In the usual (Schr¨ odinger) picture of quantum information, the admissible superoperators represent valid physical operations, transforming a system having associated space X to one with associated space Y . For this reason, admissible super-operators are also commonly referred to as channels .

A super-operator Φ is said to be unital if it is the case that Φ ( 1 X ) = 1 Y , for 1 X and 1 Y denoting the identity operators on X and Y , respectively. Super-operators that are both unital and admissible are said to be doubly stochastic . The existence of a doubly-stochastic channel of the form (1) obviously requires that X and Y have equal dimension d , which is assumed hereafter in this paper.

Among the doubly stochastic channels are the mixed-unitary 1 channels: those for which there exists a collection of unitary operators U 1, . . . , UN ∈ U ( X , Y ) and a probability distribution ( p 1, . . . , pN ) so that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

1 The term random unitary channel is commonly used. However, this term is easily confused with a different notion that is now common in quantum information theory-that of a fi xed unitary operator that is randomly chosen according to some measure (frequently the Haar measure). For this reason, the term mixed-unitary channel is suggested in this paper.

for all X ∈ L ( X ) . (The notation U ( X , Y ) refers to the set of unitary mappings from X to Y .)

For the case d = 2 it holds that every doubly stochastic channel is mixed-unitary, but for larger d this is no longer the case: for all d ≥ 3 there exist doubly stochastic channels that are not mixedunitary [Tre86, KM87, LS93]. While it is computationally simple to check that a given channel is doubly stochastic, there is no efficient procedure known to check whether a given channel is mixed-unitary.

Several papers have studied properties of mixed-unitary channels within the last several years. For instance, Gregoratti and Werner [GW03] gave a characterization, with an interesting physical interpretation, of the class of mixed-unitary channels: they proved that a given channel is mixed-unitary if and only if it has full quantum corrected capacity , which assumes that the correction procedure is permitted arbitrary measurements on the channel's environment. Smolin, Verstraete, and Winter [SVW05] further investigated this notion of capacity, and conjectured that many copies of any doubly stochastic channel can be closely approximated by a mixed-unitary channel. Buscemi [Bus06] investigated bounds on the number N required in the expression (2) for different channels; Audenaert and Scheel [AS08] investigated conditions under which channels are mixed-unitary; and Mendl and Wolf [MW08] proved several facts about mixed-unitary channels, including the fact that a non-mixed-unitary channel can become mixed-unitary when tensored with the completely depolarizing channel. Rosgen [Ros08] recently proved that various additivity questions about general channels reduce to the same questions on the (potentially simpler) class of mixed-unitary channels.

This paper proves a simple fact about mixed-unitary channels, which is that every doubly stochastic channel becomes mixed-unitary when properly averaged with the completely depolarizing channel. To state this fact more precisely, let us write Ω : L ( X ) → L ( Y ) to denote the completely depolarizing channel, which is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every operator X ∈ L ( X ) . This channel is well-known to be mixed-unitary, as it is representable as a uniform mixture over the discrete Weyl operators (also known as the generalized Pauli operators). The claimed fact is now stated in the following theorem.

Theorem 1. Let X and Y be d dimensional complex Hilbert spaces, and let Φ : L ( X ) → L ( Y ) be any doubly stochastic channel. Then for 0 ≤ p ≤ 1/ ( d 2 -1 ) it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a mixed-unitary channel.

It is also proved, as a corollary of this theorem, that within the smallest real affine subspace of super-operators that contains the doubly stochastic channels, there is a ball with positive radius around the completely depolarizing channel within which all super-operators are mixed-unitary channels.

## 2 Notation and background information

The purpose of this section is to introduce concepts and notation that are needed in the proof of the main result that appears in the following section.

Assume throughout the remainder of the paper that X and Y are finite-dimensional complex Hilbert spaces for which a common orthonormal basis {| 1 〉 , . . . , | d 〉} has been fixed. We let L ( X , Y ) denote the set of all linear operators from X to Y , and (as stated above) the notation L ( X ) is shorthand for L ( X , X ) (and likewise for other spaces in place of X ). The usual (HilbertSchmidt) inner product of two operators X and Y is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With respect to the standard basis of X and Y , we define a linear bijection

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for 1 ≤ i , j ≤ d , and extending to all of L ( X , Y ) by linearity.

The Choi-Jamiołkowski representation [Jam72, Cho75] of a super-operator Φ : L ( X ) → L ( Y ) is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The mapping J defined in this way is a linear bijection from the space of all super-operators of the form L ( X ) → L ( Y ) to the space L ( Y ⊗ X ) . It holds that a super-operator Φ : L ( X ) → L ( Y ) is completely positive if and only if J ( Φ ) is positive semidefinite, trace-preserving if and only if Tr Y ( J ( Φ )) = 1 X , and unital if and only if Tr X ( J ( Φ )) = 1 Y . The following facts may be verified directly:

1. For any choice of an operator A ∈ L ( X , Y ) , the super-operator Φ : L ( X ) → L ( Y ) defined by Φ ( X ) = AXA ∗ satisfies J ( Φ ) = vec ( A ) vec ( A ) ∗ .
2. For any choice of operators A ∈ L ( X ) and B ∈ L ( Y ) , the super-operator Φ : L ( X ) → L ( Y ) defined by Φ ( X ) = 〈 A , X 〉 B satisfies J ( Φ ) = B ⊗ A .

When combined with the linearity of the mapping J , these facts will allow for simple calculations of J ( Φ ) for particular super-operators Φ appearing later in the paper.

Next, let us recall that the swap operator on Y ⊗ X is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and let us write R and S to denote the orthogonal projections on Y ⊗ X defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The projections R and S denote the anti-symmetric and symmetric projections on Y ⊗X , respectively. Subscripts are used when it is necessary to be explicit about the spaces on which the projections R and S act; so, as just defined, the operators R and S are written more precisely as R Y⊗X and S Y⊗X , and in general other spaces may be substituted for X and Y . In the next section we will make use of the identities

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

by setting which hold for all X ∈ L ( X ) .

Finally, it is necessary that a few points on integrals over unitary operators are discussed. Let us first note that the collection of mixed-unitary channels Φ : L ( X ) → L ( Y ) is convex and compact. For any measure ν on the Borel subsets of U ( X , Y ) , normalized so that ν ( U ( X , Y )) = 1, it follows that the super-operator defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for every X ∈ L ( X ) is a mixed-unitary channel-or in other words can be expressed in the form (2) for some finite choice of N . (It can easily be shown, using Carath´ eodory's Theorem, that such an expression exists for some choice of N ≤ d 4 -2 d 2 + 2. See also Buscemi [Bus06] for bounds based on rank ( J ( Φ )) .)

Hereafter let us write µ to denote the normalized Haar measure on U ( X , Y ) . This is the unique measure on the Borel subsets of U ( X , Y ) that satisfies µ ( U ( X , Y )) = 1 and is invariant under left multiplication by every unitary operator V ∈ U ( Y ) . It is clear that identity

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds. We will also require the identity

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X 1 and X 2 represent isomorphic copies of the space X , Y 1 and Y 2 are isomorphic copies of Y , and we view that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The identity (6) may be confirmed by considering the well-known twirling operation [Wer89]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and taking the Choi-Jamiołkowski representation of both sides. (For the interested reader, it is noted that the above integrals (5) and (6), as well as higher-order variants of them, may also be easily evaluated by means of a general formula of Collins and ´ Sniady [C ´ S06].)

## 3 Proof of the main theorem and a corollary

We now prove the main theorem, which is restated here for convenience.

Theorem 1. Let X and Y be d dimensional complex Hilbert spaces, and let Φ : L ( X ) → L ( Y ) be any doubly stochastic channel. Then for 0 ≤ p ≤ 1/ ( d 2 -1 ) it holds that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a mixed-unitary channel.

Proof. Given that Ω is mixed-unitary, and that the set of mixed-unitary channels is convex, it suffices to consider the case p = 1/ ( d 2 -1 ) .

Define a super-operator Ψ : L ( X ) → L ( Y ) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the above identity (5) we have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and it is clear that 〈 vec ( U ) vec ( U ) ∗ , J ( Φ ) 〉 is nonnegative for all U ∈ U ( X , Y ) . It follows that Ψ is a mixed-unitary channel. To complete the proof, it will suffice to establish that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for then the right-hand-side will be shown to be mixed-unitary as required.

To this end, consider the Choi-Jamiołkowski representation of Ψ , which is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By the identity (6) we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where, in this equation, it is viewed that J ( Φ ) ∈ L ( Y 2 ⊗X 2 ) and J ( Ψ ) ∈ L ( Y 1 ⊗X 1 ) . (As in the previous section, the spaces X 1, X 2 and Y 1, Y 2 are isomorphic copies of X and Y , respectively.)

The above expression of J ( Ψ ) may now be simplified by means of the equations (3). In particular, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Making use of the equalities Tr X ( J ( Φ )) = 1 Y and Tr Y ( J ( Φ )) = 1 X (which follow from Φ being doubly stochastic), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As J is a linear bijection, this implies that equation (7) holds, and therefore completes the proof.

This theorem implies that, within the smallest real affine subspace of super-operators that contains the doubly stochastic channels, there is a ball with positive radius around the completely depolarizing channel within which all super-operators are mixed-unitary. This fact is established by the following corollary.

Corollary 2. Suppose Φ : L ( X ) → L ( Y ) is a trace-preserving and unital super-operator such that J ( Φ ) is Hermitian and satisfies

Then Φ is a mixed-unitary channel.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Define Ψ = ( d 2 -1 ) Φ -( d 2 -2 ) Ω , which is clearly trace-preserving and unital. It follows from the expression

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

together with the assumptions of the corollary, that Ψ is completely positive, and thus is doubly stochastic. By Theorem 1 we therefore have that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is mixed-unitary, as required.

## 4 Discussion

As has been discussed by several authors, the Choi-Jamiołkowski representation reveals density operator analogues to various facts about channels. In the present case, the mapping

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

gives a linear bijection from the set of doubly stochastic channels Φ : L ( X ) → L ( Y ) to the collection of density operators ρ ∈ D ( Y ⊗ X ) whose reduced states on both Y and X are completely mixed:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Corollary 2 therefore establishes that within the smallest affine subspace that contains all such density operators, there is a ball of positive radius around the maximally mixed state containing only states that are expressible as mixtures of maximally entangled states. When expressed in these terms, it is appropriate to compare the results of the previous section with an analogous fact concerning the set of separable states, which are those expressible as mixtures of unentangled states.

Specifically, it follows from the results proved in [GB02] that any unit-trace Hermitian operator ρ ∈ L ( Y ⊗ X ) satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is a separable density operator. In contrast, Corollary 2 establishes that any unit-trace Hermitian operator ρ ∈ L ( Y ⊗ X ) satisfying both the linear constraints (8) and the bound

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is expressible as a convex combination of maximally entangled states. (It is clear that operators not satisfying the constraints (8) are not expressible as convex combinations of maximally entangled states, regardless of their distance from the maximally mixed state.)

It is noted that the ball defined by (10) is properly contained in the one defined by (9). All of the states contained in the smaller ball are therefore representable at two extremes: as convex combinations of unentangled states and convex combinations of maximally entangled states. To what extent this fact can be generalized is an interesting question for future research.

## Acknowledgements

I thank Andrew Childs, Gus Gutoski, and Marco Piani for comments and suggestions. This research was supported by Canada's NSERC and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR).

## References

- [AS08] K. Audenaert and S. Scheel. On random unitary channels. New Journal of Physics , 10:023011, 2008.
- [Bus06] F. Buscemi. On the minimum number of unitaries needed to describe a random-unitary channel. Physics Letters A , 360(2):256-258, 2006.
- [Cho75] M.-D. Choi. Completely positive linear maps on complex matrices. Linear Algebra and Its Applications , 10(3):285-290, 1975.
- [C ´ S06] B. Collins and P. ´ Sniady. Integration with respect to the Haar measure on unitary, orthogonal and symplectic group. Communications in Mathematical Physics , 264(3):773-795, 2006.
- [GB02] L. Gurvits and H. Barnum. Largest separable balls around the maximally mixed bipartite quantum state. Physical Review A , 66(6):062311, 2002.
- [GW03] M. Gregoratti and R. Werner. Quantum lost and found. Journal of Modern Optics , 50(67):915-933, 2003.
- [Jam72] A. Jamiołkowski. Linear transformations which preserve trace and positive semidefiniteness of operators. Reports on Mathematical Physics , 3(4):275-278, 1972.
- [KM87] B. K¨ ummerer and H. Maassen. The essentially cummutative dilations of dynamical semigroups on Mn . Communications in Mathematical Physics , 109:1-22, 1987.
- [LS93] L. Landau and R. Streater. On Birkhoff's theorem for doubly stochastic completely positive maps of matrix algebras. Linear Algebra and Its Applications , 193:107-127, 1993.
- [MW08] C. Mendl and M. Wolf. Unital quantum channels - convex structure and revivals of Birkhoff's theorem. Available as arXiv.org e-Print 0806.2820, 2008.
- [Ros08] B. Rosgen. Additivity and distinguishability of random unitary channels. Available as arXiv.org e-Print 0804.1936, 2008.
- [SVW05] J. Smolin, F. Verstraete, and A. Winter. Entanglement of assistance and multipartite state distillation. Physical Review A , 72(5):52317, 2005.

- [Tre86] S. Tregub. Bistochastic operators on finite-dimensional von Neumann algebras. Journal of Soviet Mathematics , 30(3):105, 1986.
- [Wer89] R. Werner. Quantum states with Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen correlations admitting a hidden-variable model. Physical Review A , 40(8):4277-4281, 1989.