## MEASURING THE 'NON-STOPPING TIMENESS' OF ENDS OF PREVISIBLE SETS

JU-YI YEN (1) , (2) AND MARC YOR (3) , (4)

Abstract. In this paper, we propose several 'measurements' of the 'nonstopping timeness' of ends G of previsible sets, such that G avoids stopping times, in an ambiant filtration. We then study several explicit examples, involving last passage times of some remarkable martingales.

## 1. Introduction: About ends of previsible sets

In this paper, we are interested in random times G defined on a filtered probability space (Ω , F , ( F t ) , P ) as ends of ( F t ) previsible sets Γ, that is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For simplicity, we shall make the following assumptions:

(C): All (( F t ) , P ) martingales are continuous;

[(C) stands for 'continuous', and (A) for 'avoiding'].

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To such a random time, one associates the Az´ ema supermartingale:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which, under (CA), admits a continuous version.

In a number of questions, it is very interesting to consider the smallest filtration ( F ′ t ) t ≥ 0 , which contains ( F t ), and makes G a stopping time; this filtration is usually denoted ( F G t ) t ≥ 0 . One of the interests of ( Z G t ) is that it allows to write any ( F t ) martingale as a semimartingale in ( F G t ) t ≥ 0 ; see e.g. [2, 3, 8, 9], for both general formulae and many examples.

Recently, it has been understood that Black-Scholes like formulae are closely related with certain such G 's, thus throwing a new light on a cornerstone of Mathematical Finance, see, e.g. [6, 7]. In the present paper, with (A) as our essential hypothesis, we would like to measure 'how much G differs from a ( F t ) stopping time'. The remainder of this paper consists in two sections: - In Section 2, we propose several criterions to measure the NST ( ≡ Non Stopping Timeness) of G 's which satisfy (CA); it is not surprising that we get interested in the function:

- In Section 3, we compute explicitly this function m G for various examples, where G is the last passage time at a level of a martingale which converges to 0, as t →∞ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Date : October 3, 2008.

Key words and phrases. Az´ ema supermartingale, last passage times.

## 2. Several possible 'NST' criterions

- 2.1. A fundamental function: m G ( t ) . Let us consider several possible criterions: first of all, if G were a ( F t ) stopping time, then the process 1 ( G≥ t ) would be identically equal to Z G t ≡ P ( G ≥ t |F t ). Thus, the function ( m G ( t ) , t ≥ 0) tells us about the NST of G . Next, a simple but useful remark is that:
- 2.2. Definition of m ∗ G , m ∗∗ G , and ˜ m G and proof that m ∗∗ G = 1 / 4 = ˜ m G . Instead of considering the 'full'function ( m G ( t ) , t ≥ 0), we may consider only:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

as a 'global' measurement of the NST of G .

Here are two other, a priori natural, measurements of the NST of G :

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where T runs over all ( F t ) stopping times.

However, we cannot expect to learn very much from m ∗∗ G and ˜ m G , since it is easily shown that

Proof.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (i) The fact that m = 1 / 4 follows immediately from:

sup x [0 , 1] ( x (1 -x )) = 1 / 4, and the fact that, a.s., the range of the process

( Z G t , t ≥ 0) is [0 , 1] since Z G 0 = 1, Z G ∞ = 0, and ( Z G t , t ≥ 0) is continuous.

□

- ∗∗ G ∈
- (ii) Let us consider T = inf t : Z = a , for 0 &lt; a &lt; 1. Then:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 2.3. The optional stopping time discrepancy µ G . Let us not forget either the nice characterization [4], of stopping times, among random times, as the times τ such that for every bounded martingale ( M t ) t ≥ 0 one has

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where, here under our hypothesis (C), we may define F τ = σ { H τ ; H previsible } . Thus, as a 4th possible measurement of the NST of G , we may take:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 2.4. Distance from stopping times. We introduce:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where T runs over all ( F t ) stopping times. However, this quantity may be infinite as G may have infinite expectation. A more adequate distance may be:

We note that this distance was precisely computed by du Toit-Peskir-Shiryaev in the example they consider [1].

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It would be nice to be able to estimate µ G and/or ν G , ν ′ G in terms of the function m G ( t ), but we have not been able to obtain any result in this direction. We shall now concentrate uniquely on the study of ( m G ( t ) , t ≥ 0).

3. A study of several interesting examples of functions m G ( t )
2. 3.1. Some general formulae. We shall compute ( m G ( t ) , t ≥ 0) in some particular cases where:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with M 0 = 1, M t ≥ 0, a continuous local martingale such that M t -→ t →∞ 0, we recall that (see, e.g. [2, 8]):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

thus

- 3.2. The particular case M t = E t = exp( B t -t/ 2) , with ( B t ) a standard Brownian motion, and G K = sup { t : E t = K } , ( K ≤ 1) . From formula (9), we deduce:

Particularizing again, for M t = E t = exp( B t -t/ 2), and K = 1, then

Figure 1 presents the graphs of m K ( t ) for some K 's.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 1. Graphs of m K ( t ) , for K = 0 . 1 , 0 . 2 , ... 1 .

<!-- image -->

Comments: It seems that m ∗ K = sup t ≥ 0 ( m K ( t )) increases with K , at least for K ≤ 1. Can this be proven? If so, it indicates that, as K varies, the G K 's are increasingly further from stopping times.

- 3.3. The case G = G T a = sup { t &lt; T a : B t = 0 } . From line 4 of Table (1 α ) of Progressive Enlargements, p.32 of [8], we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, it remains to compute the function ϕ . We note that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We shall take advantage of the very useful formula:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(This formula is easily seen to be equivalent to the well-known expression of the joint density of ( S 1 , B 1 ); see, e.g., [5], p.425.) Thus, we find:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- 3.4. The case G = L a = sup { u : R u = a } . From line 6 of Table (1 α ) of Progressive Enlargements, p.32 of [8], we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, ( R u ) is BES 0 ( d ) , d = 2( µ +1). For that second example, we get:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where using the fact that R 2 1 (law) = 2 γ d/ 2 , we get (recall: d 2 = µ +1):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 2. Graphs of ϕ µ ( z ) , for µ = 1 / 2 , 1 , 3 / 2 , 5 / 2 , 7 / 2 , 9 / 2 , 11 / 2 , 13 / 2 , and that z 1 / 2 = 0 . 19 , z 1 = 0 . 61 , z 3 / 2 = 1 . 08 , z 5 / 2 = 2 . 05 , z 7 / 2 = 3 . 04 , z 9 / 2 = 4 . 03 , z 11 / 2 = 5 . 02 , z 13 / 2 = 6 . 02 .

<!-- image -->

Figure 2 presents the graphs of ϕ µ for µ = 1 / 2 , 1 , 3 / 2 , 5 / 2 , 7 / 2 , 9 / 2 , 11 / 2 and 13 / 2. We also approximate z µ , the unique &gt; 0 real which achieves the max of ϕ µ . This will give us the value m µ def = m ∗ G , for these G ≡ L a (note that, for a given µ , the value does not depend on a ; this is because of the scaling property).

It is not difficult to show that: z µ is the unique solution of

and also

Note that

Figure 3 presents the graphs of m µ and m ′ µ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 3. Graphs of m µ and m ′ µ

<!-- image -->

## References

- [1] du Toit, J., Peskir, G. ,&amp; Shiryaev, A. N. Predicting the last zero of Brownian motion with drift, Stochastics , 80: 229-245, 2008.
- [2] Jeulin, T. Semi-martingales et grossissements d'une filtration , LNM 833, Springer, Berlin, 1980.
- [3] Jeulin, T. &amp; Yor, M. Eds. Grossissements de filtrations: exemples et applications , LNM 1118, Springer-Verlag, 1985.
- [4] Knight, F. &amp; Maisonneuve, B. A characterization of stopping times, The Annals of Probability , Vol. 22, No. 3 (July, 1994), pp. 1600-1606.
- [5] Karatzas, I. &amp; Shreve, M. Brownian Motion and Stochastic Calculus, 2nd ed . Springer, Berlin (1991).
- [6] Madan, D., Roynette, R., &amp; Yor, M. Option prices as probabilities, Finance Research Letters 5, 79-87 (2008), doi:10.1016/j.frl.2008.02.002
- [7] Madan, D., Roynette, R., &amp; Yor, M. Unifying Black-Scholes type formulae which involve last passage times up to finite horizon. To appear in Asia-Pacific Financial Markets (2008).
- [8] Mansuy, R. &amp; Yor, M. Random times and enlargements of filtrations in a Brownian setting , LNM 1873, Springer, Berlin, 2006.
- [9] Nikeghbali, A. &amp; Yor, M. Doob's maximal identity, multiplicative decomposition and enlargements of filtrations, Ill. Journal of Maths. , 50:791-814, 2006.
- (1) Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37240, USA E-mail address : ju-yi.yen@vanderbilt.edu
- (2) Institute of Mathematics, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
- (3) Laboratoire de Probabilit´ es et Mod` eles Al´ eatoires, Universit´ e Pierre et Marie Curie, Case Courrier 188, 4, Place Jussieu, 75252 Paris, Cedex 05, France
- (4) Institut Universitaire de France