## MULTIPLICATIVE APPROXIMATION OF WEALTH PROCESSES INVOLVING NO-SHORT-SALES STRATEGIES VIA SIMPLE TRADING

CONSTANTINOS KARDARAS AND ECKHARD PLATEN

Abstract. A financial market model with general semimartingale asset-price processes and where agents can only trade using no-short-sales strategies is considered. We show that wealth processes using continuous trading can be approximated very closely by wealth processes using simple combinations of buy-and-hold trading. This approximation is based on controlling the proportions of wealth invested in the assets. As an application, the utility maximization problem is considered and it is shown that optimal expected utilities and wealth processes resulting from continuous trading can be approximated arbitrarily well by the use of simple combinations of buy-and-hold strategies.

## 0. Introduction

In frictionless financial market modeling, semimartingale discounted asset-price processes are ubiquitous. On one hand, this structure is enforced by natural market viability conditions - see for example [1] and [3]. On the other hand, the powerful tool of stochastic integration with respect to general predictable integrands already permits answers to fundamental economic questions, as is for example the classical utility maximization problem -see [4, 5] for a very general framework.

In financial terms, stochastic integration using general predictable integrands translates into allowing for continuous trading in the market. Its theoretical importance notwithstanding, since it allows for existence and elegant representations of optimal wealth processes, continuous trading is but an ideal approximation. In reality, agents in the market can only use simple finite combinations of buy-and-hold strategies. It is therefore natural to question the practical usefulness of such modeling approach. Furthermore, in the context of numerical approximations, where time-discretization is inevitable, computer modeling of hedges can simulate only simple buy-and-hold trading.

The questions we are dealing with in the present paper are the following: Can wealth processes that are obtained by allowing continuous trading be closely approximated via simple buy-and-hold trading? If the answer to the previous question is affirmative, how can this eventually be achieved?

Our contribution is an approximation result for wealth processes involving no-short-sales strategies allowing only simple wealth processes. In order to achieve this, we establish an interesting intermediate result on multiplicative -type approximation of positive stochastic integrals. This is carried out by following a time-discretized continuous trading strategy in proportional, rather than absolute, terms. The actual number of units held in the portfolio still remains constant between trading dates; however, the investment strategy is parametrized by fractions. Not only is the former choice of discrete-time approximation more reasonable from a trading viewpoint under a range of objectives, it also ensures that the investor's self-financing wealth process stays nonnegative, therefore admissible, even in the presence of jumps in the asset-price process. Note that, in the case where jumps are involved in the market model, a use of the classical additive approximation using the dominated convergence theorem for stochastic integrals might fail to guarantee that the approximating wealth processes are nonnegative.

Date : October 24, 2018.

1991 Mathematics Subject Classification. 60H05 60H30 91B28.

Key words and phrases. Semimartingales; buy-and-hold strategies; stochastic integral; arbitrages of the first kind; utility maximization.

The first author would like to thank the warm hospitality of the School of Finance and Economics of the University of Technology Sydney, where the major part of this work was carried out.

We also provide an application of our approximation result to the expected utility maximization problem. Specifically, under weak economic assumptions, it is shown that the indirect utilities and (near-)optimal wealth processes under the possibility of no-short-sales continuous trading can be approximated arbitrarily well using simple combinations of buy-and-hold strategies.

There is a wealth of literature on approximations of stochastic integrals. In the context of financial applications, we mention for example [6] dealing with continuous-path assets, as well as [9], where a result that is useful in approximating the optimal wealth process for the exponential utility maximization problem is proved. The analysis in the present paper is different, as we are interested in cases where wealth has to remain positive. To the best of the authors' knowledge, no previous work in this respect for asset-processes that include jumps has appeared before.

The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 1 introduces the market model, where no-shortsales trading is allowed. Section 2 contains the statements and proofs of the basic approximation results. Finally, Section 3 contains the application to the utility maximization problem.

## 1. The Financial Market and No-Short-Sales Trading

- 1.1. The financial market model. The evolution of d risky assets in the market is modeled via nonnegative and c` adl` ag (right-continuous with left-hand limits) stochastic processes S 1 , . . . , S d , where we write S = ( S 1 t , . . . , S d t ) t ∈ R + . We assume in the sequel that all wealth processes, including the above assets, are denominated in units of another traded 'baseline' asset; this could be, for example, the money market account. All processes are defined on a filtered probability space (Ω , ( F t ) t ∈ R + , P ). Here, P is a probability on (Ω , F ∞ ), where F ∞ := ∨ t ∈ R + F t , and ( F t ) t ∈ R + is a filtration satisfying the usual assumptions of right-continuity and saturation by all P -null sets of F . It will be assumed throughout that F 0 is trivial modulo P .
- 1.2. Trading via simple no-short-sales strategies. In the market with the discounted assetprice processes described above, economic agents can trade in order to reallocate their wealth. Realistic trading consists of finite combinations of buy-and-hold strategies. We model this by considering processes of the form θ := ∑ n j =1 ϑ τ j -1 I ] ] τ j -1 ,τ j ] ] , where each τ j , j = 0 , . . . , n , is a finite stopping time with 0 = τ 0 &lt; τ 1 &lt; . . . &lt; τ n , and where each ϑ i τ j -1 is F τ j -1 -measurable for i = 1 , . . . , d

and j = 1 , . . . , n . Starting from initial capital x ∈ R + and investing according to the aforementioned simple strategy θ , the agent's discounted , with respect to the baseline asset, wealth process is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we are using 〈· , ·〉 throughout to denote (sometimes, formally) the usual Euclidean inner product on R d . Note that the predictable process θ is modeling the units of assets held in the portfolio, and that it is piecewise constant over time.

The wealth process X x,θ of (1.1) could, in principle, become negative. In real markets, economic agents sometimes face institution-based trading constraints, the most important and typical example of which is the prevention of short sales. Consider a wealth process X x,θ as in (1.1). In order to ensure that there are no short sales of the risky assets and the baseline asset, we ask that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the subscript ' t -' is used to denote the left-hand limit of processes at time t ∈ R + . For fixed initial wealth x ∈ R + , we define the set X s ( x ) of all no-short-sales wealth processes using simple trading, which are the wealth processes X x,θ given by (1.1) such that (1.2) holds. (Note that subscripts ' s ', like the one used in the definition of X s ( x ) for x ∈ R + , will be used throughout the paper serving as a mnemonic for 'simple'.)

1.3. Arbitrages of the first kind. The market viability concept we shall now introduce is a weakened version of the No Free Lunch with Vanishing Risk condition of [1].

Definition 1.1. For T ∈ R + , an F T -measurable random variable ξ will be called an arbitrage of the first kind on [0 , T ] if P [ ξ ≥ 0] = 1, P [ ξ &gt; 0] &gt; 0, and for all x &gt; 0 there exists X ∈ X s ( x ) , which may depend on x , such that P [ X T ≥ ξ ] = 1. If, in a market where only simple, no-short-sales trading is allowed, there are no arbitrages of the first kind on any interval [0 , T ], T ∈ R + , we shall say that condition NA1 s holds.

For economic motivation and more information on condition NA1 s , we refer the interested reader to [3]. The next result follows in a straightforward way from Theorem 2.3 of [3].

Theorem 1.2. Assume that condition NA1 s of Definition 1.1 holds. Then, S is a semimartingale. Further, for all X ∈ ⋃ x ∈ R + X s ( x ) , defining ζ X := inf { t ∈ R + | X t -= 0 or X t = 0 } to be the (first) bankruptcy time of X , we have X t = 0 for all t ∈ [ ζ X , ∞ [ on the event { ζ X &lt; ∞ } .

1.4. No-short-sales continuous trading. If condition NA1 s is in force, Theorem 1.2 implies the semimartingale property of S . We can therefore use general stochastic integration with respect to S , allowing in effect agents to change their position in the assets in a continuous fashion. This form of trading is only of theoretical interest, since it cannot be implemented in reality even if one ignores market frictions, as we do here.

Starting from initial capital x ∈ R + and investing according to some predictable and S -integrable strategy θ = ( θ 1 t , . . . , θ d t ) t ∈ R + , an agent's discounted wealth process is

where in the above definition ∫ · 0 〈 θ t , d S t 〉 denotes a vector Itˆ o stochastic integral - see [8]. For an initial wealth x ∈ R + , X ( x ) will denote the set of all no-short-sales wealth processes allowing continuous trading, that is, wealth processes X x,θ given by (1.3) such that (1.2) holds. As this form of continuous-time trading obviously includes as a special case the simple no-short-sales trading described in § 1.2, we have X s ( x ) ⊆ X ( x ) for all x ∈ R + .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under condition NA1 s , the conclusion of Theorem 1.2 stating that X t = 0 for all t ∈ [ ζ X , ∞ [ on the event { ζ X &lt; ∞ } , where ζ X := inf { t ∈ R + | X t -= 0 or X t = 0 } , extends to all X ∈ ⋃ x ∈ R + X ( x ). Again, this comes as a straightforward consequence of Theorem 2.3 in [3]. We shall feel free to imply this strengthened version of Theorem 1.2 whenever we are referring to it.

## 2. Approximation of No-Short-Sales Wealth Processes via Simple Trading

In this section, we discuss an approximation result for no-short-sales wealth processes obtained from continuous trading via simple strategies. We consider convergence of processes in probability uniformly on compact time-sets. The notation uc P -lim n →∞ ξ n = ξ shall mean that P -lim n →∞ sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | ξ n t -ξ t | = 0, for all T ∈ R + . Note that uc P -convergence comes from a metric topology. For more information on this rather strong type of convergence, we refer to [7].

## 2.1. The approximation result. We now state the main result of this section.

Theorem 2.1. Assume that condition NA1 s is valid in the market. For all x ∈ R + and X ∈ X ( x ) , there exists an X s ( x ) -valued sequence ( X k ) k ∈ N such that uc P -lim k →∞ X k = X .

The proof of Theorem 2.1, which will be given in § 2.4, will involve a 'multiplicative' approximation of the stochastic integral, discussed in § 2.2 and § 2.3, which is sensible from a trading viewpoint when dealing with nonnegative wealth processes.

Remark 2.2 . In the statement of Theorem 2.1, suppose further that there exists some ǫ &gt; 0 such that X ≥ ǫ . Then, it is straightforward to see that the approximating sequence ( X k ) k ∈ N can be chosen in a way such that X k ≥ ǫ , for all k ∈ N .

2.2. Proportional trading. Sometimes it is more useful to characterize investment in relative , rather than absolute terms. This means looking at the fraction of current wealth invested in some asset rather than the number of units of the asset held in the portfolio, as we did in (1.1) and (1.3).

Under condition NA1 s , the validity of Theorem 1.2 allows one to consider the total returns process R = ( R 1 t , . . . , R d t ) t ∈ R + , where R satisfies R 0 = 0 and the system of stochastic differential equations d S i t = S i t -d R i t for i = 1 , . . . , d and t ∈ R + . In other words, S i = S i 0 E ( R i ), where E is the stochastic exponential operator, see [7]. It should be noted that, for i = 1 , . . . , d , the process R i only lives in the stochastic interval [ [0 , ζ S i [ [ until the bankruptcy time ζ S i of Theorem 1.2, and that it might explode at time ζ S i . However, this does not affect the validity of the conclusions below, due to the fact that, by Theorem 1.2, S i t = 0 holds for all t ∈ [ ζ S i , ∞ [ on { ζ S i &lt; ∞ } , i = 1 , . . . , d . Let ∆ d denote the closed d -dimensional simplex , i.e., For any predictable, ∆ d -valued process π = ( π 1 t , . . . , π d t ) t ∈ R + of investment fractions, consider the process X ( x,π ) defined via

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observe that we are using parentheses in the '( x, π )' superscript of X in (2.1) to distinguish from a wealth process of the form X x,θ = x + ∫ · 0 〈 θ t , d S t 〉 , generated by θ in an additive way.

Under condition NA1 s , the set of all processes X ( x,π ) when ranging π over all the predictable ∆ d -valued processes is exactly equal to X ( x ). This is straightforward as soon as one notices that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

2.3. Stochastic integral approximation in a multiplicative way. Start with some adapted and c` agl` ad (left continuous with right limits), therefore predictable, ∆ d -valued process π of investment fractions. The wealth process generated by π in a multiplicative way starting from x ∈ R + is X ( x,π ) , as defined in (2.1). Consider now some economic agent who may only change the asset positions at times contained in T = { 0 =: τ 0 &lt; τ 1 &lt; . . . &lt; τ n } . Wanting to approximately, but rather closely, replicate X ( x,π ) , the agent will decide at each trading instant τ j -1 to rearrange the portfolio wealth in such a way as to follow with a piecewise constant number of units of the asset held until the next trading time τ j the given investment portfolio. More precisely, the agent will rearrange wealth at time τ j -1 , j = 1 , . . . , n , in a way such that a proportion π i τ j -1 + := lim t ↓ τ j -1 π i t is held in the i th asset, i = 1 , . . . , d ; the resulting number of units is then held constant until time τ j , when a new reallocation will be made in the way previously described. Starting from initial capital x ∈ R + and following the above-described strategy, the agent's wealth remains nonnegative and is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that, for all i = 1 , . . . , d , j = 1 , . . . , n and t ∈ R + , the ratio ( S i τ j ∧ t -S i τ j -1 ∧ t ) /S i τ j -1 ∧ t is assumed to be zero on the event { S i τ j -1 ∧ t = 0 } . Using the fact that the filtration ( F t ) t ∈ R + is right-continuous, it is straightforward to see that X ( x,π ; T ) ∈ X s ( x ).

Consider a sequence ( T k ) k ∈ N with T k ≡ { τ k 0 &lt; . . . &lt; τ k n k } for each k ∈ N , where each τ k j , for k ∈ N and j = 0 , . . . , n k , is a finite stopping time. We say that ( T k ) k ∈ N converges to the identity if, P -a.s., lim k →∞ τ k n k = ∞ as well as lim k →∞ sup j =1 ,...,n k | τ k j -τ k j -1 | = 0.

Theorem 2.3. Assume the validity of condition NA1 s . Consider any adapted and c` agl` ad ∆ d -valued process π . If ( T k ) k ∈ N converges to the identity, then uc P -lim k →∞ X ( x,π ; T k ) = X ( x,π ) .

Proof. Under condition NA1 s , and in view of Theorem 1.2, we have uc P -lim ǫ ↓ 0 X ( x, (1 -ǫ ) π ) = X ( x,π ) , as well as that, for all k ∈ N , uc P -lim ǫ ↓ 0 X ( x, (1 -ǫ ) π ; T k ) = X ( x,π ; T k ) . It follows that we might assume that π is actually (1 -ǫ )∆ d -valued, where 0 &lt; ǫ &lt; 1, which means that X ( x,π ) , as well as X ( x,π ; T k ) for all k ∈ N , remain strictly positive. Actually, since the jumps in the returns of the wealth processes involved are bounded below by -(1 -ǫ ), the wealth processes themselves are bounded away from zero in compact time-intervals, with the strictly positive bound possibly depending on the path. It then follows that uc P -lim k →∞ X ( x,π ; T k ) = X ( x,π ) is equivalent to uc P -lim k →∞ log X ( x,π ; T k ) = log X ( x,π ) , which is what we shall prove below.

To ease notation in the course of the proof we shall assume that d = 1. This is done for typographical convenience only; one can read the whole proof for the case of d assets, if multiplication and division of d -dimensional vectors are understood in a coordinate-wise sense. Also, in order to avoid cumbersome notation, from here onwards the dot ' · ' between two processes will denote stochastic integration and [ Y, Y ] will denote the quadratic variation process of a semimartingale Y .

Proceeding with the proof, write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R c is the uniquely-defined continuous local martingale part of the semimartingale R . Define the adapted c` agl` ad process η := ( π/S -) I { S -&gt; 0 } . For k ∈ N and j = 1 , . . . , n k , define ∆ k j S := S τ k j ∧· -S τ k j -1 ∧· . Further, S c is the continuous local martingale part of the semimartingale S . Since S -S 0 = ( S -I { S -&gt; 0 } ) · R , we can write (2.3) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As ( T k ) k ∈ N converges to the identity and η is c` agl` ad, the dominated convergence theorem for stochastic integrals gives uc P - lim k →∞ ∑ n k j =1 η τ k j -1 + ∆ k j S = η · S . Furthermore, using the fact that the function R ∋ x ↦→ x -log(1 + x ) behaves like R ∋ x ↦→ x 2 / 2 near x = 0, one obtains

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

via standard stochastic-analysis manipulation. The last facts, coupled with (2.4), readily imply that uc P -lim k →∞ log X ( x,π ; T k ) = log X ( x,π ) , which completes the proof. □

2.4. Proof of Theorem 2.1. Consider X ≡ X ( x,π ) ∈ X ( x ) for some ∆ d -valued predictable process π . In order to prove Theorem 2.1, we can safely assume that X ≥ ǫ for some ǫ &gt; 0, since if X ∈ X ( x ), then ǫ +(1 -ǫ/x ) X ∈ X ( x ) as well. This assumption is in force throughout the proof.

Recall that a simple predictable process is of the form ∑ n j =1 h j -1 I ] ] t j -1 ,t j ] ] , where h j -1 ∈ F t j -1 for j = 1 , . . . , d and 0 = t 0 &lt; t 1 &lt; .. . &lt; t n , where t j ∈ R + for j = 0 , . . . , n . We shall show below that there exists a sequence of simple ∆ d -valued predictable processes ( π k ) k ∈ N such that uc P -lim k →∞ X ( x,π k ) = X ( x,π ) . Given the existence of such sequence, one can invoke Theorem 2.3 and obtain a sequence ( X k ) k ∈ N of X s ( x )-valued processes with uc P -lim k →∞ X k = X .

To obtain the existence of a sequence of simple ∆ d -valued predictable processes as described in the above paragraph, observe first that a use of the monotone class theorem provides the existence of a sequence ( π k ) k ∈ N of ∆ d -valued, predictable, simple processes such that uc P -lim k →∞ π k · R = π · R , uc P -lim k →∞ [( π k -π ) · R, ( π k -π ) · R ] = 0, and 〈 π k , ∆ R 〉 &gt; -1 for all k ∈ N . Indeed, a simple approximation argument shows that only the special case when π = v I Σ , with v ∈ ∆ d and Σ is predictable and vanishes outside [ [0 , T ] ] for some T ∈ R + , has to be treated. Then, one uses the fact that the predictable σ -field on Ω × R + is generated by the algebra of simple predictable sets of the form ⋃ n j =1 H j -1 × ( t j -1 , t j ], where n ∈ N , 0 = t 0 &lt; . . . &lt; t n and H j -1 ∈ F t j -1 for j = 1 , . . . , n , and the claim readily follows.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, with Y k := π k · R and Y = π · R , the facts E ( Y k ) &gt; 0 for all k ∈ N as well as E ( Y ) &gt; 0 allow one to write

Using uc P -lim k →∞ [ Y k -Y, Y k -Y ] = 0 and uc P -lim k →∞ Y k = Y , which also imply that uc P -lim k →∞ [ Y k , Y k ] c = [ Y, Y ] c and uc P -lim n →∞ ∆ Y n = ∆ Y , we get uc P -lim n →∞ E ( Y n ) = E ( Y ), which is exactly what we wished to establish. □

## 3. Application to the Expected Utility Maximization Problem

In this section we show that, for expected-utility-maximizing economic agents, allowing only simple trading with appropriately high trading frequency, results in indirect utilities and wealth processes that can be brought arbitrarily close to their theoretical continuous-trading optimal counterparts.

3.1. The utility maximization problem. A utility function is an increasing and concave function U : (0 , ∞ ) ↦→ R . We also set U (0) := ↓ lim x ↓ 0 U ( x ) to extend the definition of U to cover zero wealth. Note that no regularity conditions are hereby imposed on U .

In what follows, we fix a fi nite stopping time T that should be regarded as the financial planning horizon of an economic agent in the market. We then define the agent's indirect utility that can be achieved when continuous-time trading is allowed via

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Observe that u is a concave function of x ∈ R + and that u ( x ) &lt; ∞ for some x &gt; 0 if and only if u ( x ) &lt; ∞ for all x ∈ R + . In particular, if u ( x ) &lt; ∞ for some x &gt; 0, u is a proper continuous concave function. If U is strictly concave (in which case it is a fortiori strictly increasing as well) and a solution to the utility maximization problem defined above exists, then it is necessarily unique. Similarly, define the agent's indirect utility under simple, no-short-sales trading via

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is obvious that u s ≤ u . All the above remarks concerning u carry over to u s mutatis-mutandis . Observe however that in almost no case is the supremum in (3.2) achieved. In other words, it is extremely rare that an optimal wealth process in the class of simple trading strategies exists for the given utility maximization problem.

3.2. Near-optimality using simple strategies. We now show that the value functions u s and u are actually equal and that 'near optimal' wealth processes under simple trading approximate arbitrarily close the solution of the continuous trading case, if the latter exists.

Theorem 3.1. In what follows, condition NA1 s of Definition 1.1 is assumed. Using the notation introduced above, the following hold:

- (1) u s ( x ) = u ( x ) for all x ∈ R + .
- (2) Suppose that U is strictly concave and that u &lt; ∞ . Then, for any x ∈ R + , any X s ( x ) -valued sequence ( X k ) k ∈ N and any X ( x ) -valued sequence ( ̂ X k ) k ∈ N with lim k →∞ E [ U ( X k T )] = u ( x ) = lim k →∞ E [ U ( X k T )] , we have P -lim k →∞ | X k T -X k T | = 0 .

The proof of Theorem 3.1 is given in § 3.4; in § 3.3, an interesting intermediate result is stated and proved. However, we first list a few remarks on the assumptions and statements of Theorem 3.1.

- ̂ ̂ (3) Suppose that U is strictly concave and continuously differentiable, and that for some x ∈ R + there exists ̂ X ∈ X ( x ) with ̂ X &gt; 0 , E [ U ( ̂ X T )] = u ( x ) &lt; ∞ , and E [ U ′ ( ̂ X T ) X T ] ≤ E [ U ′ ( ̂ X T ) ̂ X T ] &lt; ∞ holding for all X ∈ X ( x ) . Then, for any X s ( x ) -valued sequence ( X k ) k ∈ N with lim k →∞ E [ U ( X k T )] = u ( x ) , we have P -lim k →∞ sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | X k t -̂ X t | = 0 .
- Remark 3.2 . Under the mild assumption that for all i = 1 , . . . , d , we have S i ζ i -&gt; 0 on { ζ S i &lt; ∞} (the asset lifetimes ζ S i were introduced in the statement of Theorem 1.2), condition NA1 s needed in the statement of Theorem 3.1 is actually equivalent to the semimartingale property of S . For more information, check Theorem 2.3 in [3].

Remark 3.3 . The utility maximization problem for continuous trading has attracted a lot of attention and has been successfully solved using convex duality methods. In particular, in [4] and [5] it is shown that an optimal solution (wealth process) to problem (3.1) exists for all x ∈ R + and fixed financial planning horizon T under the following conditions: U is strictly concave and continuously differentiable in (0 , ∞ ), satisfies the Inada conditions lim x ↓ 0 U ′ ( x ) = + ∞ , lim x ↑ + ∞ U ′ ( x ) = 0, as well as a fi nite dual value function condition. These conditions can be used to ensure existence of the optimal wealth process in statement (3) of Theorem 3.1, that additionally satisfies the prescribed properties mentioned there.

Remark 3.4 . In statements (2) and (3), strict concavity of U cannot be dispensed with in order to obtain the result: even in cases where the supremum in (3.1) is attained, the absence of strict concavity implies that the optimum is not necessarily unique.

Remark 3.5 . Even if we not directly assume condition NA1 s in statement (3), it is indirectly in force because of the existence of ̂ X ∈ X ( x ) with ̂ X &gt; 0 and E [ U ( ̂ X )] = u ( x ) &lt; ∞ . Indeed, suppose that NA1 s fails and pick T ∈ R + and ( X n ) n ∈ N such that X n ∈ X s (1 /n ) and P [ X n T ≥ ξ ] = 1 for all n ∈ N , where P [ ξ ≥ 0] = 1 and P [ ξ &gt; 0] &gt; 0. In that case, the convexity of X ( x +1 /n ) gives that ( ̂ X + X n ) ∈ X ( x +1 /n ) for all n ∈ N . Therefore,

holds for all n ∈ N , which implies that u ( x ) &lt; lim n →∞ u ( x +1 /n ) and contradicts the continuity of the finitely-valued function u . For a similar result in this direction, see Proposition 4.19 in [2].

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 3.6 . The difference between statements (2) and (3) in Theorem 3.1 is that in the latter case we can infer uniform convergence of the wealth processes to the limiting one, while in the former we only have convergence of the terminal wealths. It is an open question whether the uniform convergence of the wealth processes can be established without assuming that the utility maximization problem involving continuous trading has a solution.

- 3.3. An result on supermatingale convergence. The following result, stated separately due to its independent interest, will help proving statement (3) of Theorem 3.1.

Proposition 3.7. On the filtered probability space (Ω , ( F t ) t ∈ R + , Q ) , let ( Z k ) k ∈ N be a sequence of nonnegative Q -supermartingales on [ [0 , T ] ] with Z k 0 = 1 for all k ∈ N and Q -lim k →∞ Z k T = 1 , where T is a finite stopping time. Then, Q -lim k →∞ sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] | Z k t -1 | = 0 .

Proof. Since Z k ≥ 0 for all k ∈ N , it suffices to show that Q -lim k →∞ sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] Z k t = 1 and Q -lim k →∞ inf t ∈ [0 ,T ] Z k t = 1.

For proving Q -lim k →∞ sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] Z k t = 1, observe that lim k →∞ E Q [ Z k T ] = 1 as a consequence of Fatou's lemma; this implies the Q -uniform integrability of ( Z k T ) k ∈ N and as a consequence we obtain lim k →∞ E Q [ | Z k T -1 | ] = 0. In particular, the probabilities ( Q k ) k ∈ N defined on (Ω , F T ) via (d Q k / d Q ) | F T = Z k T / E Q [ Z k T ] converge in total-variation norm to Q .

Fix ǫ &gt; 0 and let τ k := inf { t ∈ R + | Z k t &gt; 1 + ǫ } ∧ T . We have E Q [ Z k T ] ≤ E Q [ Z k τ k ] ≤ 1, which means that lim k →∞ E Q [ Z k τ k ] = 1. Showing that lim k →∞ Q [ τ k &lt; T ] = 0 will imply that Q -lim k →∞ sup t ∈ [0 ,T ] Z k t = 1, since ǫ &gt; 0 is arbitrary. Suppose on the contrary (passing to a subsequence if necessary) that lim k →∞ Q [ τ k &lt; T ] = p &gt; 0. Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last equality follows from lim k →∞ E Q [ Z k T ] = 1 and lim k →∞ Q k [ τ k = T ] = lim k →∞ Q [ τ k = T ] = 1 -p . This contradicts p &gt; 0 and the first claim is proved.

Again, with fixed ǫ &gt; 0, redefine τ k := inf { t ∈ [0 , T ] | Z k t &lt; 1 -ǫ } ∧ T - we only need to show that lim k →∞ Q [ τ k &lt; T ] = 0. Since Q [ Z k T &gt; 1 -ǫ 2 | F τ k ] ≤ (1 -ǫ ) / (1 -ǫ 2 ) = 1 / (1 + ǫ ) holds on the event { τ k &lt; T } , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Use Q [ τ k = T ] = 1 -Q [ τ k &lt; T ], rearrange and take the limit as n goes to infinity to obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which completes the proof of Proposition 3.7.

□

3.4. Proof of Theorem 3.1. We close by giving the proof of each of the three statements of Theorem 3.1.

3.4.1. Proof of statement (1). We begin by proving that u s = u . Assume first that u is finite. Since lim ǫ ↓ 0 u ( x -ǫ ) = u ( x ) for all x &gt; 0, it suffices to prove that for all ǫ ∈ (0 , x ) there exists an X s ( x )-valued sequence ( X k ) k ∈ N such that u ( x -ǫ ) ≤ lim inf k →∞ E [ U ( X k T )] + ǫ . Pick ξ ∈ X ( x -ǫ ) such that E [ U ( ξ T )] ≥ u ( x -ǫ ) -ǫ ; then, X := ǫ + ξ satisfies E [ U ( X T )] ≥ u ( x -ǫ ) -ǫ , X ∈ X ( x ) and X ≥ ǫ . According to Theorem 2.1 (combined with Remark 2.2), we can find an X s ( x )-valued sequence ( X k ) k ∈ N with P -lim k →∞ X k T = X T and X k T ≥ ǫ . Fatou's lemma implies that E [ U ( X T )] ≤ lim inf k →∞ E [ U ( X k T )] and the proof that u s = u for the case of finitely-valued u is clarified. The case where u ≡ ∞ is treated similarly.

3.4.2. Proof of statement (2). Pick any X s ( x )-valued sequence ( X k ) k ∈ N and any X ( x )-valued sequence ( ̂ X k ) k ∈ N with lim k →∞ E [ U ( X k T )] = u ( x ) = lim k →∞ E [ U ( ̂ X k T )]. We shall show below that P -lim k →∞ | X k T -X k T | = 0.

̂ Fix some m ∈ N ; the strict concavity of U implies the existence of some β m &gt; 0 such that for all ( a, b ) ∈ (0 , ∞ ) × (0 , ∞ ) we have

̂ For any m ∈ N , define K m := { ( a, b ) ∈ R 2 | a ∈ [0 , m ] , b ∈ [0 , m ] and | a -b | &gt; 1 /m } . As follows from Proposition 2.1 of [3], under condition NA1 s both sequences ( X k T ) k ∈ N and ( ̂ X k T ) k ∈ N are bounded in probability. Therefore, P -lim k →∞ | X k T -̂ X k T | = 0 will follow if we establish that, for all m ∈ N , lim k →∞ P [( X k T , X k T ) ∈ K m ] = 0.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

since lim k →∞ ( E [ U ( X k T )] + E [ U ( ̂ X k T )] ) = 2 u ( x ), lim k →∞ P [( X k T , ̂ X k T ) ∈ K m ] = 0 follows. 3.4.3. Proof of statement (3). Pick any X s ( x )-valued sequence ( X k ) k ∈ N with the property that lim k →∞ E [ U ( X k T )] = u ( x ). We already know from part (2) of Theorem 3.1 that P -lim k →∞ X k T = ̂ X T . What remains in order to prove statement (3) is to pass to the stronger convergence uc P -lim k →∞ X k = ̂ X . Observe that since inf t ∈ [0 ,T ] ̂ X t &gt; 0, which is a consequence of ̂ X &gt; 0 and condition NA1 s , the latter convergence is equivalent to uc P -lim k →∞ ( X k / ̂ X ) = 1. Define a new probability Q on F ∞ via the recipe

̂ ̂ The assumptions of statement (3) in Theorem 3.1 imply that Q is well-defined and equivalent to P on F ∞ , as well as that X/ ̂ X is a Q -supermartingale on [ [0 , T ] ] for all X ∈ X ( x ). Letting Z k := X k / ̂ X for all k ∈ N , we are in the following situation: Z k is a nonnegative Q -supermartingale on [ [0 , T ] ] with Z k 0 = 1 for all k ∈ N , and Q -lim k →∞ Z k T = 1. Then, Proposition 3.7 allows us to conclude.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## References

- [1] F. Delbaen and W. Schachermayer , A general version of the fundamental theorem of asset pricing , Math. Ann., 300 (1994), pp. 463-520.
- [2] I. Karatzas and C. Kardaras , The num´ eraire portfolio in semimartingale financial models , Finance Stoch., 11 (2007), pp. 447-493.
- [3] C. Kardaras and E. Platen , On the semimartingale property of discounted asset-price processes . submitted for publication, 2009.
- [4] D. Kramkov and W. Schachermayer , The asymptotic elasticity of utility functions and optimal investment in incomplete markets , Ann. Appl. Probab., 9 (1999), pp. 904-950.
- [5] , Necessary and sufficient conditions in the problem of optimal investment in incomplete markets , Ann. Appl. Probab., 13 (2003), pp. 1504-1516.
- [6] S. Levental and A. V. Skorohod , On the possibility of hedging options in the presence of transaction costs , Ann. Appl. Probab., 7 (1997), pp. 410-443.
- [7] P. E. Protter , Stochastic integration and differential equations , vol. 21 of Stochastic Modelling and Applied Probability, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2005. Second edition. Version 2.1, Corrected third printing.
- [8] A. N. Shiryaev and A. S. Cherny˘ ı , A vector stochastic integral and the fundamental theorem of asset pricing , Tr. Mat. Inst. Steklova, 237 (2002), pp. 12-56.
- [9] C. Stricker , Simple strategies in exponential utility maximization , in S´ eminaire de Probabilit´ es, XXXVI, vol. 1801 of Lecture Notes in Math., Springer, Berlin, 2003, pp. 415-418.

Constantinos Kardaras, Mathematics and Statistics Department, Boston University, 111 Cummington Street, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

E-mail address :

kardaras@bu.edu

Eckhard Platen, School of Finance and Economics &amp; Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Technology, Sydney, P.O. Box 123, Broadway, NSW 2007, Australia.

E-mail address : eckhard.platen@uts.edu.au