## A SECURITY PRICE VOLATILE TRADING CONDITIONING MODEL

Leilei Shi* 1 , Yiwen Wang 2 , Ding Chen 3 , Liyan Han 2 , Yan Piao, and Chengling Gou 4

1

Complex System Research Group, Department of Modern Physics University of Science and Technology of China 2 Department of Finance, Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 3 Harvest Fund Management Co. Ltd. 4 Department of Physics, Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics

## This Draft is on February 8, 2010 (Comments welcome)

## Abstract

We  develop  a  theoretical  trading  conditioning  model  subject  to  price  volatility  and  return

information in terms of market psychological behavior, based on analytical transaction

volume-price  probability  wave  distributions  in  which  we  use  transaction  volume  probability  to

describe price volatility uncertainty and intensity. Applying the model to high frequent data test in

China stock market, we have main findings as follows: 1) there is, in general, significant positive

correlation between the rate of mean return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity; 2)

it lacks significance in spite of positive correlation in two time intervals right before and just after

bubble  crashes;  and  3)  it  shows,  particularly,  significant  negative  correlation  in  a  time  interval

when SSE Composite Index is rising during bull market. Our model and findings can test both

disposition effect and herd behavior simultaneously, and explain excessive trading (volume) and

other anomalies in stock market.

Key words: behavioral finance, transaction volume-price probability wave, price volatility, trading conditioning, disposition effect, herd behavior, excessive trading, econophysics

JEL Classification: G12, G11, G10, C16

*Corresponding  author.  E-mail  address:  Shileilei8@yahoo.com.cn  or  leilei.shi@hotmail.com,  working  in  an

international securities company in China.

The  author  appreciates  valuable  discussion  with  Huaiyu  Wang,  Yaping  Wang,  Chunsheng  Zhou,  Jing  Liu,  and

Famin Liu etc.

## 1. INTRODUCTION

It has been long that literature in finance focuses much more attention on price and return and less  on  trading  volume,  even  completely  ignoring  it.  In  the  past  10  years,  however,  there  is  a changing  trend  that  academics  have  increasing  minds  on  the  information  contained  in  trading volume. In neoclassical finance framework, Lo and Wang (2006) explored the link between the dynamic  properties  of  volume,  together  with  price,  and  the  economic  fundamentals,  and underlined  the  general  point  that  trading  volume  and  price  should  be  an  integral  part  of  any analysis  of  asset  market.  In  newly  emerging  behavioral  finance,  we  have  associated  trading volume  with  investors'  emotion,  belief,  and  preference.  Behavioral  finance  is  the  study  of  the influence of  psychology on the behavior of financial practitioners and the subsequent effect on markets  (Sewell,  2008).  It  helps  explain  why  and  how  markets  might  be  inefficient.  Lee  and Swaminathan  (2000)  showed  that  past  trading  volume  provides  an  important  link  between 'momentum'  and  'value'  strategies  and  these  findings  help  to  reconcile  intermediate-horizon 'underreaction'  and  long-horizon  'overreaction'  effects.  Benos  (1998)  and  Odean  (1998) hypothesized  that  overconfidence  produces  excessive  trading  in  stock  market.  Odean  (1999) explained why those actively trade in financial markets to be more overconfident than the general population  by  three  reasons:  selection  bias,  survivorship  bias,  and  unrealistic  belief,  and  tested overconfident  trading hypothesis  by investigating whether  the  trading profits of discount brokerage  customers  are  sufficient  to  cover  their  trading  costs.  Barber  and  Odean  (2000) documented  further  evidence  that  active  trading  results  poor  performance  and  is  hazardous  to wealth. Such irrational behavior can be explained only by overconfidence. Graham et al. (2009) found that investors who feel competent trade more, and thus explained that overconfidence leads to  higher  trading  frequency.  Tested  the  trading  volume  predictions  of  formal  overconfidence models, Statman et al. (2006) found that share turnover is positively related to lagged returns in both market-wide and individual security for many months. They are interpreted as the evidence of  investor  overconfidence  and  the  disposition  effect.  Barber  et  al.  (2009)  demonstrated  that psychological biases that lead investors to systematically buy stocks with strong recent performance,  to  refrain  from  selling  stocks  with  a  loss,  and  to  be  net  buyers  of  stocks  with unusually high trading volume, likely contribute to the evidence that the trading of individuals is highly  correlated  and  persistent.  Grinblatt  and  Keloharju  (2001)  evidenced  that  past  return, reference price effect, tax-loss selling, and the size of the holding period capital gain or loss etc. affect  trading.  Overconfident  investors  and  sensation  seeking  investors  trade  more  frequently (Grinblatt and Keloharju, 2009). Hong and Stein (2007) found that trading volume appears to be an  indicator  of  sentiment.  In  other  words,  when  prices  look  to  be  high  relative  to  fundamental value,  disagreement  on  price  is  strong,  and  volume  is  abnormally  high.  Thus,  they  proposed  a disagreement  volume  model  which  allows  speaking  directly  to  a  joint  behavior  between  stock price and trading volume.

Whatever  excessive  trading  (volume)  hypotheses  are  overconfidence,  sensation  seeking,  and disagreement, they all converge to a point that trading volume reflects the intensity of investors' emotion, belief, and preference.

Pavlov (1904), a Russian physiologist and Nobel laureate in physiology or medicine in 1904, proposed conditioned reflex (classical conditioning) when studied physiological reflex in animal, using  saliva  volume  to  measure  conditioned  reflex  intensity  in  dog.  Conditioned  reflex  is  a physiological response  to  expect  that  an  unconditioned  stimulus  will  follow  whenever  a conditioned stimulus is present.

Thorndike  (1913)  is  a  pioneer  in  operant  conditioning  study.  Skinner  (1938)  invented  a conditioning chamber, called as a Skinner box, to study operant conditioning. It was a finding that a  rat  settles  into  a  smooth  pattern  of  frequent  bar  pressing,  after  it  gets  foods  (reinforcement) several  times  by  doing  this.  Today,  psychologists  define  an  operant  reinforcement  as  any  event that follows a response and increases its probability.

Like classical conditioning, operant learning is based on information and expectancies. Operant conditioning is a behavioral response with expectancy that if a certain operation is made, it will be followed  by  a  certain  consequence  (reinforcement)  at  certain  times.  In  a  viewpoint,  operant conditioning  is  that  a  discriminative  stimulus  sets  the  occasion  for  operant  behavior,  which  is followed  by  a  consequence  (Pierce  and  Cheney,  2004).  Or  it  occurs  in  the  presence  of  certain stimuli and is always followed by certain consequences (Irons and Buskist, 2008). Skinner called this relationship a three-term contingency (Dragoi, 1997). In operant conditioning, reinforcement is  used  to  alter  the  frequency  of  responses.  It  produces  very  high  operant  response  rate  and tremendous resistance to extinction  that  reinforcement  follows  the  uncertain  number  of  operant times (variable ratio) and time interval (variable interval) (Coon, 2007).

Intra-cranial stimulation (ICS) that involves direct stimulation of 'pleasure centers' in brain is one of the most unusual and powerful reinforcement (Olds and Fobes, 1981). Some rats press a bar thousands of times per hour to obtain stimulation in experiment, ignoring food, water, and sex in favor of the bar pressing.

Coon  (2007)  classified  operant  reinforcement  into  three  categories:  primary  reinforcement, secondary reinforcement, and feedback. Primary reinforcement is natural, or unlearned. They are usually rooted in biology and produce comfort, end discomfort, or fill an immediate physical need. Money,  praise,  approval,  affection,  and  similar  rewards,  all  serve  as  learned  or  secondary reinforcement.  Secondary  reinforcement  that  can  be  exchanged  for  primary  reinforcement  gain their value more directly. Printed money obviously has little or no value of its own, neither eaten nor drunk. However, it can be exchanged for foods and services, and perhaps is the most important source of economic reinforcement or conditioned reinforcement (Pierce and Cheney, 2004). For example, chimpanzees were taught to work for tokens in research (Cowles, 1937). Feedback is a process  that  an  operator  makes  an  (input)  adjustment  on  his  behavior  after  receiving  the consequence of his response (output).

Soros (1995) studied reflex theory in a perspective of philosophy at beginning, and gradually found that it was correlated with stock price behavior. In his opinion, it is the  best platform  to study  reflex  in  stock  market.  He  has  descriptive  explanation  for  a  feedback  process,  the  third reinforcement in Coons' classifications, that investors participate in trading, cause price volatility, make a judgment from price information, and then decide trading again to further influence price.

Studied joint behavior for security transaction volume distribution over a trading price range on every  trading  day,  Shi  (2006)  derived  a  time-independent  transaction  volume-price  probability wave equation and got two sets of analytical transaction volume distribution eigenfunctions over a trading price range in which transaction volume probability describes price volatility uncertainty and intensity using normative econophysics methodology. Based on this, we develop a theoretical trading conditioning model subject to price volatility and return information in terms of market psychological  behavior,  in  which  we  use  transaction  volume  probability  to  describe  trading conditioning intensity. By studying correlation between the rate of return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity, we test both disposition effect and herd behavior simultaneously, trace  back  to  analyze  investors'  psychological  behavior  with  price  volatility  when  they  make trading  decision,  and  attempt  to  provide  a  quantitative  analysis  and  test  model  for  behavioral finance.

Although there are many literatures on the relation between return and volume, we have not yet found study on the relation between the rate of return and that of change in transaction volume (probability), and a successful result that incorporates normative analytical transaction volume-price  probability  wave  behavior  in  econophysics  with  descriptive  cognitive  reflex  and conditioning  behavior  in  physiology  and  psychology-it  is  difficulty  for  most  of  non-Expected Utility models in trying to achieve both normative and descriptive goals that they end up doing an unsatisfactory  job  at  both  (Barberis  and  Thaler,  2003).  Unlike  transaction  volume,  the  rate  of change in transaction volume (probability) could be positive, negative, or zero. Instead of testing disposition effect  and herd behavior separately using event study and psychological experiment previously,  moreover,  we  use  high  frequency  data  to  test  them  simultaneously,  and  explain excessive trading and other anomalies in a unified theory.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 will briefly introduce analytical transaction  volume-price  probability  wave  distributions  and  find  a  way  to  measure  trading conditioning intensity subject to price volatility and return information; in section 3, we first study stationary  equilibrium,  determine  the  equilibrium  price,  and  demonstrate  the  early  finding  that stationary equilibrium is prevailing in stock market (Shi, 2006) using Huaxia SSE 50ETF every trading high frequent data. Then, we empirically test correlations among the rate of mean return, the rate of change in trading conditioning intensity, and that of change in the amount of transaction in any two consecutive trading days. Section 4 is analyses and discussions on empirical results. They are: 1) Stationary equilibrium exists widely as a consequence of interaction and coherence in stock market; 2) General speaking, there are significant both disposition effect and herd behavior; 3)  Cognitive  and  trading  behavior  changes  with  price  volatility  and  environment;  4)  Excessive trading  explanation  in  trading  conditioning  theory;  and  5)  Potential  application.  Final  are summaries and main conclusions.

## 2. TRANSACTION VOLUME DISTRIBITION AND TRADING CONDITIONING INTENSITY

## 2.1 Transaction Volume-price Probability Wave Distribution

Shi (2006) documented that stationary equilibrium exists widely in stock market by studying transaction  volume-price  behavior,  using  econophysics  method.  Transaction  volume v is accumulative trading volume at a price in a given time interval. It shows a kurtosis near the price mean  value  over  a  trading  price  range  on  every  trading  day  regardless  of  stock  price,  price volatility  path  and  direction 1 .  A  stationary  equilibrium  price  is  the  price  to  which  transaction volume  kurtosis  is  corresponding.  In  addition,  while  trading  price  is  volatile  upward  and downward to a stationary equilibrium price constantly, the equilibrium price jumps from time to time 1 .

1 Shi (2006) fitted and tested 618 volume distributions over a trading price range. Although there are different in price,  price  volatility  path  and  direction,  they  show  the  same  characteristic  that  accumulative  trading  volume exhibits kurtosis near the price mean value.

There  are  many  factors  that  could  influence  stock  price  and  its  volatility,  for  example, management  in  listing  company,  macro-economy,  news  announcement,  and  psychological behavior etc. These factors impact on price change more and less if and only if there is trading. Shi (2006) did not consider them temporarily in his previous study.

There is no price volatility at all if there is no trading in stock market. But if there is trading, we can not draw a conclusion that there is price change. Trading is a necessary condition for price volatility. In addition, the amount of transaction constrains price volatility and transaction volume.

Studied how the amount of transaction constrains price volatility and transaction volume, and how the volume distributes over a trading price range in stationary equilibrium in stock market, Shi  (2006)  proposed  a  relationship  hypothesis  among  the  constraint  of  transaction  amount,  the transaction  volume  distribution  of  the  amount,  and  the  price  volatility  of  the  amount  (price reversal to a stationary equilibrium price), i.e. transaction amount constraint hypothesis:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p is price, its dimension is [currency unit][share] -1 ; t v v t / = is transaction momentum and transaction volume in a given time interval , its dimension is [share][time] t -1 ; is the amount of transaction at a correspondent price 2 / t v p E ⋅ = p in a given time interval , its dimension is[currency][time] t -2 ; is impulse and momentum force in a direction deviating from a stationary equilibrium price at a corresponding price 2 / t v v tt = p in a given time interval , its dimension is[share][time] t -2 , is the volume probability of transaction amount at a price V v p t / 2 ⋅ p in a given time interval , its dimension is [currency unit][time] t -2 ; In addition,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is the price volatility and linear reversal of transaction amount to a stationary equilibrium price at a  price p in  a  given  time  interval ,  its  dimension  is  [currency  unit][time] t -2 ,  too; is  a stationary equilibrium price and 0 p p is price mean value; ( ) tt V v v A / 1 -= is the magnitude of a  supply-demand  restoring  force  or  stationary  equilibrium  restoring  force  ,  its  dimension  is [share][time] -2 .

According to stock trading regulation, transaction priority is given by 'price first and time first'. If current trading price is , then next trading priority is given to minimize price volatility with c p respect  to  it.  It  states  that  actual  trading  price  path  is  chosen  by  transaction  amount  constraint hypothesis, equation (1), functional

1 Unlike Poisson-diffusion jump (Ait-Sahalia, 2004) and Levy jump (Li et al., 2008), stationary equilibrium price jump  has  its  clear  mechanism.  For  example,  if  there  is  sudden  increasing  buying  volume  to  break  stationary equilibrium, trading price will be volatile upward and downward from a stationary equilibrium price to another by its jump. We can measure its jump behavior in terms of volume distribution over a trading price range (Shi, 2006).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to minimize its wave function ( ) p ψ with respect to price variations. Its mathematical expression is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From equation (1) and (4), we have transaction volume-price probability wave equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting equation (2) into equation (5) with its natural boundary conditions

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we get two sets of analytical transaction volume distribution eigenfunctions over a trading price range. One is that when there is coherence (the sum of momentum force and restoring force is equal to an eigenvalue constant over a trading price range), we have tt v A

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where m ω satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

( ) [ ] -ω

a set of positive eigenvalue  constants, 0 0 p p J m are a set of zero-order Bessel eigenfunctions, are  normalized  dimensionless  constants;  the  other  is  that  when  restoring are  a  set  of  constants  over  a  trading  price  range,  we  get  the  other  set  of  multi-order m C

force eigenfunctions as m A

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

( ) 0 ,1,2 p p A n F m --are  a  set  of order confluent hypergeometric eigenfunctions or the first Kummer's eigenfunctions. n

The absolute of functions (6) and (8) ( ) p m ψ is transaction volume density and probability at price p in  a  given  time  interval  (see  figure  1  and  figure  2,  in  which  x-coordinate  is  price, 6

y-coordinate is transaction volume distribution, and origin is a stationary equilibrium price), is normalized constant. m C

Figure 1: Transaction te of function (6) volume distribution over a trading price range in the absolu

<!-- image -->

Figure 2: Transa nction (8) ction volume distribution over a trading price range in the absolute of fu

<!-- image -->

There  are  several  different  characteristics  between  figure  1  and  figure  2.  First,  the  volume distribution  in  figure  1  is  an  attenuated  wave  with  price  departing  from  stationary  equilibrium price, while it is a uniform wave with price except for zero-order distribution which is exponent in figure  2.  The  higher  the  order  is  in  the  volume  distribution  function,  the  better  uniformly  the volume distributes over a price range in figure 2. Second, it is an open distribution in figure 1, which  can  describe  a  pulse  trading  behavior  far  away  from  a  stationary  equilibrium  price,  for example, profit and loss transfer trading, whereas it is a closed distribution in figure 2, which can describe random and uniform behavior. Third, the magnitude of eigenvalue in figure 2 is about two orders of magnitude larger than that in figure 1 except for exponent distribution. However, both distributions can fit exponent distribution very well in common.

## 2.2 Eigenvalue and Probability Wave

An eigenvalue is different from a parameter in a distribution function when we use it to describe . The uncertainty in events. In a great majority of scenarios, we usually use a distribution function with a parameter to analyze statistic and uncertain behavior in events if we know their distribution in a certain extent, but do not understand its mechanism. In this approximate analysis, we do not clear what exact information is contained in the parameter. An eigenvalue is observable and measurable. Thus, it is possible for us to test distribution eigenfunction validity quantitatively and understand its mechanism. In transaction volume-price probability wave distribution, for example, two sets of eigenvalues represent two observables. One is calculated by equation (7). It is the consequence of a kind of coherence that the sum of momentum force v and supply-demand restoring force is equal to this eigenvalue constant over a trading price range other is calculated by equation (9). It  is  the  consequence that supply-demand restoring and reversal force is equal to the eigenvalue constant  over  a  trading  price  range.  It  can  describe  exponent  distribution  and  uniform  random distribution. tt

Figure 3: Classical wave and probability wave

<!-- image -->

robability wave is a kind of wave in which we use volume distribution and probability rather th P an the amplitude of wave to describe wave intensity. For example, we use transaction volume probability rather than the amplitude of price volatility to describe price volatility intensity in a transaction  volume-price  probability  wave.  Now,  let  us  contrast  and  compare  probability  wave with  classical  wave.  First,  x-coordinate  is  price  (in  stock  market)  or  distance  (in  quantum mechanics)  and  y-coordinate  is  accumulative  volume  probability  in  a  probability  wave,  while x-coordinate is time and y-coordinate is amplitude in a classical wave. Second, we use volume distribution and probability to describe wave intensity, whereas we use the amplitude of wave to describe wave intensity. Third, intensity is equal to and larger than zero in probability wave, while it  can be negative in classical wave; Forth, intensity displays wave change with an independent variable in a probability wave. Large amplitude is not equal to strong intensity in a probability wave. In a classical wave, the larger the amplitude is, the stronger the intensity does be in wave. Fifth, probability wave is the consequence of coherence in group. It can not exist independently. Classical wave can exist independently. Sixth, strictly speaking, we have not yet found that there is  a  periodicity  and  time  cycle  in  a  probability  wave.  It  is  that  there  is  uncertainty  in  time prediction. In classical wave, we can measure speed in wave. Thus, there is periodicity and time cycle.  However,  there  are  common  in  both.  There  is  coherence  in  both  probability  wave  and classical wave. And there is repeated change reference to an equilibrium point (see figure 3).

## 2.3 Price Volatile Trading Conditioning and Its Intensity

Let us first consider a rigid trading system in which there is no any subjective cognition change in buying and selling behavior. The transaction volume is the same at any the same time interval even if trading price is volatile.

of  transaction  to  buy,  to  break  stationary  equilibrium,  and  to If  there  is  incremental  amount cause  stationary  equilibrium  price  jump,  then,  there  is  one-to-one  correspondence  between incremental  amount  of  transaction  and  the  equilibrium  price  jump  because  total  transaction volume is the same in two time intervals before and after jump.

that  could  influence  investors' In  a  real  financial  market,  there  are  a  great  many  factors subjective  cognition,  supply-demand  balance,  and  transaction  volume.  Therefore,  it  is  a  key  to find a certain relation among incremental amount of transaction, transaction volume change, and stationary  equilibrium  price  jump  how  we  combine  market  subjective  trading  behavior  and transaction volume change into transaction volume-price probability wave distribution function. It is  also  a  key  to  develop  a  theoretical  trading  conditioning  model  subject  to  price  volatility  and return information.

people  have physiological demand for clothes, foods, and services in life. Th It  is  objective  that is is physiological response and unconditioned reflex. Printed money obviously has little or no value of its own, neither eaten nor drunk. In commodity exchange economy, however, when we associate  money,  income,  and  return  with  the  necessities  of  life  and  services  tightly  through exchange, we have been conditioned by them (conditioned reinforcement) and will produce the same physiological response to them, i.e. conditioned reflex. Pierce and Cheney (2004) wrote that money  can  be  exchanged  for  foods  and  services,  and  perhaps  is  the  most  important  source  of economic and conditioned reinforcement.

x (classical conditioning) that traders produce the same ph In stock market, it is a conditioned refle ysiological response when they are stimulated by price volatility and return information as they do for the necessities of life and services, and it is a trading conditioning that practitioners trade and expect return in the future after they analyze, judge and have decision making in the presence of price volatility and return information.

n  in  price  volatile  trading  conditioning.  It  has  several The  reinforcement  is  money  and  retur characteristics  as  follows:  First,  it  does  not  loss  reinforcement  value  as  quickly  as  primary reinforcement  does  because  physiological  demand  is  satisfied.  Second,  profit  is  a  positive reinforcement whereas loss is a negative reinforcement. People trade and buy if they expect price rising. On the other hand, they trade and sell if they expect price dropping. There are tradings no matter whether price rises or drops in expectancy. Third, because we have not yet found time cycle in volume-price probability wave, return occurs after stock holding in an uncertain time interval. This makes tremendous resistance to extinction in trading conditioning, similar to variable interval (VI) schedules in operant conditioning experiment (Coon, 2007). Forth, the trading consequence (profit  and  loss)  that  produces  feedback  to  traders  could  influence  their  emotion  and  judgment, and enhance or change their expectancy in return to make trading. For examples, loss stop selling investors are likely to buy stock again because they change their expectancy in return, stimulated by price volatility and return. Just buying traders may sell their stock immediately because they find market movement in an opposite direction and change their previous expectancy. Therefore, cognitive response in price volatile trading conditioning includes both expectancy and expectancy change in return.

ers' three-term contingency and operant conditioning (Irons and Buskist, 2008), w Based on Skinn e  define price volatile trading conditioning in stock market as participants trade (operant) and expect  return  (profit  and  loss)  in  the  future  (consequence)  after  they  analyze,  judge,  and  have decision making (cognition) in the presence of price volatility and return information (discriminative  stimuli).  The  trading  consequence  (profit  and  loss)  that  produces  feedback  to influences their emotion and judgment, adjust their expectancy in return, and make trading (see figure 4).

Figure 4: Three-term contingency in trading conditioning

<!-- image -->

There  are  two  independent  variables,  price  and  transaction  volume,  in  stock  market.  The amount  of  transaction  is  a  constrain  condition  on  them.  According  to  classical  mechanics (Greenwood, 1977), the degree of freedom is equal to that the number of independent variables minus the number of constrain conditions. The degree of freedom is one in this trading system.

t Osborne (1977), a pioneer in econophysics, found that price as a function of volume does no exist empirically, and then explained why volume is the function of price, and this is not invertible. McCauley  (2000)  proved  that  price  as  a  function  of  volume  does  not  exist  mathematically. Therefore,  Shi  (2006)  chose  price  as  an  independent  variable  and  transaction  volume  as  a dependent variable in stock market.

g conditioning behavior, security price volatility and return According to afore-developed tradin information  stimulate  practitioners  to  trade  with  expectancy  on  its  return  in  the  future.  The subjective  trading  behavior  (cognition)  and  accumulative  trading  volume  (transaction  volume) change synchronously. We use the change in transaction volume distribution (probability) over a trading price range to present the change in subjective trading behavior (cognition) subject to price volatility and return information (We use transaction volume rather than the amount of transaction because the later is constraint).

robability wave distribution function, we use transaction volume In transaction volume-price p probability  instead  of  the  amplitude  of  price  volatility  to  describe  price  volatility  intensity.  The larger the transaction volume probability is at a price, the higher the trading intensity is (Unlike a classic wave in that the larger the amplitude is, the stronger the intensity does be). The higher the trading intensity is, the higher the trading frequency 1 . Therefore, expectancy on return and trading conditioning intensity are higher (The higher the transaction volume is, the higher volume traders buy.  There  are  more  expectancy  on  price  rising.  On  the  other  side,  the  higher  the  transaction volume is, the higher volume traders sell. There are more expectancy on price dropping), and vice versa. Price volatile intensity is approximately equal to trading conditioning intensity subject to price  volatility  and  return  information.  Therefore,  we  can  use  transaction  volume  probability (distribution) to describe trading conditioning intensity and frequency (reference to figure 5).

Figure 5: Price volatility intensity is approximately equal to trading conditioning intensity

<!-- image -->

Now, we can use transaction volume probability to describe trading conditioning intensity. In the same way, when we use stationary equilibrium jump to represent price volatility mean return in  two  consecutive  trading  days,  we  can  use  the  rate  of  change  in  total  transaction  volume  to describe the rate of change in trading conditioning intensity subject to the rate of mean return and its  information  in  the  two  days.  Obviously,  the  rate  of  change  in  trading  conditioning  intensity could be positive, negative, and zero. In this way, we can study correlation between the rate of mean  return  and  that  of  change  in  trading  conditioning  intensity  and  trace  back  to  analyze investors' physiological response and psychological behavior when they trade in decision making, using high frequency data.

1 According to the law of large number in probability and statistics, if total transaction volume is much greater than the volume of every trading, then, transaction volume probability is approximately equal to trading frequency. In our  study,  total  daily  trading  volume  is  about  360,000,000  shares  in  average.  We  can  use  transaction  volume probability  to  represent  trading  frequency.  The  higher  the  transaction  volume  is  at  a  price,  the  higher  trading frequency. Although there is difference in information contained in a single large trading volume equivalent to total volume of several small trades, transaction volume probability is still approximately equal to trading frequency. The abnormal volume distribution disturbed by large volume trading reveals that stationary equilibrium is easily broken by capital advantage speculators. We will study it in the future.

## 3. EMPIRCAL TESTS

In this section, we will fit and test accumulative trading volume distribution over a trading price range by using the absolute of zero-order Bessel eigenfunction regression model. From this, we can get a stationary equilibrium price on every trading day and calculate its jump and mean return in any two consecutive trading days. For those that show the significance fitted by the model, we can determine a stationary equilibrium from fitting figures directly. Otherwise, we substitute price mean value for it. In this way, we can further study the correlations among the rate of mean return, the  rate  of  change  in  trading  conditioning  intensity,  and  that  of  change  in  the  amount  of transaction.

## 3.1 Data

We use every trading high frequent data in Huaxia SSE 50ETF from April 2, 2007 to April 10, 2009, in which there are nearly 740 days and 495 trading days in total, i.e., the total number of volume distributions over a trading price range is 495. The data is from HF2 database, provided by Harvest Fund Management Co., Ltd.

We  process  the  data  in  two  steps.  First,  we  reserved  two  places  of  decimals  in  price  by rounding-off  method  and  added  volume  at  a  corresponding  price  (original  data  reserves  three places of decimals.). Second, transaction volume at a price is divided by total transaction volume over a trading price range. Thus, we acquire transaction volume probability (distribution) over a trading price range in every trading day.

## 3.2 Distribution Fitting, Significance Test, and Stationary Equilibrium Price

In a stationary equilibrium state, theoretical transaction volume-price distribution function is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

m C , m ω where and 0 p are  a  normalized  constant,  an  eigenvalue  constant  and  a  stationary equilibri p , respe vely, and determined by a nonlinear regression model as follow: um rice cti

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where is the number of prices over a trading price range in a trading day; n i ε is random error

( ) ( ) [ ] 0 0 p p J C i m m -ω 2 0, σ N ; ( ) i m p ψ and subject to are observed  and  theoretical transaction  v e  over  a nge,  respectively.  We  fit  the olume  probability  at  a  pric trading  price  ra volume  distribution  by  Levenberg-Marquardt  nonlinear  least  square  method,  get  the  numerical values of m C , m ω 0 and p , and find theoretical distribution. Origin 6.0 Professional software is friendly use n ng (se igure 6 (a)). d i fitti e f

We use F statistic to test significance. The coefficient of determination 2 R is as follow:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( ) 2 1 ˆ ∑ = -= n i i Y Y ESS ( ) 2 1 ˆ ∑ = -= n i i i Y Y RSS ( ) 2 1 ∑ = -= n i i Y Y , ,  and TSS are  the  explained

sum of squares, the residual sum of squares, and total sum of squares, respectively. And,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where n and k is  sample  size  and  the  number  of  explanatory  variables,  respectively.  If 0.05 F F &gt; or

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the regression model (11) holds true at 95% significant level.

Our test results show that 380 out of 495 distributions show significance from April 2, 2007 to April 10, 2009 (76.77%). The remainders (23.23%) lack significance.

There are two notable characteristics among significance lacking distributions. First, the number of trading prices is few or the sample size is too small in price. It is partly credited by previous data process, in which we reserved two places of decimals in price by rounding-off three places in original data. The volume distribution characteristics can not be displayed.

To solve the problem, we add 0.005 in three places of decimals in price and subdivided volume at corresponding prices. As a result, 28 volume distributions show significance, modeled by absolute zero-order  Bessel  function.  Thus,  there  are  total  408  (380+28)  volume  distributions,  around 82.42%, that show significance. Their stationary equilibrium prices can be determined by fitting results directly.

Second, the remaining volume distributions (87) show at least two of kurtosis over a trading price range. It is explained when abrupt change in supply and demand quantity, for example, continuous large  buying  volume,  breaks  up  original  stationary  equilibrium,  price  volatility  is  going  to  be adjusted  to  a  new  equilibrium  price.  The  stationary  equilibrium  price  appears  a  step  and  jump change. After this, trading  price is  volatile  around  the  new  stationary  equilibrium  price.  In  this case, the volume distribution function is the linear superposition of function (10), that is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where n is  the  number  of  stationary  equilibrium  prices.  We  fit  them  with  a  two  stationary equilibrium price regression model as follow:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 2 . = n

We test significance ( ,  here 2 2 2 2 crit R R &gt; 2 = k ). Of 87 distributions, 59 distributions (11.92%

in total) show significance at 95% level (see figure 6 (b)).

Figure 6: Distributions fitted by transaction volume-price probability wave model and significance test 1

<!-- image -->

For the rest of 28 transaction volume distributions, we fit them by the second set of distribution functions as follow:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In convenience, we choose 1, it is = n

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The result is that 23 distributions (about 4.65% in total) show significance at 95% level by this regression model (see figure 6 (c)). The last 5 distributions lack significance (see figure 6 (d)).

1 In  figure,  P1,  P2,  and  P3  are  a  normalized  constant,  an  eigenvalue,  and  a  stationary  equilibrium  price, respectively. P4 is a stationary equilibrium price, too.

In  figure  6  shows  some  typical  test  results  fitted  by  transaction  volume-price  distribution functions (10), (16), and (18), respectively.

## 3.3 Correlation and Significant Test

408 transaction volume distributions (about 82.42% in total samples) show significance, tested by the absolute of zero-order Bessel eigenfunction regression model. We can decide their stationary equilibrium  prices  from  fitting  figures  directly.  For  the  rest  samples,  we  substitute  price  mean values  for  them.  In  this  way,  we  can  figure  out  price  volatility  mean  return  by  stationary equilibrium price jump in any two consecutive trading days. Thus, we can study the correlation among the rate of mean return, the rate of change in trading conditioning intensity, and that of change in the amount of transaction. Here, the rate of change in trading conditioning intensity is approximately equal to that in total transaction volume in any two consecutive trading days.

Given correlation coefficient X Y , r as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( X σ and Y σ are the standard deviations of variable X and Y , ) X Y , cov is covariance. We use t -statistic to test significance. If we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then,

where r and a n re  correlation  coefficient  and  sample  size,  respectively.  For 0.05 α = ,  if ( 2 0.05 / 2 -= &gt; n t t t crit ) , then, original hypothesis is rejected. Correlation coefficient is significant not equal to zero at 95% level.

In our test, we use Eviews6.0. We subdivide our data into 5 groups in terms of time, financial crisis in the United States, and bubble crash in China. The first group is dated from April 2, 2007 to June 29, 2007, the first half before bubble crash in China. The second group is dated from July 2,  2007  to  October  31,  2007,  the  second  half  before  bubble  crash  in  China.  The  third  group  is dated from November 1, 2007 to April 40, 2008, the first half after bubble crash in China. The forth group is dated from May 5, 2008 to October 31, 2008, the second half after bubble crash in China. And latest one is dated from November 3, 2008 to April 10, 2009, the reversal time after a year time deep dropping (reference to Table).

There is  a  major  advantage  when  we  subdivide  data  into  5  time  intervals.  We  can  find  how market psychological behavior change with time and environment and quire why.

By  empiric  results,  we  have  main  findings  as  follows:  generally  speaking,  first,  there  are significant positive correlations between the rate of mean return and that of change in both trading conditioning intensity  and  the  amount  of  transaction;  second,  correlation  coefficient  varies  in  5

subdivided periods. For examples, (a) they lack significance in spite of positive correlations in two time intervals right before and just after bubble crashes; (b) it shows positive significance in the second half after bubble crash; (c) the positive correlation coefficient is 0.4766, the highest during reversal period after a year time deep dropping; (d) particularly, there exists significant negative correlation between the rate of mean return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity when SEE Composite Index is rising during bull market; third, the correlation coefficient between the  rate  of  mean  return  and  that  of  change  in  amount  of  transaction  is  always  several  points (0.03~0.08)  higher  than  that  between  the  rate  of  mean  return  and  that  of  change  in  trading conditioning intensity. We will discuss them in next section.

Table: Correlation and Significance Test

| Time  (yr. mo. d.)  Number of  Distributions  SSE  Composite Index  Correlation 1  Correlation 2  Differences  Correlation 3  A  2007.4.2-2009.4.10  494  3252.59-2444.23  0.1391  (t=3.115&gt;  =1.960)  crit  t  0.1970  (t=4.458&gt;  =1.960)  crit  t  0.0579  0.9975  (t=316.3&gt;  =1.960)  crit  t  B  2007.4.2-2007.6.29  59  3252.59-3820.70  -0.2567  (t=2.006&gt;  =2.001)  crit  t  -0.2120  (t=1.638&lt;  =2.001)  crit  t  0.0447  0.9986  (t=142.0&gt;  =2.001)  crit  t  C  2007.7.2-2007.10.30  83  3836.29-5954.77  0.0729  (t=0.6583&lt;  =1.990)  crit  t  0.1053  (t=0.9529&lt;  =1.990)  crit  t  0.0324  0.9993  (t=241.2 &gt;  =1.990)  crit  t  D  2007.11.1-2008.4.30  122  5914.28-3693.11  0.1026  (t=1.130&lt;  =1.980)  crit  t  0.1714  (t=1.906&lt;  =1.980)  crit  t  0.0688  0.9968  (t=137.0&gt;  =1.980)  crit  t  E  2008.5.5-2008.10.31  123  3761.01-1728.79  0.1963  (t=2.202&gt;  =1.980)  crit  t  0.2706  (t=3.091&gt;  =1.980)  crit  t  0.0743  0.9958  (t=119.2&gt;  =1.980)  crit  t  F  2008.11.3-2009.4.10  107  1719.77-2444.23  0.4766  (t=5.556&gt;  =1.983)  crit  t  0.5203  (t=6.243&gt;  =1.983)  crit  t  0.0437  0.9981  (t=166.5 &gt;  =1.983)  crit  t   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Notes: (1) Correlation 1 is the correlation between the rate of mean return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity; correlation 2 is the correlation between the rate of mean return and  that  of  change  in  the  amount  of  transaction;  Correlation  3  is  the  correlation  between  the  rate  of  change  in  trading  conditioning  intensity  and  that  in  the  amount  of  transaction;  (2) Differences are correlation coefficient 2 minus 1; (3) is crit t ( ) 2 0.05 2 -n t ; If , then, the correlation coefficient is significantly not equal to zero; On the other hand, we can not reject original hypothesis that the correlation coefficient is equal to zero; (4) the lack of significance is printed in bold and red; (5) SSE Composite Index is measured by closing point. crit t t &gt;

## 4. ANALYSES AND DISCUSSIONS ON EMPIRICAL RESULTS

## 4.1 Stationary Equilibrium and the Equilibrium Price

Shi  (2006)  decomposed  price  volatility  behavior  into  two  parts.  First,  trading  price  is  volatile upward and downward to a stationary equilibrium price constantly. It is quantitatively described by  a  transaction  volume-price  probability  wave  equation  (5),  in  which  a  stationary  equilibrium price is the price that transaction volume kurtosis corresponds to. Second, a stationary equilibrium price jumps from time to time. It is explained that a stationary equilibrium is easily broken and its restoring force is weak in stock market. If there is abrupt change in supply and demand quantity, for example, by a large buying volume, then trading price is going to adjust to a new stationary equilibrium price that jumps. After this, it is volatile upward and downward to new equilibrium price. The jump is used to represent for mean return.

We use every trading high frequent data in Huaxia SSE 50ETF from April 2, 2007 to April 10, 2009, in which there are nearly 740 days and 495 trading days in total, i.e., the number of volume distribution over a price range is 495. We firstly apply transaction volume-price probability wave distribution regression model, equation (11), to fitting them, and test significance. 408 distributions or 82.42% in total show significance. For those distributions that show significance, we  get  stationary  equilibrium  prices  directly  from  fitting  results.  For  those  that  do  not  show significance, the volume distributions display two and more than two of kurtosis over trading price range in a day. It is that a stationary equilibrium price jumps on trading days. We substitute price mean value for stationary equilibrium price. Thus, we can get price volatility mean return in any two consecutive trading days by stationary equilibrium price jump.

Our empirical results further demonstrate the early finding that there is stationary equilibrium and a stationary equilibrium price jumps from time to time in stock market (Shi, 2006).

The ratio of the number of abnormal distributions to total number of distributions is 23.23% from 2007  to  2009  in  this  paper  and  5.66%  in  2003  (Shi,  2006).  By  comparison,  we  can  draw  a conclusion that it is much more stable and less volatile in Shanghai stock market in 2003. It is fact that  there  was  26.17% maximum volatility in 2003, whereas there was 140.96%, 231.71%, and 88.60% from 2007 to 2009, respectively. The larger the ratio is, the more volatile and unstable market is. Thus, the ratio can be used as a stability index in stock market.

## 4.2 Test Disposition Effect and Herd Behavior

From empirical test  results  in  Section  3,  we  find  that  there  is  significant  positive  correlation between the rate of mean return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity in general from April, 2007 to April, 2009 (reference to line A in Table). In order to understand the result and its  implication  in  trading  behavior,  let  us  clarify  disposition  effect  and  herd  behavior  in  stock market at first.

Shefrin and Statman (1985) identified what they termed the 'disposition effect' that investors have a desire to realize gains by selling stocks that have appreciated, but to delay the realization of losses. Odean (1998) tested and demonstrated the disposition effect among investors by analyzing trading  records  for  10,000  accounts  at  a  large  discount  brokerage  house.  Weber  and  Camerer (1998) designed experiments to test disposition effect validity and explained it by prospect theory (Tversky and Kahneman, 1992). Grinblatt and Keloharju (2001) found evidence that investors are reluctant  to  realize  losses  using  a  unique  data  set  in  Finnish  stock  market.  Disposition  effect  is abnormal behavior in selling stock.

There  are  innumerable  social  and  economic  situations  in  which  we  are  influenced  in  our decision  making  by  what  others  around  us  are  doing  (Banerjee,  1992).  Herding  has  been theoretically linked to many economic activities. It is often said to occur when many people take the same action (Graham, 1999). There are many herd behaviors (Hirshleifer and Teoh, 2009), for example,  Nofsinger  and  Sias  (1999)  studied  herding  and  feedback  trading  by  institutional  and individual investors. Lux (1995) formalized herd behavior to explain the emergence of bubbles. Trading  conditioning  herd  is  that  we  are  participants  with  others  when  expecting  return  and onlookers  with  others  when  expecting  loss  subject  to  price  volatility  and  return  information  in trading market. Herd is abnormal behavior in buying stock.

If, on selling side, the larger the positive mean return is, the more share volume are sold, and the larger the negative mean return is, the less share volume are sold, then, it is disposition effect. If, on buying side, the larger the positive mean return is, the more share volume are bought, and the larger the negative mean return is, the less share volume are bought, then, it is trading conditioning herd behavior.

Therefore, it  is  true  that  there  are  significant  disposition  effect  and  trading  conditioning  herd behavior  simultaneously  if  there  is  a  significant  positive  correlation  between  the  rate  of  mean return  and  that  of  change  in  trading  conditioning  intensity.  The  magnitude  of  correlation coefficient indicates intensity in the behavior. Our empirical results show that there is significant positive  correlation  between  the  rate  of  mean  return  and  that  of  change  in  trading  conditioning intensity  in  general.  Therefore,  there  are  significant  disposition  effect  and  trading  conditioning herd behavior in stock market in general. It is physiological response and conditioned behavior for return in human beings when people stimulated by price volatility and return information trade in expectancy for return.

## 4.3 Cognitive and Trading Behavior

We subdivide our two year high frequency data into five time intervals based on financial crises in the world and bubble crash in China in 2007. There is a major advantage for this because we can study cognitive and trading behavior change with price volatility, time, and environment.

The correlation coefficients are 0.0729 and 0.1026 right before and just after bubble crashes, respectively. The positive correlation lacks significance. Disposition effect and herd behavior lack significance.  It  is  explained  that  disagreement  on  price  between  bounded  rational  and  irrational traders increases uncertainty in last bubble riding (see line C and D in Table). If we can further demonstrated  that  there  is  a  relation  between  bubble  crash  and  the  lack  of  significance  in  the correlation, we might time and predict bubble crash at a certain extent.

It  is  more  interesting  that  the  correlation  coefficient  is  0.1963  when  SH  Index  continues dropping  in  second  half  time  interval  after  bubble  crashes.  The  positive  correlation  shows significance.  The  disposition  effect  and  herd  behavior  are  significance.  In  comparison  with behavior just after bubble crash, we further demonstrate that disposition effect and herd behavior are stronger in a more loss situation (please compare the correlation coefficient in line E with line D in Table).

The correlation coefficient is 0.4766, the largest among 5 subdivided time intervals, and shows significance. It is the most notable disposition effect and herd behavior (see line F in Table). This indicates  two  facts.  First,  investors  have  been  conditioned  by  drop  momentum  after  a  year succession  of  large  drop  from  top  6124.04  points  to  bottom  1664.04  points  in  SSE  Composite Index. Disposition effect to realize gains shows the most significance in short term. Second, it is a necessary condition for reversal after there is price momentum drop in market that we enhance market  confidence  and  expectancy  in  return,  keep  incremental  amount  of  capital  into  market continuously,  and  buy  a  large  volume  of  stock  shares  that  have  appreciated  and  sold  by  strong disposition effect in short term.

Now, we will focus on a special case that there is a negative correlation, -0.2567, between the rate of mean return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity. It shows significance (see line B in Table).

SSE  Composite  Index  increases  almost  continuously  from  998.23  points  at  bottom  in  June, 2005  to  3183.98  points  in  March,  2007,  the  beginning  of  sampling.  When  investors  are conditioned by sustaining positive return, they are reluctant to sell shares with price rising. It is an 'anti-disposition effect' (see line B in Table).

We explain variation in the correlation coefficient by that Investors change their expectancy in return and psychological behavior in stock market.

Finally, the correlation coefficient between the rate of mean return and that of change in amount of  transaction  is  always  several  points  (0.03~0.08)  higher  than  that  between  the  rate  of  mean return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity. Money plays more important role in mean return than psychological behavior and expectancy do in stock  market. It demonstrates a dictum in Wall Street: cash is king.

## 4.4 Trading Conditioning and Excessive Trading

We extend three-term contingency operant conditioning to a six-term trading conditioning loop as follows: price volatility and return information (discriminative stimuli) cognition, judgment, and  decision  (decision  making) trading  and  no  trading  (operant) expectancy  on  return (profit and loss) in the future (consequence) consequence emotion (new discriminative stimuli) adjustment in expectancy on return (feedback). Please see figures 4 and 7. → → → → →

Let  us  go  back  to  reconsider  intra-cranial  stimulation  (ICS)  experiment  in  introduction. Assumed that the rat is rational in bar pressing for foods and irrational for pleasures, we might find  a  clue  why  investors  behave  irrational  by  excessive  trading  ignoring  wealth  loss  and maximum utility.

Pierce  and  Cheney  (2004)  wrote  that  money  can  be  exchanged  for  foods  and  services,  and perhaps  is  the  most  important  source  of  economic  and  conditioned  reinforcement.  Money  and return  is  positive  reinforcement  in  price  volatile  trading  conditioning  in  stock  market.  It  has several characteristics as follows: First, it does not loss reinforcement value as quickly as primary reinforcement  does  because  physiological  demand  is  satisfied.  Second,  profit  is  a  positive reinforcement whereas loss is a negative reinforcement. People trade and buy if they expect price rising.  On the other hand, they trade and sell if they expect price dropping. There is trading no matter whether price in expectancy rises or drops. Trading frequency is higher. Third, because we have not yet found time cycle in volume-price probability wave, profit occurs after stock holding in  an  uncertain  time  interval.  This  makes  tremendous  resistance  to  extinction  in  trading conditioning, similar to variable interval (VI) schedules in operant conditioning experiment (Coon, 2007). It can increase trading probability and frequency if people not leave market, for example, loss stopping traders are likely to buy stock again, stimulated by price volatility and positive return (herd behavior). Forth, the trading consequence (profit and loss) that produces feedback to traders could influence their emotion and judgment, and enhance or change their expectancy in return to make trading. Expectancy change also produces high frequency trading. For examples, just buying traders  may  sell  their  stock  immediately  because  they  find  market  movement  in  an  opposite direction. Investors who have realized gains by selling stock may become overconfidence and buy stock  again.  Trading  will  not  stop.  In  conclusion,  we  find  that  trading  conditioning  produces excessive trading (volume) in stock market.

## Price Volatility in Stock Market (The Source of Conditioned Stimulus)

<!-- image -->

Conditioned Cognitive Reflex ('Physiological Response')

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Consequence in Return Influences Emotion Pride or Regret, Happy or Rejected, Greedy or Terrified New Conditioned Cognitive Reflex (Persistent Reinforcement Establishes 'Beliefs')

Figure 7: Excessive trading mechanism in a trading conditioning loop

## 4.5 Finance Theory in Interdisciplinary Fields

Shiller (2006) summarized the history of financial theory over the last half century in terms of two distinct revolutions. The first was the revolution by neoclassical finance that began around 1960s, and the second was the revolution by behavioral finance which began in the 1980s. Unlike neoclassical finance that assumed investors' rationality and maximum utility in decision making, behavioral  finance  attempts  to  establish  a  link  among  neoclassical  finance,  psychology,  and decision making science, study how investors make systematic biases in cognition, judgment, and decision,  and  explain  anomalies  in  financial  market  from  psychological  behavior  (Tversky  and Kahneman, 1973). Today, we have made great progress on how preferences, beliefs, and limits to arbitrage  influence  financial  market,  respectively.  Of  all  non-expected  utility  (EU)  theories, prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky,1979)(Tversky and Kahneman, 1992) may be the most promising (Barberis and Thaler, 2003).

It is necessary for newly emerging behavioral finance to have better explanations that we need develop a unified hypothesis, methodology, and theory about financial economics  while incorporating salient aspect of human behavior so that both rational and irrational behaviors are covered in extreme conditions (Dong, 2009).

Barberis and Thaler (2003) concluded that behavioral models typically capture something about investors' beliefs, or their preference, or the limits to arbitrage, but not all three. In addition, there are obviously competing behavioral explanations for some of the empirical facts.

Shiller  (2006)  continued  his  viewpoint  that  behavioral  finance  is  not  wholly  different  from neoclassical finance. Perhaps the best way to describe the difference is that behavioral finance is more eclectic, more willing to learn from other social sciences and less concerned about elegance of models and more with the evidence that they describe actual human behavior.

We  attempt  to  use  econophysics  methodology  to  link  physiology,  cognitive  psychology, neuroeconomics (Camerer et al., 2005), probability and statistics,  economic  finance,  behavioral finance, and econophysics together to study financial market, a multi-interdisciplinary science (see figure 7).

## 4.6 Possible Applications

There are many possible applications in our research. First, we find that trading conditioning produces excessive trading (volume) in stock market. This can help us to explain why and how personality, e.g. overconfidence, sensation seeking, and disagreement, produces excessive trading and high volume from the viewpoints in cognitive psychology, neuroeconomics (Hsu et al., 2005), and  medicine.  For  example,  it  supports  disagreement  excessive  trading  hypothesis  (Hong  and Stein, 2007) in a certain extent because of positive correlation between the rate of mean return and the rate of change in trading conditioning intensity in general. Second, we use high frequency data to test disposition effect and herd behavior simultaneously by positive correlation between the rate of  return  and  that  of  change  in  trading  conditioning  intensity.  It  provides  a  new  quantitative analysis and test model for behavioral finance. Third, if we can further demonstrated that there is a relation between bubble crash and the lack of significance in correlation between the rate of mean return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity, we might time and predict bubble crash at a certain extent. In this way, we can improve investment strategy, avoid large risk, and capture good opportunity in investment. Forth, policy makers may use reinforcement to manage irrational behavior  and  reduce  risk  in  financial  market  (Xiao  and  Houser,  2005).  Fifth,  it  is  the  best laboratory to do research on conditioning in physiology, psychology, and medicine field.

## 5. SUMMARIES AND MAIN CONCLUSIONS

In  a  real  financial  market,  there  are  a  great  many  factors  that  could  influence  investors' subjective cognition and transaction volume. Therefore, it is a key to develop a theoretical trading conditioning model subject to price volatility and return information how we incorporate market subjective trading behavior into transaction volume-price probability wave distribution function.

Based on classical conditioning and Skinners' three-term contingency operant conditioning, we

define price volatile trading conditioning in stock market as participants trade (operant) and expect return in the future (consequence) after they analyze, judge, and have decision making (cognition) in  the  presence  of  price  volatility  and  return  information  (discriminative  stimuli).  The  trading consequence  that  produces  feedback  (feedback)  to  influences  their  emotion    and  judgment, adjusts their expectancy in return (emotion), and makes trading.

We  develop  a  theoretical  trading  conditioning  model  subject  to  price  volatility  and  return information in terms of market psychological behavior, based on normative analytical transaction volume-price probability wave distribution function in econophysics. We use transaction volume probability to represent trading conditioning intensity in the model.

In  the  same  way,  when we use stationary equilibrium price jump to represent price volatility mean return in any two consecutive trading days, we can use the rate of change in total transaction volume to describe the rate of change in trading conditioning intensity subject to the rate of mean return and its information in the two days. In this way, we can use high frequency data to study correlation between the rate of mean return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity, to analyze psychological behavior change when participants make trading decision in stock market, and to provide a quantitative analysis method and test model for behavioral finance.

In empiric test, we use every trading high frequency data in SSE Huaxia 50ETF from April 2, 2007  to  April  10,  2009.  We  study  stationary  equilibrium  at  first  in  stock  market  and  further evidence the early finding that stationary equilibrium exists widely and transaction volume-price probability wave distribution holds true. Second, we get many good and useful results by studying the correlation between the rate of mean return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity using high frequency data. They are, for examples, (a) we test and explain disposition effect and herd  behavior  using  significant  positive  correlation.  General  speaking,  there  are  significant disposition  effect  and  herd  behavior  simultaneously.  We  explain  them  by  trading  conditioning theory. It is physiological response and return conditioned behavior in human beings when people stimulated by price volatility and return information trade in expectancy for return; (b) we find anti-disposition  effect  and  explain  it  by  sustainable  positive  return  (conditioned  reinforcement) rewarded to buying and holding behavior in bull market; (c) it is a necessary condition for reversal after there is price momentum drop in market that we enhance market confidence and expectancy in return, keep incremental amount of capital into market continuously, and buy a large volume of stock shares that have appreciated and sold by strong disposition effect in short term; (d) it lacks significance in spite of positive correlation in two time intervals right before and just after bubble crashes.  Probably,  it  will  help  us  to  time  bubble  crash  in  stock  market;  (e)  the  magnitude  of correlation  coefficient  between  the  rate  of  mean  return  and  that  of  change  in  the  amount  of transaction is always several percent points (0.03~0.08) higher than that between the rate of mean return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity. We can draw an inference that money plays more important role in mean return than psychological behavior and expectancy do in stock market. Third, trading conditioning produces excessive trading.

## References:

Ait-Sahalia, Yacine (2004): 'Disentangling Diffusion from Jump,'

Journal of Financial Economics

, 74, 487-528.

Benos,  Alexandros  V.  (1998):  'Aggressiveness  and  Survival  of  Overconfident  Traders,'

Markets

, 1, 353-383

Barber,  Brad  M.,  AND  Terrance  Odean  (2000):  'Trading  Is  Hazardous  to  Your  Wealth:  The  Common  Stock Investment Performance,' Journal of Finance , 55, 773-806.

Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, AND Ning Zhu (2009): 'Systematic Noise,'

547-569.

Barberis, Nicholas, AND Richard Thaler (2003): 'A Survey of Behavioral Finance,'

, 12,

Journal of Financial Markets

Handbook of the Economics

of Finance (Edited by G.M. Constantinides, M. Harris and R. Stulz)

, Elsevier Science B.V., 1051-1121.

Camerer,  Colin  F.,  George  Loewenstein,  AND  Drazen  Prelec  (2005):  'Neurosciences:  How  neuroscience  can

inform economics?'

, XLIII, 9-64.

Journal of Economic Literature

Coon, Dennis, AND John O. Mitterer (2007): Introduction to Psychology-Gateways to Mind and Behavior (11

Edition), Brooks/Cole Publishing Company.

Cowles,  J.T.  (1937):  'Food-tokens  as  Incentive  for  Learning  by  Chimpanzees,'

Monographs

, 14 (5, Whole no. 71).

Dong, Zhiyong (2009): Behavioral Finance, Peking University Press, 303-304.

Dragoi, V. (1997): 'A Dynamic Theory of Acquisition and Extinction in Operant Learning,' Neural Networks, 10,

201-229.

Graham, John R. (1999): 'Herding among Investment Newsletters: Theory and Evidence,'

237-268.

Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, AND Hai Huang (2009): 'Investor Competence, Trading Frequency, and

Home Bias,'

Management Science

, 55, 1094-1106.

nd

Greenwood, D.T. (1977): Classical Dynamics (2

edition), Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Grinblatt, Mark, AND Matti Keloharju (2001): 'What Makes Investors Trade?'

, 56, 589-616.

Journal of Finance

Grinblatt,  Mark,  AND  Matti  Keloharju  (2009):  'Sensation  Seeking,  Overconfidence,  and  Trading  Activity,'

Journal of Finance

, 64, 549-578.

Hirshleifer,  David  AND  Siew  Hong  Teoh  (2009):  'Thought  and  Behavior  Contagion  in  Capital  Markets,'

Handbook Financial of

North-Holland/Elsevier.

Hong,  Harrison,  AND  Jeremy  C.  Stein  (2007):  'Disagreement  and  Stock  Market,'

Perspectives

Hsu, Ming,

, 21, 109-128.

Meghana Bhatt, Ralph Adolphs, Daniel Tranel, and Schenk-Hoppe), Journal  of  Economic AND Colin F. Camerer (2005): 'Neural Systems

Responding to Degrees of Uncertainty in Human Decision-Making,'

Irons,

, 310 (5754), 1680-1683.

(2008):

Conditioning,'

Science

'Operant

21

G., and Buskist William

Jessica

Psychology-A Reference Handbook (ed. by Davis and Buskist), 329-339.

Kahneman,  Daniel,  AND  Amos  Tversky  (1979):  'Prospect  Theory:  An  Analysis  of  Decision  under  Risk,'

Econometrica

, 47, 263-292.

Lee, Charles M.C., AND Bhaskaran Swaminathan (2000): 'Price Momentum and Trading Volume,'

Finance

, 55, 2017-2069.

Li,  Haitao,  Martin  T.  Wells,  AND  Cindy  L.  Yu  (2008):  'A  Bayesian  Analysis  of  Return  Dynamics  with  Levy

Jumps,'

The Review of Financial Studies

, 21, No.5, 2345-2378.

Lo, Andrew W., AND Jiang Wang (2006): 'Trading volume: Implications of an Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing

Model,'

Journal of Finance

, 61, 2805-2840.

Lux, Thomas (1995): 'Herd Behavior, Bubbles and Crashes,'

The Economic Journal

, 105 (July), 881-896.

McCauley J. L. (2000): 'The Futility of Utility: How Market Dynamics marginalize Adam Smith,'

506-538.

Nofsinger, John R. AND Richard W. Sias (1999): 'Herding and Feedback Trading by Institutional and Individual

Investors,'

Journal of Finance

, 54 (6), 2263-2295.

Odean, Terrance (1998a): 'Volume, Volatility, Price, and Profit When All Traders Are Above Average,'

Finance

, 53, 1887-1934.

Odean, Terrance (1998b): 'Are Investors Reluctant to Realize Their Losses?'

Journal of Finance Journal of

, 53, 1775-1798.

Odean, Terrance (1999): 'Do Investors Trade Too Much?' The American Economic Review, 89, 1279-1298.

Olds,  M.E.  AND  J.L.  Fobes  (1981):  'The  Central  Basis  of  Motivation:  Intracranial  Self-stimulation  Studies,'

Annual Review of Psychology

, 32, 523-574.

Osborne, M. F. M. (1977): The Stock Market and Finance from a Physicist's Viewpoint, Grossga, Mineapolis.

Pavlov,  Ivan  (1904):  'Physiology  of  Digestion,'

Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1967.

[(available at http://nobelprize.org/nobel\_prizes/medicine/laureates/1904/pavlov-lecture.html )](http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/medicine/laureates/1904/pavlov-lecture.html)

rd

Pierce, W.D., AND C.D. Cheney (2004): Behavior Analysis and Learning (3

Sewell, Martin (2008): 'Behavioral Finance,' working paper.

Shefrin, Hersh, AND Meir Statman (1985): 'The Disposition to Sell Winners Too Early and Ride Losers to Long: Theory and Evidence,' Journal of Finance , 40, 777-790.

.), Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Nobel  Lectures-Physiology  or  Medicine  1901-1921

,  Elsevier

Physica A

st Century

Markets:

Dynamics and Evolution

(edited by Hens Journal  of  Financial Journal of Finance th Comparative  Psychology

, 54,

Journal of

, 285, Shi, Leilei (2006): 'Does Security Transaction Volume-price Behavior resemble a Probability Wave?' Physica A , 366, 419-436.

Shiller ， Robert  J.  (2006):  'Tools  for  Financial  Innovation:  Neoclassical  versus  Behavioral  Finance,' The Financial Review , 41, 1-8.

Skinner, B.F. (1938): The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental Analysis, New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Soros, George (1995): The Alchemy of Finance-Reading the Mind of the Market, International Publishing Co..

Statman, Meir, Steven Thorley, AND Keith Vorkink (2006): 'Investor Overconfidence and Trading Volume,' The Review of Financial Studies , 19, 1531-1565.

Thorndike, E.L. (1913): Educational Psychology (Vol. 2), New York: Teachers College.

Tversky, Amos, AND Daniel Kahneman (1973): 'Availability: A Heuristic for Judging Frequency and Probability,' Cognitive Psychology , 5, 207-232.

Tversky,  Amos,  AND Daniel Kahneman (1992): 'Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of Uncertainty,' Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,' 5, 297-323.

Weber,  Martin,  AND  Colin  F.  Camerer  (1998):  'The  disposition  effect  in  securities  trading:  an  experimental analysis,' Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , 33, Issue 2, 167-184.

Xiao, Erte, AND Daniel Houser (2005): 'Emotion Expression in Human Punishment Behavior,' Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102 (20), 7398-7401.

## FOLLOWED IS CHINESE VERSION

## 证券价格波动的交易性条件反射模型

石磊磊 * 1 、王毅文 2 、陈定 3 、韩立岩 2 、朴燕、苟成玲 4

1 中国科学技术大学近代物理系复杂系统研究组 2 北京航空航天大学金融系 3 嘉实基金管理公司 4 北京航空航天大学物理系

## （ 2010 年 2 月 8 日修改稿） （欢迎讨论）

## 摘要

基于解析的成交量价概率波分布函数，用成交量概率描述价格波动的不确定性和强度， 我们根据市场群体的心理行为， 构造了一个关于价格波动和收益信息的交易性条件反射的理 论模型。应用此模型对中国股市高频数据检验，我们主要有以下发现： 1 ）总体来说平均收 益率与交易性条件反射强度变化率之间存在着显著的正相关； 2 ）在泡沫破裂前、后两个时 期，它们之间的正相关缺乏显著性； 3 ）比较特殊的是上证指数在牛市上升的一段时期内， 它们之间存在着显著的负相关。 我们的模型和实证能够同时检验股市中的处置效应和羊群行 为，并且解释过度交易等市场异象。

关键词：行为金融、成交量价概率波、价格波动、交易性条件反射、处置效应、羊群行为、过度交易、经 济物理

JEL 分类： G12 ， G11 ， G10 ， C16

* 联系作者：在某著名证券公司工作，电子信箱 Shileilei8@yahoo.com.cn 或 leilei.shi@hotmail.com 作者感谢与王怀玉、王亚平、周春生、刘劲和刘发民等非常有意义的讨论。

## A SECURITY PRICE VOLATILE TRADING CONDITIONING MODEL

Leilei Shi* 1 , Yiwen Wang 2 , Ding Chen 3 , Liyan Han 2 , Yan Piao, and Chengling Gou 4

1

Complex System Research Group, Department of Modern Physics University of Science and Technology of China 2 Department of Finance, Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 3 Harvest Fund Management Co. Ltd. 4 Department of Physics, Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics

## This Draft is on February 8, 2010 (Comments welcome)

## Abstract

We  develop  a  theoretical  trading  conditioning  model  subject  to  price  volatility  and  return information in terms of market psychological behavior, based on analytical transaction volume-price  probability  wave  distributions  in  which  we  use  transaction  volume  probability  to describe price volatility uncertainty and intensity. Applying the model to high frequent data test in China stock market, we have main findings as follows: 1) there is, in general, significant positive correlation between the rate of mean return and that of change in trading conditioning intensity; 2) it lacks significance in spite of positive correlation in two time intervals right before and just after bubble  crashes;  and  3)  it  shows,  particularly,  significant  negative  correlation  in  a  time  interval when SSE Composite Index is rising during bull market. Our Model and findings can test both disposition effect and herd behavior simultaneously, and explain excessive trading (volume) and other anomalies in stock market.

Key words: behavioral finance, transaction volume-price probability wave, price volatility, trading conditioning, disposition effect, herd behavior, excessive trading, econophysics

JEL Classification: G12, G11, G10, C16

*Corresponding  author.  E-mail  address:  Shileilei8@yahoo.com.cn  or  leilei.shi@hotmail.com,  working  in  an international securities company in China.

The  author  appreciates  valuable  discussion  with  Huaiyu  Wang,  Yaping  Wang,  Chunsheng  Zhou,  Jing  Liu,  and Famin Liu etc.

长期以来，人们都十分关注价格波动行为的研究，而忽略了对交易量的认识。近 10 年 来这种现象有所改变， 人们开始逐步重视和研究在金融交易市场中交易量所包含的内容和信 息。在新古典金融理论的框架内， Lo 和 Wang （ 2006 ）试图通过建立价格和交易量与基本面 之间某种联系来强调应该把量价作为一个整体对资本市场进行分析。 在新兴发展的行为金融 学范畴内，我们开始将交易量与投资者的情绪、信念和偏好联系在一起。 Sewell （ 2008 ）认 为：行为金融学是研究心理学对金融市场参与者行为的影响并且由此产生的市场效应，它有 助于解释市场为什么以及怎样无效的。 Lee 和 Swaminathan （ 2000 ）发现以前的成交量在趋 势投资策略和价值投资策略之间提供了重要的连接， 它有益于调和价格在中期反应不足而在 长期反应过度的效应； Benos （ 1998 ）和 Odean （ 1998 ）认为过于自信（ overconfidence ）导 致市场的过度交易（ excessive trading ） ； Odean （ 1999 ）例举三个理由说明过于自信的投资者 产生过度的交易量：职业选择偏差、生存能力偏差以及对预期收益的不现实理念，并通过对 客户交易收益和交易成本的研究来检验过于自信导致过度交易的假说； Barber 和 Odean （ 2000 ）进一步的实证发现活跃的交易行为会降低收益率，这种非理性行为只能用过于自信 来解释； Graham 等（ 2009 ）则从那些自认为比别人更具竞争力的群体交易更加频繁来解释 过于自信导致过度交易假说。 Statman 等（ 2006 ）用过于自信模型对交易量的预测性进行检 验， 发现个股的换手率与滞后回报率以及与滞后市场回报率之间持续数月的关系分别显示了 处置效应和过于自信。 Barber 等（ 2009 ）用个人投资者系统地买入近期表现好的股票而不卖 亏损的股票（使得净交易量非常大）的心理偏差来解释个体对价格表现的交易行为存在着高 度持续的相关性。 Grinblatt 和 Keloharju （ 2001 ）通过实证发现过去的回报率、参照价格效 应、避税卖出和持有期间盈亏的大小都是影响交易的因素，而过于自信和寻求兴奋感 （ sensation  seeking ）的人交易都更加频繁和活跃（ Grinblatt 和 Keloharju ， 2009 ） 。 Hong 和 Stein （ 2007 ）认为交易量似乎是反应投资者观点的指标，价格偏离基本价值越高，交易者对 价格的分歧就越大，交易量就表现出异常地大，由此，提出了一个可以将股价和交易量统筹

考虑的意见分歧交易量模型（ disagreement model ） 。

无论是过于自信交易量假说， 还是寻求兴奋感或意见分歧交易量假说都认为交易量的大 小反应了投资者情绪、信念和偏好的强弱程度。

1904 年诺贝尔生理与医学奖获得者、俄国生理学家巴甫洛夫（ Pavlov ， 1904 ）在研究动 物生理反应和反射时用狗的唾液量来表示反射的强度，提出了经典性条件反射。经典性条件 反射是当条件反射刺激出现时预期非条件反射刺激物的一种生理反应。

Thorndike （ 1913 ）最早研究了操作性条件反射。 Skinner （ 1938 ）为了研究大鼠操作性 条件反射专门设计了一个装置， '斯金纳箱' （ Skinner  box ） 。实验发现：经过几次操作获取 食物（强化物）之后，大鼠便形成了稳定的频率按压杠杆获取食物的行为模式。现在，心理 学家把操作性强化物定义为 '伴随一个反应发生并能增加这个反应再次发生的可能性事件' 。

与经典条件反射一样，操作性学习也是建立在信息和期望基础之上的。操作性条件反射 是在特定时间通过特定操作预期得到特定结果 （强化物） 的行为反应。 Pierce 和 Cheney （ 2004 ） 把操作性条件反射归纳成'由特定刺激营造的时机从事操作，进而产生某种后果（强化物） ' 的行为反应。或者说在特定的刺激出现时发生操作性条件反射行为，并伴随着特定的结果 (Irons  and  Buskist,  2008) 。 Skinner 将这种关系称之为三项相互联系、可能发生的事件 （ three-term contingency ） （ Dragoi ， 1997 ） 。在操作性条件反射中，强化物可被用于改变反应 频率：强化物出现的不确定性（例如不确定反应次数后出现强化物的'可变比率模式'和不 确定时间间隔后出现强化物的'不定时间间隔模式' ）使得条件反射的频率很高、消退的抑 制力很强（库恩， 2007 ） 。

颅内刺激（ intracranial stimulation, ICS ）能够直接激活大脑中的快乐中枢，有着最强、 最特殊的强化作用（ Olds 和 Fobes ， 1981 ） 。实验发现许多大鼠为获得愉快感每小时能按压 杠杆几千次，远远大于为获取食物按压的频率（相差几个数量级） ，全然不顾对食物、水和 性的需求！

库恩（ Coon ， 2007 ）将操作性强化物分成三类：一级强化物、二级强化物和反馈。一 级强化物是自然形成的和非习得性的，具有生理基础，能产生舒适感和消除不适感，或能满

足即时的生理需求。金钱、赞扬、赞同、情感以及其他的奖赏都可以成为强化物，即习得的 二级强化物。一些二级强化物具有'代币物'的功能，可用以交换一级强化物，因此就有了 更直接的价值。例如，钱币本身没有太大的价值，既不能充饥也不能解渴，但是，我们可以 用它换取商品和服务，也许是最重要的经济强化物（ Pierce 和 Cheney ， 2004 ） 。研究者曾通 过实验教黑猩猩为获得代币物而工作（ Cowles ， 1937 ） 。反馈是指人们对操作反应结果信息 的接收和处理之后再影响操作的一个过程。

索罗斯（ Soros ， 1995 ）最初从抽象的哲学思考出发研究反射理论，随后逐步察觉到它 与股票价格行为的相关性。他认为股票市场可以成为研究反射现象的最佳起点。索罗斯定性 描述的反射是指人们参与交易导致价格波动，通过重新对交易价格的认知、思考和判断再参 与交易的反馈过程，属库恩（ Coon ， 2007 ）分类中的第三类操作性强化物。

在研究每日证券成交量在价格波动区间分布整体行为时， Shi （ 2006 ）用规范的经济物 理方法推导出一个解析的成交量价波动方程并且得到两组解析的成交量在价格波动区间的 分布函数，用成交量概率描述价格波动的不确定性和强度。基于此，我们根据市场群体的心 理行为用成交量概率描述价格波动的交易性条件反射强度， 构造了一个关于价格波动和收益 信息的交易性条件反射的理论模型。 通过该模型研究平均收益率与交易性条件反射强度变化 率的相关性，我们同时检验了股市中的处置效应和羊群行为，由此追溯和分析市场群体在做 交易决策时因价格波动和信息环境不同而发生的心理行为的变化，解释过度交易（量）等市 场异象，试图为行为金融提供一个新的分析和检验模型。

尽管在过去有许多关于回报与交易量的研究，也有一些交易量行为的研究，但是据笔者 所知还没有回报率与成交量（概率）变化率关系的研究，没有将经济物理学中严谨规范的解 析量价概率波分布与生理学和心理学中解释性的认知条件反射行为成功地结合在一起进行 研究--绝大多数试图同时实现规范和解释性目标的非期望效用理论模型的困难之处是它 们最终在这两个方面都做的不好（ Barberis 和 Thaler ， 2003 ） 。与成交量不同，成交量变化率 或成交量概率变化可以是正的、也可以是负的、或者是零。与过去采用事件研究法和心理学 实验方法不同，我们用高频数据同时检验处置效应和羊群行为，并且解释过度交易行为等市 场异象。

以下文章的结构是： 第二部分是成交量价概率波分布函数简介并且找到了一种关于价格 波动和收益信息的交易性条件反射强度的计量方法；第三部分是以华夏上证 50ETF 每笔交 易的高频数据为例，我们首先研究定态均衡、确定定态均衡价格、进一步佐证了在股票市场 中普遍存在着定态均衡状态（ Shi ， 2006 ） ；之后，我们实证检验了前后交易日之间平均收益 率、交易性条件反射强度变化率和成交金额变化率三者之间的相关性；第四部分是实证分析 和讨论，这包括 1 ）市场群体相互作用和干涉结果出现的定态均衡； 2 ）总体来说，市场同 时具有显著的处置效应和羊群行为； 3 ）人们的认知和交易行为随价格波动和环境不同发生 的变化； 4 ）用交易性条件反射理论解释过度交易； 5 ）应用前景等等；最后是总结和主要结 论。

## 二、成交量价概率波分布函数及交易性条件反射强度

## 2.1 成交量价概率波分布函数

在用经济物理的方法研究股票成交量价波动行为时， Shi （ 2006 ）观察到在股票交易市 场中普遍存在着定态均衡现象。股票每日在价格波动区间的成交量（累计交易量）分布在价 格加权平均值附近出现峰化，这种现象与股票价格高低、价格波动路径以及涨跌没有关系 1 。 我们将成交量峰值所对应的价格定义为该日的定态均衡价格。另外，价格总是围绕定态均衡 价格上下波动的同时，定态均衡价格表现出跳跃（ jump ）的变化 2 。

1 Shi （ 2006 ）对 618 个成交量价分布进行拟合和显著性检验。这些样本价格不同、价格波动的路径和方向 也不同，但是都表现出在成交量加权价格平均值附近出现峰化现象。

2 与 Poisson-diffusion （ Ait-Sahalia ， 2004 ）和 Levy （ Li ， Wells &amp; Yu, 2008 ）等跳跃不同，定态均衡价格有清 晰的跳跃机制。例如，当有大量资金进入市场买入股票，供需关系突然发生大的变化、打破平衡时，供需 关系就会通过价格调节作用寻找新的价格平衡点，定态均衡价格随之出现不连续的跳跃；通过成交量在价

影响股票价格波动的因素有许多，例如，公司经营状况、宏观经济因素、政策因素、心 理行为因素等等。它们对价格波动的影响有大有小。但是，各种因素只有通过交易传导才能 造成价格的波动，是间接的作用。因此， Shi （ 2006 ）在前期建立价格围绕定态均衡价格波 动模型时暂时没有考虑这些因素。

没有交易就没有价格的波动，价格波动的同时一定存在交易，但是有交易不一定就有价 格的波动，交易是价格波动的必要条件。除此之外，成交金额约束着价格的波动和成交量的 大小。在某一价格处的成交量 等于在此价格处的累计交易量。在研究定态均衡条件下成交 金额是如何定量约束量价行为以及成交量是怎样在价格波动区间分布时， Shi （ 2006 ）提出 了成交金额流动约束量、 成交金额流动分布量和成交金额流动波动量 （定态均衡价格回归量） 之间相互关系假说，即成交金额约束关系假说： v

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

其中 p 是价格，其量纲是 [ 货币单位 ][ 股 ] -1 ； t v v t / = 是在时间间隔 内，在价格 t p 处的成 交量（累计交易量） 、动量（ momentum ）和趋势，其量纲是 [ 股 ][ 时间 ] -1 ； 是在价格 v V / p 处 的成交量概率，它等于在价格 p 处的成交量 除以总成交量 V ； 是在时间间隔 内，在价格 v 2 / t v p E ⋅ = t p 处的成交金额（累计交易金额） ，即成交金额流动约束量，其量纲是 [ 货币单 位 ][ 时间 ] -2 ； 是在时间间隔 内， 在价格 2 / t v v tt = t p 处的冲量和偏离定态均衡价格的趋势力， 其量纲是 [ 股 ][ 时间 ] -2 ； 是在时间间隔 内，在价格 V v p t / 2 ⋅ t p 处成交金额流动分布量，其 量纲是 [ 货币单位 ][ 时间 ] -2 ；另外，

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

是在时间间隔 内，在价格 t p 处成交金额流动回归量，其量纲也是 [ 货币单位 ][ 时间 ] -2 ； 代 表在时间间隔 t 内的定态均衡价格， 0 p p 是价格加权平均值， ( ) tt V v v A / 1 -= 代表定态均衡 回归力和供需回归力的大小，其量纲是 [ 股 ][ 时间 ] -2 。

根据股票交易'价格优先，时间优先'规则，我们有交易价格最小波动定律：股票交易 价格波动的路径要求成交金额约束假说方程（ 1 ）的泛函

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

在各种可能的价格变化中，选择对当前价格变化最小，即对描述价格波动的函数 ( ) p ψ 取极 值；其数学表达式是

由方程（ 1 ）和方程（ 4 ） ，我们得到量价波动方程

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

将方程（ 2 ）代入方程（ 5 ） ，并利用自然边界条件

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

我们得到两组解析解；其一，当偏离定态均衡价格的趋势力 与供需平衡回归力 tt v A 之和在 价格波动区间等于本征值常数、发生相互干涉行为时，我们得到

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

其中

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

m ω 是大于零的本征值常数， ( ) [ 0 0 p p J m ] -ω 是带本征值的零阶贝塞尔（ Bessel ）函数， 是一无量纲的常数；其二，当供需平衡回归力在价格波动区间等于本征值常数时，我们得到 另外一组多阶本征值函数 m C

波函数（ 6 ）和（ 8 ）的含义是它的绝对值 ( ) p m ψ 代表在价格 p 处的成交量概率（参见 图 1 和图 2 ，其中横坐标可以代表价格，纵坐标代表成交量分布，原点是定态均衡价格） ， 是归一化常数。 m C

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

图 1 和图 2 的分布函数有几点不同：第一，图 1 的分布是随着价格不断偏离定态均衡价 格表现出波浪式衰减的，而图 2 除了零阶是指数分布之外，其分布是一种波浪式均匀的，阶 数越大，均匀性越显著；第二，图 1 的分布是开放的，能够描述股市中突发的、远离均衡价 格的脉冲式交易行为，例如，利益输入或输出交易行为，而图 2 的分布是封闭的，能够描述 随机均匀分布行为；第三，除了零阶分布，图 2 分布的本征值常数一般比图 1 的大一、二个 数量级。但是，图 1 和图 2 分布的共同点是它们都能够很好地描述指数分布。

图 1 ：成交量概率在价格波动区间的零阶贝塞尔函数的绝对值分布函数

<!-- image -->

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

（

a

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

（

c

2

）零阶

）二阶

-5

（

-200

（

d

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

）一阶

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

）十阶

图 2 ：成交量概率在价格波动区间的多阶函数的绝对值分布函数

## 2.2 本征值和概率波

b

-40

-4

-20

-2

20

4

4

0

-15

-600

-10

-400

5

200

10

400

15

600

本征值又称为特征值。在描述事件分布的函数中，本征值与参数是不同的。在绝大多数 情况下，当我们观察到某种事件的分布现象时，由于不清楚导致事件分布的机制，往往用一 个带有参数的分布函数描述这种统计行为。在这种近似的描述中，我们并不知道该参数所包 含的内容和实际意义。本征值是可观察和可测量的量，明确了产生分布的机制，因此能够对 其正确与否进行定量检验。例如，在成交量价概率波分布函数中，本征值包含两种意义：在 第一组解中，本征值描述的是偏离定态均衡价格的趋势力 tt v 与供需平衡回归力 A 之和在价 格波动区间等于本征值常数、发生相互干涉行为的结果，用方程（ 7 ）计量；在第二组解中， 本征值描述的是供需平衡回归力在价格波动区间等于本征值常数、 出现指数和随机均匀分布 的现象，用方程（ 9 ）计量。

所谓概率波是用数量分布的概率描述波动的强弱程度，例如在成交量价概率波行为中， 我们 用成交量分布和概率而不是价格波动的幅度描述价格波动的强度。现在，让我们来比较 概率波和经典波的不同点和相同点（参见图 3 ） 。首先，概率波的横坐标是价格或距离，纵 坐标是数量概率，而经典波的横坐标是时间，纵坐标是振幅；第二，概率波是用数量分布概 率的大小描述波动的强弱和变化，而经典波是用振幅的大小描述波动的强弱和变化；第三， 概率波的强度大于或等于零，而经典波的强度可以是负的；第四，相对于平衡位置，概率波 波动的强度随着偏离平衡位置呈现出波浪式的变化（除了零阶分布函数） ，波动的幅度越大， 不等于波动的强度也越大，而在经典波中波动的幅度越大，波动的强度就越大；第五，概率 波描述群体之间的相互作用，不能独立存在，而经典波可以独立存在；第六，目前我们还没 有发现概率波在时间上存在着严格的周期性，即预测重复的时间存在着不确定性，而经典波 有传播速度，可以计量，因此存在着时间周期。

，都有周而复始的重复变化。 概率波和经典波的共性就是都会出现干涉现象

<!-- image -->

（

图 3 ：经典波与概率波的比较

<!-- image -->

## .3 交易性条件反射的引入 2

我们首先考虑没有人们主观变化、没有影响买卖交易行为的刚性交易体系。当交易价格 波动时，在任意相同的时间间隔内总成交量是相同的。如果有增量扰动资金进入市场买入股 票、打破供需平衡、导致定态均衡价格跳跃，那么增量资金与定态均衡价格跳跃幅度之间存 在着一一对应的关系（因为跳跃前后定态均衡的总成交量是相等的） 。

知、供需平衡和成 交量 在真实的金融交易市场中，有许许多多的因素都会影响人们的主观认 的变化。 如何将市场群体的主观交易行为和成交量变化纳入到解析的成交量价概率波分 布函数中，将是认识和解决成交量、价格波动与增量扰动资金之间相互关系的关键，也是建 立关于价格波动和收益信息的交易性条件反射理论模型的关键。

生理反应是一种非条件反 射。 人类对衣、食、住、行和服务的生理需求是客观的，对它们的 印币既不能吃，也无法解渴，其本身几乎是没有任何价值。在商品经济中，当我们将货 币、收入和收益（率）通过交换与人类赖以生存的物质必需品和服务紧密结合起来时，我们 就已经被它们条件化，就会对货币、收入和收益（率）形成同样的生理反应，即经典性条件 反射。 Pierce 和 Cheney （ 2004 ）认为在现代商品经济中钱可用于交换商品和服务，也许是最 重要的经济强化物。

当人们看到价格波动和收益（盈利或亏损）时产生的对物质必需品和 服务 在股票交易市场， 需求的生理刺激就是一种经典性条件反射， 而根据价格波动和收益信息进行分析、 处理、

判断和决策从事买卖交易行为，并预期未来收益（盈利或亏损）的反应是一种操作性条件反 射。

易性条件反射的强化物是钱和收益率，它有以下几个特点。第一，它不会像一级强化 物那 交 样因生理需求已经得到满足而失去强化作用；第二，收益对应与正强化物，亏损对应与 负强化物。 预期股票价格上涨会促使人们买入持有， 预期股票价格下跌会促使人们卖出观望。 无论是预期价格上涨还是下跌都会出现交易性条件反射，进行交易。第三，由于量价概率波 行为没有确定的时间周期，类似与操作性条件反射中部分强化的不定时间间隔模式（库恩， 2007 ） ， 持有股票时间有长有短之后才出现收益，这使得交易性条件反射消退的抑制力很强； 第四，损益结果（盈利、亏损或持平）反馈给交易者会影响人们的情绪（ emotion ）和判断 能力，会改变人们对未来收益的预期而导致交易。例如，投资者止损出来后很容易因为看到 价格上涨导致收益预期变化再次买入股票， 而刚买入股票之后也会因为收益预期变化或已经 获得微利又很快卖掉。因此，在交易性条件反射的认知过程中，除了预期收益和亏损外，还 包括反馈导致的预期变化。

互联系、可能发生的事件（ three-term contingency ）和操作性条 件反 根据 Skinner 关于三项相 射的定义（ Irons and Buskist ， 2008 ） ，我们定义在股票市场中的交易性条件反射是一种 受价格波动和收益信息 （ discriminative stimuli ） 影响， 通过分析、 处理、 判断和决策 （ cognition ） 进行交易（ operant ） ，并预期未来收益（盈利、亏损或持平） （ consequence ）的一种操作性 条件反射； 其结果 （收益、 亏损或持平） 反馈 （ feedback ） 给交易者会影响他们的情绪 （ emotion ） 和判断能力，调整他们的收益预期并进行交易活动（参见图 4 ） 。

图 4 ：在交易性条件反射中三项相互联系、可能发生的事件

<!-- image -->

在股票交易体系中，独立变量有两个，价格和成交量，成交金额是它们的约束量。根据 经典 力学原理（周衍柏， 1985 ） ，我们知道交易体系的独立自由度的数目等于 1 （独立变量 数 2 减去约束方程数 1 ） 。经济物理学先驱 Osborne （ 1977 ）发现价格作为供需量的被解释变 量（因变量）在实证中是不存在的， McCauley （ 2000 ）从数学上证明了 Osborne 的这一发现。 因此， Shi （ 2006 ）选择价格是股票交易体系中的自变量，成交量是因变量。

场群体对该 证券 根据刚刚建立的交易性条件反射行为， 证券的价格波动和收益信息会产生市 未来收益的预期而进行交易。这种主观认知的交易行为和成交量是同步变化的。我们用 成交量分布和概率随价格波动的变化（注：不是成交金额的变化，因为成交金额是约束量） 表示市场群体受价格波动和收益信息影响，导致交易行为、供需关系和主观认知的变化。

的幅 在成交量价概率波分布函数中，我们用成交量概率描述价格波动的强度（不是价格波动 度） 。在某一价格处，成交量概率越大，波动的强度就越大（注：与经典波不同，在概 率波中波动的强度越大不等于波动的幅度就越大，反之亦然） ，波动的频率就越高 1 ，交易频

33 1 根据概率统计学的大数定律，当总成交量远远大于单笔成交量时，成交量的概率近似等于频率。因为我们

率也就越高，对未来价格波动、收益和亏损的预期就越高（成交量越大，买量越大，表明市 场对未来价格上涨的心理预期越强；成交量越大，卖量越大，表明市场对未来价格下跌的心 理预期越强） ，交易性条件反射的强度也就越大，反之亦然。因此，价格波动的强度近似等 于关于价格波动和收益信息的交易性条件反射的强度。 我们可以用成交量概率近似地描述交 易性条件反射的强度和频率（参见图 5 ） 。

图 5 ：价格波动的强度（用成交量概率表示）近似等于交易性条件反射的强度

<!-- image -->

现在，我们用成交量概率表示交易性条件反射的强度。同样，当我们用定态均衡价格跳 跃的 幅度率表示价格波动的平均收益率时， 我们也能够用定态均衡价格跳跃前后成交量的变 化率来描述市场群体对该平均收益率的交易性条件反射强度的变化率。显然，交易性条件反 射强度的变化率可以是正的、负的或是零。这样，我们就能够通过使用高频数据定量分析平 均收益率与交易性条件反射强度变化率之间的相关性， 由此研究他们在交易决策时的生理反 应和心理行为。

## 三、数据分析及相关性检验

我们以华夏上证 50ETF （ 510050 ）每笔交易的高频数据为例，用零阶贝塞尔绝对值分布 回归 模型对每个交易日的成交量在价格波动区间的分布进行拟合并检验其显著性。 对于通过 检验的，我们能够从拟合数据中直接得到该交易日的定态均衡价格。对其他交易日，我们用 价格加权平均值近似表示该日的定态均衡价格。由此，我们能够计算出前后交易日之间定态 均衡价格跳跃的幅度（平均收益率） ，研究平均收益率、交易性条件反射强度变化率以及成 交金额变化率之间的相关性。

## 3.1 据 数

们采用嘉实基金管理公司提供的嘉实高频 HF2 数据库中每笔交易的高频数据。样本 区间 我 为 2007 年 4 月 2 日至 2009 年 4 月 10 日。近 740 天，共 495 个交易日，即 495 个量价 分布。

我们分两步对原始数据进行了预处理。首先，在原始数据中价格保留了小数点后的三位

在下一部分使用样本期间的日平均成交量很大，为 3.6 亿股，所以在某一价格处成交量概率可近似等于交 易频率。这样，在某一价格的成交量越大，其概率就越大，频率就越大。对于一笔大单提升的交易量，即 使诸多小单对应同样的交易量，虽然两者对应的信息可能不一样，但是成交量概率依然可以近似地描述交 易的频率，由此出现的量价分布'异常'现象说明市场资金优势的扰动很容易破坏定态均衡、操纵价格， 我们会进一步研究。

采取四舍五入的原则保留到两位数，同时将相应的成交量相加，得到新的量价数据。 接着 数，我们 我们将每一价格处的成交量（累计交易量）除以当天总成交量得到在该价格处的成交量 概率。这样，我们就得到了每个交易日的成交量概率在价格波动区间的实际分布。

## 3.2 成交量价分布拟合、总体显著性检验以及定态均衡价格确定

我们已知在定态均衡状态下，量价分布的理论函数是

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

、 m C m ω 其中 和 分别是归一化常数、本征值常数和定态均衡价格。 回归模型 0 p 它们在单变量非线性

是服从 ( ) 2 0, σ N 中是三个待 间内的价 定常系数， n 是样本在交易价格区 格数， i ε 分布的随 机误差项， ( ) i m p ψ 是在价格波动区间内任一处的成交量概率观察值， ( ) [ ] 0 i m 合，确定其中 待定常系数并且得到成交量概率分布的理论结果。 使用 Origin6.0 软件（参见图 6 （ a ） ） 。 0 p p J C m -ω 是理论值。我们采用 Levenberg-Marquardt 非线性最小二乘法对每一个量价分布样本进行拟 的三个 在拟合分析中，我们

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

对总体显著性检验，我们采用 F 检验的方法。可决系数 (coefficient of determination)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

( ) 2 1 ˆ ∑ = -= n i i Y Y ESS 和 (explained sum of squares) ， ( ) 2 ˆ ∑ -= n Y Y RSS 是 其中 是回归平方 = i i i 残 1

差平方和 (residual sum of squares) ， ( ) 2 ∑ -= n Y Y 是总离差平方和 1 = i i TSS (total sum of squares) 。

统计量

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

分别指样本个数和解 中， n 和 释变量个数（独立自由度数） 。设定显著性水平 0.05 = k α ， 当 或 0.05 F F &gt;

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

即 2 R 大于 ）在 95% 的显著性水平下总体显著成立（在 临界值 时，则回归模型（ 11 这里 ） 。 2 crit R 1 = k

检验结果显示自 通过显著性检验，即 R R &gt; 个，约 23.23% 的样本缺少显著性。 2007 年 4 月 2 日至 2009 年 4 月 10 日的 495 个交易日中有 380 个样本 2 2 crit 。其余 115

成交量价 是因为我们 在前期数据处理时只保留价格数据中小数点后的两位数，导致一些分布信息无法体现出来。 我们对缺少显著性的样本进行仔细的观测，发现这些样本有两个特征：第一，相当一部 分未通过显著性检验的 分布，其成交价格太少，单日的样本数不足。这 为此，我们在小数点后第三位采用 ' 二舍三入和七舍八入 ' 的原则增加一个数值 0.005 ，相应 的成交量也叠加到对应的交易价格中去，得到较明显的特征分布，并对它们进行拟合和显著 性检验。结果有 28 天的分布样本通过零阶贝塞尔绝对值分布回归模型的检验。这样，我们 总共有 408 （ 380+28 ）个分布样本，约占总数的 82.42% ，通过零阶贝塞尔绝对值分布回归 模型的检验。

供求平衡关系发生较大的变化，其成交量价行为通过价格的调节，使得交易 第二个特征是成交量在交易价格区间内出现两个或两个以上的峰值。 这是因为这些样本 在交易日当天的

价格从围绕某一定态均衡价格上下波动调整成围绕另外一个或几个定态均衡价格上下波动。 定态均衡价格在当日出现不连续的跳跃变化。在这种情况下，其成交量价分布函数是（ 10 ） 式的线性叠加，即

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

其中 是定态均衡价格的数目。我们采用具有两个定态均衡价格的量价分布回归模型 n

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

87 个分布进行拟合和 2 2 crit R R &gt; 显著性检验（这 对剩余的 里 2 2 2 = k ） 。结果显示 本， 约占总数的 11.92% 在 95% 的水平下显著成立（参见图 6 （ b ） ） 。 59 个样

28 分布样 概率波 函数的表达式如下 对还没有通过显著性检验的 本，我们采用量价 分布的第二组解 --含 合流超几何函数（第一类 Kummer 函数）的量价分布回归模型来拟合。该

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

由于这是一个多阶的分布函数， 比较特殊和复杂， 直接拟 时， 采用一阶函数的展开式 合比较困难， 我们取定 1 = n

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

28 个样本中有 23 个（约占总分布数的 平下 6 （ c ） ） 。最后 5 个分布样本呈现 4 日市 进行拟合和检验。结果显示 4.65% ）在 95% 的水 显著成立（参见图 个或 4 个以上的峰值，这表明当 场非常不稳定（见图 6 （ d ） ） 。图 7 是分别为采用函数（ 10 ） 、函数（ 16 ）和函数（ 18 ）拟合 并检验其显著性的典型样本。

<!-- image -->

图 6 ：用成交量价概率波回归模型拟合成交量在价格波动区间的分布并检验其显著性 1

## 3.3 平均收益率与交易性条件反射强度变化率的相关性分析

对于 408 个通过零阶贝塞尔绝对值分布回归模型检验的样本（约占总数的 82.42% ） ，我 们从拟合数据中直接得到该交易日的定态均衡价格。对于其他 87 个交易日，我们用价格加 权平均值近似表示该日的定态均衡价格。由此，我们能够计算出任意前后交易日之间定态均 衡价格跳跃的幅度（平均收益率） ，研究平均收益率、交易性条件反射强度变化率以及成交 金额变化率之间的相关性。 在这里交易性条件反射强度变化率近似等于前后交易日总成交量 变化率。

已知相关系数

X 其中 σ 和 Y σ 分别是变量 X 和 Y 的标准差， ( ) X Y , cov 是协方差， r 是相关系数。 X Y , 我们 设 采用 t 分布对相关系数进行显著性检验。建立原假设和备择假

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

计算统计量

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

其中 r 、 n 分别为样本相关系数和样本容量。取显著性水平为 0.05 α = ，当 = &gt; t t t ( ) 2 -n 时，拒绝原假设，相关系数在该显著性水平下显著不为 0 。 0.05 / 2 crit

软件，以美国次贷金融危机和上证综合指数走势为背景，将华夏上 证 50ETF （ 510050 ）整个样 个子 样本： 2007 年 4 月 2 日（上证综合指数 3252.59 点）至 2007 年 6 月 29 日（上证综合指数 70 为泡沫破裂前市场上升前期； 年 7 月 2 合指 年 2007 年 11 月 3693.11 点）为泡沫 破裂后市场下跌前期； 2008 年 5 月 5 日（上 合指数 37 01 点）至 2008 年 10 月 31 日 数 1728.79 点）为泡沫破裂后市场下跌后期； 2008 年 11 月 3 日（上证综合指 数 1719.77 点）至 2009 年 4 月 。 （上证综合指 3820. 点） 2007 日（上证综 数 3836.29 点）至 2007 10 月 31 日（上证综合指数 5954.77 点）为泡沫破裂前市场上升后期； 1 日（上证综合指数 5914.28 点）至 2008 年 4 月 30 日（上证综合指数 我们使用 Eviews6.0 本数据从 2007 年 4 月 2 日至 2009 年 4 月 10 日又分成为五 证综 61. 10 日（上证综合指数 2444.23 点）为市场反转上升初期

这样细分有一个优点：我们 化。 从实证结果（参见表中的检验 看到： ）总体来说，平均收益率与交易性条 强 变 率和成交金额变 本期间的 个不同阶段，平均收益 在泡沫 破裂 能够看出不同时期市场群体的心理行为随环境发生的变 数据） ，我们 1 件反射 度 化 化率之间都呈现出显著的正相关； 2 ）在整个样 5 率与交易性条件反射强度变化率之间的相关性明显不同 : （ a ） 前、后两个时期，它们之间的正相关缺乏显著性； (b) 在泡沫破裂后的后半时期，它们 具有显著的正相关性； (c) 泡沫破裂后市场出现反转上升的初期，其正相关系数最高，是 0.4766 ； (d) 比较特殊的是在牛市上升的一段时期内，即在泡沫破裂前市场上升的前期，平 均收益率与交易性条件反射强度变化率之间存在着显著的负相关，相关系数是 -0.2567 ； 3 ） 成交金额变化率与平均收益率之间的相关系数比交易性条件反射强度变化率与平均收益率 之间的相关系数总是要高出几个百分点。我们将在下一部分详细讨论实证结果。

1 在图 6 中，拟合结果中的 P1 、 P2 和 P3 分别代表归一化常数、本征值常数和定态均衡价格，在图 6 （ b ） 中， P3 和 P4 分别代表跳跃前后的定态均衡价格。

表：相关系数和显著性检验

| 时期  样本  数量  上证综合指数  （  1A0001  ）  收益率与条件反射变化率  收益率与成交额变化率  差值  条件反射变化率与成交额变化率  A  2007.4.2-2009.4.10  494  3252.59-2444.23  0.1391  （  t=3.115&gt;  ）  0.1970  （  t=4.458&gt;  ）  0.0579  （  t=  crit  t  =1.960  crit  t  =1.960  0.9975  316.3&gt;  crit  t  =1.960  ）  B  2007.4.2-2007.6.29  59  3252.59-3820.70  -0.2567  （  t=2.006&gt;  ）  -0.2120  （  t=1.638&lt;  ）  0.0447  （  t=  crit  t  =2.001  crit  t  =2.001  0.9986  142.0&gt;  crit  t  =2.001  ）  C  2007.7.2-2007.10.30  83  3836.29-5954.77  0.0729  t=0.6583&lt;  ）  0.1053  （  t=0.9529&lt;  ）  0.0324  （  t=  （  crit  t  =1.990  crit  t  =1.990  0.9993  241.2 &gt;  crit  t  =1.990  ）  D  2007.11.1-2008.4.30  122  5914.28-3693.11  0.1026  （  t=1.130&lt;  ）  0.1714  （  t=1.906&lt;  ）  0.0688  （  t=  crit  t  =1.980  crit  t  =1.980  0.9968  137.0&gt;  crit  t  =1.980  ）  E  2008.5.5-2008.10.31  123  3761.01-1728.79  0.1963  （  t=2.202&gt;  ）  0.2706  （  t=3.091&gt;  ）  0.0743  （  t=  crit  t  =1.980  crit  t  =1.980  0.9958  119.2&gt;  crit  t  =1.980  ）  0.9981  166.5 &gt;  crit  t  =1.983)  F  2008.11.3-2009.4.10  107  1719.77-2444.23  0.4766  （  t=5.556&gt;  ）  0.5203  （  t=6.243&gt;  ）  0.0437  (t=  crit  t  =1.983  crit  t  =1.983   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

- 标注： 1 ） crit t 指 ( ) 2 2 -n ， 0.05 t crit t t &gt; 说明相关系数显著不为零；相反，不能拒绝相关系数为零的原假设；
- 2 ） 差值是平均收益率与成交金额变化率之间的相关系数减平均收益率与交易性条件反射强度变化率之间的相关系数；
- 2 ） 红色黑体标出的是检验结果的相关性缺乏显著性；
- 3 ） 上证综合指数以当日收盘值计量。

## 4.1 定态均衡和定态均衡价格

S 2006 ） 价 行 分 成 。 一 价 绕某个定态均衡价 格上下 动 种定 为可以 解析的 量价概 方程 ）定量描述，其中定态均 衡价格 成 的 易 格 二 定态均衡价格表现出不连续的跳跃（ jump ）变 化。在定态均衡条件下，定 均衡回 较弱， 均衡 被打破 变化， 如有增 动资金 入市场 买入股 ，打破原有定态均衡，那么，供需关系就 会通过价格的调节作用寻找新的定态均衡点，定态均衡价格出现不连续的跳跃。此后价格又 开始围绕新的定态均衡价格上下波动。定态均衡价格跳跃的幅度表示价格波动的平均收益 率。 hi （ 波 是 例 将 峰值 量扰 格波 态行 对应 动的 交 态 进 为 用 价 解 ；第 归力 大量 两个 成交 ， 部分 定态 票 第 率波 ， 容易 格始 （ 5 终围 。当供需关系发生较大 ，这 交量

我们对华夏上证 50E 近 740 共 49 交易日，即 495 个成交量价分布分析，用 零阶贝塞尔绝对值分布函数对它们逐一拟合和显著性检验， 结果是通过显著性检验的样本数 量是 408 个，占总数的 82.42% ，这表明在股票市场中普遍存在着定态均衡状态。对于通过 显著性检验的分布，我们从拟合数据中就能够得到交易日当天的定态均衡价格。 著性检验的成交量价分布'异常'现 对于 这部分交易日， 用 交 加 近 代 其 态 价 。 ， 后交易日定态均衡价格跳跃的幅度和价格波动的平均收益率。 TF 5 个 天， 没有通过显 象是在交易日当天定态均衡价格跳跃的行为特征。 均值 我们 成 量 权平 似 替 定 均衡 格 这样 我们能够得到前

我们的实证进一步佐证了 S 2 ）前期发现：在股票市场中普遍存在着定态均衡状 态，而 态均衡 会出现 连续的 变化。 006 跳跃 价格 不 hi （ 定

我们从本次'异常'样本数量比例（ 17.58 与 Shi 06 ）前期的比例（ 6% ）比 较，就能够推断 03 年的上海证券交易市场比 07~200 的市场平稳。事实上，上证指 数在 2003 年最大振幅是 26.17% ，而在 2007 、 2008 及 2009 年的最大振幅分别是 0.96% 、 2 .71 88.60% 因此，我们能够用这种比值表示市场稳定性或波动性指标。比值越大， 市场的波动性也就越大，越不稳定。 5.6 14 20 % ） 20 （ 20 9 年 31 % 和 。

## 4 检验处置效应和羊群行为的新方法 .2

前一部分的实证结果表明：从 20 年 4 月 009 年 整个样本期间，平均收益率与 交易性条件反射变化率之间的相关系数是 0.139 具有显 A 栏） 。 为了理 它所包 行为内 ，我们 解一下 市中的 效应和 群行 。 为 解 含的 07 先了 到 2 1 ， 股 4 月 著的正相关性（参见表中 处置 容 羊

Shefrin 和 Statman （ 1985 ）最早提出处置效应：投资者在处置处于不同赢利状态股票时， 存在急于兑现收益、回避兑现亏损的倾向。之后， Odea 1998 ） 究了 00 交易记录后充分证实了处置效应， er 和 C erer （ 1 ）通过心理学实验来检验并且用 Kah 和 Tversky （ 19 1992 ） 的前景理论来解释处置效应， Gr tt 和 loh u 001 ） 用芬兰股市中 34 卖 据检验 处置效 处置效 现的 股票 象。 0 个帐户的 arj 行为 10 Ke 时的 n （ 998 应表 在研 inbla 是卖 Web 了 am 应。 neman 79 ， 单数 （ 2 异 2930

为 存在于 的社 动中（ erjee ， 2 ） ，理论上讲与许多经济活动有 关系（ Graham ， ） 。 当模仿他人导致许多人采取同样的行为时， 在股票市场中存在着许多类型的羊群行为（ Hirshleifer 和 Teoh ， 2001 ） ，例如机构和个人的 羊群行为（ No ger 和 ， 1999 Lux  (1 ) 曾提出传染模型描述投资者的羊群行为。 我们定义交易性条件反射的羊群行为是受价格波动和收益信息影响， 亏损的观望交易行为。羊群行为表现的是买股票时的行为异象。 199 我们说羊群行为出现了。 会活 Ban 羊群行 人类 普遍 1999 fsin Sias 995 ） 。 预期收益的从众和规避

对于卖方 果平均 率正值 大卖量 ，并且 果平均 率负值越 大）卖量越少 么，这是处置效应。对于买 如果平 收益率 越大，买 众跟风的行为越明显，并且如果平 益率负 越大（ 越多） 量越少， 避亏损的气氛越浓，这是交易性条件反射羊群行为。 大（亏损越 量越 大家观望回 多 ，如 ，那 收益 越 均收 越多 方， 值 如 均 亏损 收益 正值 ，买 ，从

因此， 平均收益率与交易性条件反射强度变化率之间显著的正相关特性表明市场同时具有显 著的处置效应和交易性条件反射羊群行为， 其正相关系数的大小也能够用来衡量处置效应和 羊群行为的强弱。 我们的实证表明市场总体平均收益率与交易性条件反射变化率之间具有显

## 四、实证分析和讨论

著的正相关性，具有显著的处置效应和羊群行为。它们是人类受价格波动和收益信息刺激、 获得收益和规避亏损从事交易而表现出来的一些生理反应和人性被收益条件化的行为。 为

## .3 认知心理和交易行为的变化 4

我们以美国次贷金融危机和我国股市泡沫破裂为背景，将整个样本时期细分 5 个阶段。 这样做有一个优点， 我们能够研究市场群体随价格波动和环境不同展现出的认知心理和交易 行为的变化。

如果我们今后的研究能够进一步证明这种缺乏显著性相关特征与股市价格泡沫破裂有 一定 在泡沫破裂前的最后疯狂上涨和泡沫破裂初期，其相关系数分别是 0.0729 和 0.1026 。 它们的正相关都缺乏显著性，处置效应和羊群行为不显著。在这两个阶段，有限理性和非理 性之间对价格认识的分歧增大，他们之间的博弈产生了很大的不确定性（参见表中 C 和 D 栏） 。 的相互联系，那么，我们就在一定程度上找到了一种预测和把握泡沫破裂的时机！

有趣的是在泡沫破裂后的后期，持续下跌和超跌期间，相关系数是 0.1963 ，具有显著的 正相关性，处置效应和羊群行为显著增大，换句话说下跌越多，亏损越大，卖出越少，处置 效应越显著；同时下跌越多，买入越少，观望气氛越浓，羊群行为更显著（比较表中 D 栏 与 E 栏的相关系数）。

年大幅下跌，股指从最高的 6124 人们收益预期，保持持续增量资金入市接 盘、 在反转上涨初期，相关系数最大，是 0.4766 ，具有显著的正相关性，处置效应和羊群行 为最显著（参见表中 F 栏）。这说明两个问题：第一，经历一 .04 点跌到 1664.93 点后，人们已经形成了熊市下跌的趋势思维，短期获利了结的处置 效应非常显著；第二，当下跌趋势形成之后，提高 克服大量短期赢利兑现的处置效应是改变市场继续下跌并出现反转的必要条件。

总体来说， 在股票交易市场中普遍存在着处置效应和羊群行为， 而且我们发现下跌越多， 亏损越大，平均收益率与交易性条件反射强度变化率之间的正相关系数就越大，处置效应和 羊群行为就越显著。

的情况，泡沫破裂前市场上升前期收益率与交易性条 反射强度的变化率之间存在较强的负相关性，相关系数是 -0.2567 ，具有显著的负相关性 现在，我们来关注实证中非常特殊 件 （参见表中 B 栏）。

上证综合指数从 2005 年 6 月最低的 998.23 点开始几乎是一路上涨到 2007 年 3 月 30 日 （样 缩，而价 格下 本选取区间起始日期）的 3183.98 点。当持有股票与正收益率挣钱（条件反射刺激物） 不断结合，持有股票的行为转化为正收益率挣钱效应（正强化）时，一种新的条件反射也就 形成了。人们表现出惜售和持有股票的心态。价格上升，卖的数量减少，成交量萎 跌，买的数量增加，成交量放大，出现'反处置效应' 。

最后， 我们还注意到平均收益率与成交金额变化率之间的相关性比它与交易性条件反射 强度变化率之间的相关性总是高出几个点（ 0.03~0.08 ） 。由此，我们可以推断在股票交易市 场，资金对平均收益率的作用大于人们的心理行为和收益预期的作用，印证了华尔街的一句 至理名言：现金为王。

## 4.4 交易性条件反射循环和过度交易

） 损益结果影响情绪 （新 我们将传统的操作性条件反射的三项相互联系、可能发生的事件进行扩展和补充，归纳 出交易性条件反射的六个环节：价格波动和收益信息（可识别刺激） → 认知、判断和决策 （决策） → 交易或不交易（操作行为） → 预期收益或亏损（结果 → 的可识别刺激） → 调整收益预期（反馈） 。我们将这种周而复始的过程称之为交易性条 件反射行为的六项重复过程（参见图 4 和图 7 ） 。

进行的操作性条件反射的行为是理性 现在让我们回过头来再仔细思考一下引言中提到的颅内刺激（ intra-cranial  stimulation, ICS ）实验。如果我们做一个类比，大鼠为获取食物而 的，为获取愉快感而进行的操作性条件反射的过度行为是非理性的，那么，我们就能够类推 人们过度交易而忽视了资产增值或效用最大化的非理性行为的原因。

在现代商品经济中，钱、收入和收益可用于交换商品和服务，也许是最重要的经济强化

物（ Pierce 和 Cheney, 2004 ） 。在股票市场中，交易性条件反射的强化物是钱和收益率，它不 会像一级强化物那样因生理需求已经得到满足而失去强化作用；第二，量价概率波行为没有 定的时间周期， 其收益率的不确定性增加了交易性条件反射的频率。 收益对应与正强化物， 格上涨会促使人们买入持有，预期股票价格下跌会促使人 卖出观望。因此，无论是预期价格上涨还是下跌都会促使人们交易，提高交易的频率，导 致过 很容易因为看到价格上涨导致收益预期变化再次买入股票（羊群行为） ，增 加交 确 亏损对应与负强化物。预期股票价 们 度交易。第三，类似与操作性条件反射中部分强化的不定时间间隔模式（库恩， 2007 ） ， 持有股票时间有长有短之后才出现收益，这使得交易性条件反射消退的抑制力很强，例如投 资者止损出来后 易频率；第四，收益（盈利和亏损）结果会影响人们的情绪（ emotion ）和判断能力， 并且再反馈到交易者、改变人们的收益预期。例如，投资者赢利卖出后会因为自信增强而再 次参与买进股票，而刚买入股票之后也会因为收益预期变化或已经获得微利（处置效应）又 急于卖掉，交易很难停止，出现过度交易。我们的结论是：交易性条件反射导致过度交易！

## 4.5 多学科交叉的金融理论体系

与 新古 并且 发展 Shiller （ 2006 ）把过去半个世纪的金融理论史概括成两次革命。第一次起源于上个世纪 六、七十年代的新古典金融学革命和第二次起源于上个世纪八十年代的行为金融学革命。 典金融学理论要求投资者是完全理性和决策效用最大化不同， 行为金融学把新古典经济 金融学理论与心理学和决策科学联系起来，研究投资者是如何产生系统的认知偏差、判断偏 差和决策偏差， 并从心理学的角度解释金融市场上的异常现象 （ Tversky 和 Kahneman ， 1973 ） 。 目前，行为金融学分别在研究人们偏好、情绪和信念、以及有限套利三方面对金融市场的影 响已经取得了许多卓有成效的成果，其中由 Kahneman 和 Tversky （ 1979 ， 1992 ）提出 起来的描述性前景理论影响最深远。

需要找到统一的理论将理性与非理性这两个极端的情况统一起来，以 增强 然而， 新兴发展中的行为金融学需要将心理学同经济学更好地结合起来构建比较统一的 假设前提和研究范式， 其解释能力。而目前的研究还局限在基于投资者的认知偏差和前景理论，但在各自的目 标函数上引入了五花八门的行为特征，用以解释某一特定现象（董志勇， 2009 ） 。

2003 ）认为行为金融学模型有代表性地扑捉到投资信念（ beliefs ） 、 偏好 Barberis 和 Thaler （ （ preferences ）或有限套利（ the limits of arbitrage ）三个方面中的某一特征，而不能涵 盖全部三个方面，而且对同一个实证结果又有明显不同的行为解释。

Shiller （ 2006 ）认为行为金融学不是完全不同与新古典金融学。也许描述两者不同的最 好方式是行为金融学更加兼收并蓄、 更加愿意从其他社会科学吸取营养而较少关心模型是否 完美、更加注重描述真实的人类行为现象。

我们试图通过经济物理学的方法，将生理学、认知心理学、神经经济学（ Camerer 等， 2005 ） 、医学、概率统计数学、经济金融学、行为金融学和经济物理学联系起来，在一个整 体框架内系统全面地研究涉及多交叉学科的金融交易市场的行为和变化（参见图 7 ） 。

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

市场结果影响人们（无论交易还是不交易者）的情绪 产生自豪或后悔、快乐或沮丧、甚至贪婪或恐惧等 新的认知条件反射（生理反应） （不断强化的条件反射会形成'信念' ）

图 7 ：用成交量概率定量描述价格波动的不确定性和市场群体交易性条件反射的强度 （交易性条件反射导致过度交易）

## 4.6 应用前景

， 2005 ）和医学角度解释为什么不同性格的 人会有不同的交易频率（交易量） ，并且检验 于自信、寻找兴奋感或意见分歧导致过度交 易的行为金融学假说，例如，当价格上涨成交量增加的市场效应在一定程度上支持意见分歧 导致过度交易假说（ Hong 和 Stein ， 2007 ） ；第二，通过对平均收益率与交易性条件反射强 度变化率的相关性分析，我们用高频数据同时检验了市场群体的处置效应和羊群行为。交易 性条件反射理论模型为行为金融学假说和模型提供了一个新的定量分析和检验方法；第三， 缺乏显著性的特征与股市价 我们就在一定程度上找到 预测和把握泡沫破裂 策略，规避和防范 大的金融风险和扑捉好的投资机会；第四，有助于监管部门通过正负强化（ reinforcement ） 金融市场（ Xiao 和 Houser ， 2005 ） ， 降低大的金融风险和危机爆发的可能性； 第五 很好的交易性条件反射实验室，有助于今后开展一些生理 学、认知心理学、神经经济学和医学方面的研究工作。 通过量价概率波分布函数， 我们根据市场的心理行为用成交量概率定量描述了交易性条 件反射的强度并且归纳出包含六项环节的交易性条件反射循环，用它解释过度交易行为，这 有助于今后从认知心理学、神经经济学（ Hsu 等 过 如果我们今后的研究能够进一步证明平均收益率与交易性条件反射强度变化率之间相关性 格泡沫破裂有一定的相互联系，那么， 的时机！通过加深对市场的认识，我们能够优化投资 措施和政策调控 ，证券市场为我们提供了一个

## 五、总结和主要结论

在真实的金融交易市场中，有许许多多的因素都会影响人们的主观认知和成交量的变 化。 如何将市场群体的主观交易行为和成交量变化纳入到经济物理学中规范的解析量价概率 波分布函数中， 键，也是建立关于价格波动和收益信息的交易性条件反射理论模型的关键。 将是定量解决成交量、价格波动的平均收益率与增量资金之间相互关系的关

我们从经典条件反射和操作性条件反射出发，进一步提炼交易性条件反射行为的定义： 在股票市场中，交易性条件反射是一种受价格波动和收益信息影响，通过分析、处理、判断 和决策进行交易，并预期未来收益的一种操作性条件反射；交易性条件反射结果反馈给交易 者会影响他们的情绪和判断能力，调整他们的收益预期并进行交易活动。

基于解析的量价概率波分布函数--用成交量概率描述价格波动的不确定性和强度、 用 定态均衡价格跳跃的幅度 描价格波动和成交量变 化的约束量，我们用成交量的变化率来计量交易性条件反射强度的变化率，构造了一个关于 价格波动和收益信息的交易 描述价格波动的平均收益、 并且用成交金额 性条件反射的理论模型。

同理，当我们用定态均衡价格跳跃的幅度率表示前后交易日价格波动的平均收益率时， 我们也能够用这两天成交 率的交易性条件反射强 度的变化率。这样，我们能 交易性条件反射强度变化 率之间的相关性， 追溯和分析市场群体在做交易决策时受价格波动和市场环境不同发生的心 量的变化率来描述市场群体对该平均收益 够用高频数据，通过研究平均收益率与 理行为的变化，试图为行为金融提供一个量化分析的研究方法和检验模型。

通过采用 2007 年 4 月到 2009 年 4 月我国股市中的华夏上证 50ETF 每笔交易的高频数 实证检验，我们首先来研究股票市场中的定态均衡，进一步佐证了 Shi （ 2006 ）前期的发 --在股票交易市场中，定态均衡状态普遍存在，量价概率波分布函数是有效的；第二， 我们得到许多有 意义的结果。这些包 了市场群体的处置 效应和羊群行为；总体来说， 羊群行为。我们用交易性条 件反射理论来解释这些市 和收益信息刺激、为获 得收益和规避亏损从事买卖交易而表现出来的一些生理反应和人性被收益条件化的行为； 2 ） 发现了市 反射解 释这种市场异象； 3 ）当下跌趋 ，保持持续增量资金入市接 盘、克服大量短期赢利兑现的处置效应是改变市场继续下跌并出现反转的必要条件； 4 ）在 泡沫破裂前后的两个时期，它们的正相关都缺乏显著性，这也许可以帮助我们把握泡沫破裂 据 现 通过高频数据研究平均收益率与交易性条件反射强度变化率之间的相关性， 括： 1 ）我们用它们之间的正相关性同时检验和解释 市场同时具有显著性的处置效应和 场群体行为的异象：它们是人类受价格波动 场中的反处置效应， 并且用牛市中买入持有行为不断获得收益的正强化条件 势形成之后，提高人们收益预期

时机； 5 ）成交金额变化率与收益率之间的相关系数比交易性条件反射强度变化率与它之 是要高出几个百分点。我们由此能够推断：在股票交易市场，资金对收益率 的作用大于人们的心理行为和损益预期的作用；第三，交易性条件反射导致过度交易。 的 间的相关系数总

## 参考文献：

- . Banerjee, Abhijit V. (1992): 'A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,' Quarterly Journal of Economics , CVII, Issue 3, 797-817. Ait-Sahalia, Yacine (2004): 'Disentangling Diffusion from Jump,' Journal of Financial Economics , 74, 487-528
- Benos,  Alexandros  V.  (1998):  'Aggressiveness  and  Survival  of  Overconfident  Traders,' Journal  of  Financial Markets , 1, 353-383
- Barber,  Brad  M.,  AND  Terrance  Odean  (2000):  'Trading  Is  Hazardous  to  Your  Wealth:  The  Common  Stock Investment Performance,' Journal of Finance , 55, 773-806.
- Barber, Brad M., Terrance Odean, AND Ning Zhu (2009): 'Systematic Noise,' Journal of Financial Markets , 12, 547-569.
- Barberis, Nicholas, AND Richard Thaler (2003): 'A Survey of Behavioral Finance,' Handbook of the Economics of Finance (Edited by G.M. Constantinides, M. Harris and R. Stulz) , Elsevier Science B.V., 1051-1121.
- Camerer,  Colin  F.,  George  Loewenstein,  AND  Drazen  Prelec  (2005):  'Neurosciences:  How  neuroscience  can inform economics?' Journal of Economic Literature , XLIII, 9-64.
- Cowles,  J.T.  (1937):  'Food-tokens  as  Incentive  for  Learning  by  Chimpanzees,' Comparative  Psychology Monographs , 14 (5, Whole no. 71).
- Dragoi, V. (1997): 'A Dynamic Theory of Acquisition and Extinction in Operant Learning,' Neural Networks, 10, 201-229.
- Graham, John R. (1999): 'Herding among Investment Newsletters: Theory and Evidence,' Journal of Finance , 54, 237-268.
- Graham, John R., Campbell R. Harvey, AND Hai Huang (2009): 'Investor Competence, Trading Frequency, and Home Bias,' Management Science , 55, 1094-1106.
- Grinblatt, Mark, AND Matti Keloharju (2001): 'What Makes Investors Trade?' Journal of Finance , 56, 589-616.

Grinblatt,  Mark,  AND  Matti  Keloharju  (2009):  'Sensation  Seeking,  Overconfidence,  and  Trading  Activity,'

Journal of Finance

, 64, 549-578.

Hirshleifer,  David  AND  Siew  Hong  Teoh  (2009):  'Thought  and  Behavior  Contagion  in  Capital  Markets,'

Handbook of Financial

North-Holland/Elsevier.

- Hong,  Harrison,  AND  Jeremy  C.  Stein  (2007):  'Disagreement  and  Stock  Market,' Journal  of  Economic Perspectives , 21, 109-128.
- Hsu, Ming, Meghana Bhatt, Ralph Adolphs, Daniel Tranel, AND Colin F. Camerer (2005): 'Neural Systems Responding to Degrees of Uncertainty in Human Decision-Making,' Science , 310 (5754), 1680-1683.
- Irons,  Jessica  G .,  and  William  Buskist  (2008):  'Operant  Conditioning,'  21 st Century  Psycholog Reference Handbook (ed. by Davis and Buskist), 329-339. y-A
- Kahneman,  Daniel,  AND  Amos  Tversky  (1979):  'Prospect  Theory:  An  Analysis  of  Decision  under  Risk,' Econometrica , 47, 263-292.
- Lee, Charles M.C., AND Bhaskaran Swaminathan (2000): 'Price Momentum and Trading Volume,' Journal of Finance , 55, 2017-2069.
- Li,  Haitao,  Martin  T.  Wells,  AND  Cindy  L.  Yu  (2008):  'A  Bayesian  Analysis  of  Return  Dynamics  with  Levy Jumps,' The Review of Financial Studies , 21, No.5, 2345-2378.
- Lo, Andrew W., AND Jiang Wang (2006): 'Trading volume: Implications of an Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model,' Journal of Finance , 61, 2805-2840.

Lux, Thomas (1995): 'Herd Behavior, Bubbles and Crashes,'

The Economic Journal

, 105 (July), 881-896.

- McCauley J.L. (2000): 'The Futility of Utility: How Market Dynamics marginalize Adam Smith,' Physica A , 285, 506-538.
- Nofsinger, John R. AND Richard W. Sias (1999): 'Herding and Feedback Trading by Institutional and Individual Investors,' Journal of Finance , 54 (6), 2263-2295.
- Odean, Terrance (1998a): 'Volume, Volatility, Price, and Profit When All Traders Are Above Average,' Journal of Finance , 53, 1887-1934.
- Odean, Terrance (1998b): 'Are Investors Reluctant to Realize Their Losses?' Journal of Finance , 53, 1775-1798. Odean, Terrance (1999): 'Do Investors Trade Too Much?' The American Economic Review, 89, 1279-1298.
- Olds,  M.E.  AND  J.L.  Fobes  (1981):  'The  Central  Basis  of  Motivation:  Intracranial  Self-stimulation  Studies,' Annual Review of Psychology , 32, 523-574.
- Osborne, M. F. M. (1977): The Stock Market and Finance from a Physicist's Viewpoint, Grossga, Mineapolis. Pavlov,  Ivan  (1904):  'Physiology  of  Digestion,' Nobel  Lectures-Physiology  or  Medicine  1901-1921 ,  Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1967.

(available at http://nobelprize.org/nobel\_prizes/medicine/laureates/1904/pavlov-lecture.html

)

- Pierce, W. D., AND C. D. Cheney (2004): Behavior Analysis and Learning (3 rd .), Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. Sewell, Martin (2008): 'Behavioral Finance,' working paper.
- Shefrin, Hersh, AND Meir Statman (1985): 'The Disposition to Sell Winners Too Early and Ride Losers to Long: Theory and Evidence,' Journal of Finance , 40, 777-790.
- Shi, Leilei (2006): 'Does Security Transaction Volume-price Behavior resemble a Probability Wave?' Physica A , 366, 419-436.

Markets:

Dynamics and Evolution

(edited by Hens and Schenk-Hoppe), hiller ， Robert J. (2006): 'Tools for Financial Innovation: Neoclassical versus Behavioral Finance,' The Financial Review , 41, 1-8. S

kinner, B.F. (1938): The Behavior of Organisms: An Experimental Analysis, New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts S Statman, Meir, Steven Thorley, AND Keith Vorkink (2006): 'Investor Overconfidence and Trading Volume,' The Review of Financial Studies , 19, 1531-1565.

, E.L. (1913): Educational Psychology (Vol. 2), New York: Teachers College. Thorndike

Tversky, Amos, AND Daniel Kahneman (1973): 'Availability: A Heuristic for Judging Frequency and Probability,' Cognitive Psychology , 5, 207-232.

Tversky,  Amos,  AND Daniel Kahneman (1992): 'Advances in Prospect Theory: Cumulative Representation of Uncertainty,' Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,' 5, 297-323.

Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , 33, Issue 2, 167-184. Weber,  Martin,  AND  Colin  F.  Camerer  (1998):  'The  disposition  effect  in  securities  trading:  an  experimental analysis,'

Xiao, Erte, AND Daniel Houser (2005): 'Emotion Expression in Human Punishment Behavior,' Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102 (20), 7398-7401.

董志勇（ 2009 ） : 《行为金融学》 ，北京大学出版社， 303-304.

思想与行为的认识之路》 ，第 11 版，中国轻 库恩（ Coon 美）等著，郑钢等译 （ 2007 ） : 《心理学导论-工业出版社， 283-323.

嘉斌译（ 1998 ） : 《金融炼金术》 ，吉林人民出版社， 3-57. 索罗斯（ Soros 美）著，余济群、黄

周衍柏（ 1985 ） : 《理论力学教程》 （第二版） ，高等教育出版社， 267-272.