## Multiple Access Channels with Cooperative Encoders and Channel State Information

Reza Khosravi-Farsani, and Farokh Marvasti

Advanced Communications Research Institute (ACRI) Department of Electrical Engineering Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran Email: reza.khosravi@ee.sharif.ir, marvasti@sharif.ir

Abstract -The two-user Multiple Access Channel (MAC) with cooperative  encoders  and  Channel  State  Information  (CSI)  is considered where two different scenarios are investigated: A twouser  MAC  with  common  message  (MACCM)  and  a  two-user MAC with conferencing encoders (MACCE). For both situations, the two cases where the CSI is known to the encoders either noncausally  or  causally  are  studied.  Achievable  rate  regions  are established for both discrete memoryless channels and Gaussian channels with additive interference. The achievable rate regions derived  for  the  Gaussian  models  with  additive  interference known non-causally to the encoders are shown to coincide with the  capacity  region  of  the  same  channel  with  no  interference. Therefore, the capacity region for such channels is established.

Index TermsMultiple Access Channel; Cooperative Encoders; Channel State Information (CSI)

## I. INTRODUCTION

HE Multiple Access Channel (MAC) is a communication system in which a number of transmitters send information to a receiver. In a MAC, the transmitters may also cooperate with  each  other  by  exchanging  information.  The  MAC  with correlated  sources  was  first  investigated  in  [1]  wherein  the capacity region of the discrete two-user MAC with cooperative encoders via common information was established.  In  fact,  it  was  shown  that  the  superposition encoding technique achieves the capacity region. The two-user Gaussian  MAC  with  common  message  (MACCM)  was studied  in  [2]  (also  see  [3]  for  recent  developments).  In another  scenario,  the  transmitters  exchange  information  via conferencing. The two-user MAC with conferencing encoders (MACCE) was first introduced by Willems [4]. In this system, two  transmitters  are  connected  by  communication  links  of finite  capacity,  allowing  the  encoders  to  communicate  over noise-free bit pipes of the given capacity. The capacity region of the discrete two-user MACCE was determined in [4], and the Gaussian model was studied in [5]. T

Channels with Channel State Information (CSI) available at the transmitter were studied initially by Shannon [6], where he characterized  the  capacity  of  a  single-user  channel  with  CSI

causally known to the transmitter. The capacity of the singleuser channel with CSI in which the transmitter has access to the CSI non-causally was determined in [7]. In 1983 [8], Costa considered the Gaussian counterpart of the single-user channel with  non-causal  CSI,  i.e.  a  Gaussian  channel  with  additive interference noise which is known non-causally to the transmitter. Costa showed that for this system coined 'writing on dirty paper', the capacity is the same as when there is no interference, i.e., the additive interference known non-causally to the transmitter has no penalty on the capacity.  The multiuser channels with causal and non-causal CSI were also studied in several papers [9-12]; specially, the two-user MAC with  causal  and  non-causal  CSI  was  studied  in  [9,  12]. Recently,  the  two-user  MAC  with  CSI  and  with  partially cooperating encoders where cooperation is utilized to generate empirical state coordination between the encoders as well as to share information about the private messages of the users, has been  studied  in  [13].  Also,  the  Gaussian  MACCE  with  two independent additive interferences has been studied [14] wherein  the  author  has  established  the  capacity  region  to within  a  constant  gap.  Costa's  result  for  dirty  paper  channel was also generalized to some multiuser systems; specifically, the  same  result  was  established  for  the  two-user  MAC  [15, 16], for the broadcast channel and the relay channel [16], for the relay broadcast channel [17] and for the two-user MACCE [5].

In  this  paper,  we  investigate  the  two-user  MAC  with cooperative  encoders  and  with  CSI.  Two  different  situations are considered: A two-user MACCM and a two-user MACCE. For both situations, we study the two cases where the CSI is known  to  the  encoders  either  non-causally  or  causally.  The decoder is assumed to have no access to the CSI. It should be noted that unlike [13], in our model for the MACCE with CSI both  encoders  have  access  to  the  same  CSI  (perfect  CSI). Hence, cooperation is only utilized to share information about the private messages of the users and indeed for this purpose a conferencing  is  held  between  the  two  encoders  before  the transmission begins. We establish achievable rate regions for the  discrete  memoryless  channels  and  the  Gaussian  channels with additive interference modeled  as  the channel state.

Furthermore, we show that the achievable rate regions derived for  the  Gaussian  models  with  additive  interference  known non-causally  to  both  transmitters  coincide  with  the  capacity region of the underlying channel with no interference, therefore  yielding  the  capacity  region  for  these  important cases.  Our  capacity  results  for  the  Gaussian  MAC  with cooperative  encoders  and  with  additive  interference  known non-causally to both encoders, generalize the previous known results for the two-user multiple access Costa's type channel, i.e. the two-user MAC without common message [14, 15], the two-user MACCE [5], and the-two-user MAC with degraded message sets [18].

The  rest  of  the  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  Channel models  and  definitions  are  given  in  Section  II.  The  main results are stated in Section III, where the two-user MACCM with CSI is studied in Section III-A, and the two-user MACCE with  CSI  is  studied  in  Section  III-B.  Finally,  the  paper  is concluded in Section IV.

## II. CHANNEL MODELS AND DEFINITIONS

In  this  paper,  the  following  notations  are  used:  Random variables (r.v.) are denoted by capital letters (e.g. ܺ ) and lower case  letters  are  used  to  show  their  realization  (e.g. ݔ ).  The probability  distribution function  (p.d.f.) of a r.v. ܺ with alphabet set ࣲ is denoted  by ܲ ௑ ሺ ݔ ሻ where ࣲ א ݔ and ܲ ௑|௒ ሺ ݕ|ݔ ሻ stands for the conditional p.d.f. of ܺ given ܻ . ॱሾ. ሿ , and ঈሺ. ሻ denote  the  expectation  operator  and  differential entropy,  respectively.  Finally,  the  set  of  real  numbers  is denoted by Թ .

Definition: A discrete two-user MAC with CSI denoted by ࣲۃ ଵ ࣲ , ଶ ܲ ,࣭ ,ࣳ , ௌ ሺ ݏ ሻ, Զሺ ݔ|ݕ ଵ ݔ , ଶ ݏ , ሻ ۄ , is a  channel  with  two input  alphabets ࣲ ଵ ࣲ , ଶ ,  an  output  alphabet ࣳ .  The  input  and output  alphabets  are  finite  sets.  The  state  of  the  channel ܵ ranges  over  the  state  space ࣭ (finite  set)  according  to  the known p.d.f. ܲ ௌ ሺ ݏ ሻ . The channel is described by the transition p.d.f. Զሺ ݔ|ݕ ଵ ݔ , ଶ ݏ , ሻ . The channel and also the state process are assumed to be memoryless, i.e., for ݊ ൒ 1 :

<!-- image -->

In this paper, we study the two-user MAC with cooperative encoders and with CSI where two different cases are considered:

A)  The  two-user  MACCM  with  CSI: In this  network scenario  each  encoder  sends  a  private  message  over  the channel  and  both  encoders  cooperate  to  transmit  a  common message. Fig. 1 illustrates the channel.

<!-- image -->

Figure 1.  The  two-user  MACCM with CSI: For ܶ ൌ ݊ the  two  encoders have access to the CSI non-causally, while for ܶ ൌ ݐ the  two encoders have access to the CSI causally.

Encoding  and  decoding: For  the  two-user  MACCM  with CSI in Fig.1, a length-݊ code ԧ ௡ ሺ ܴ ଴ ܴ , ଵ ܴ , ଶ ሻ with two private message sets ࣱ ௜ ൌ ሾ1, … , 2 ௡ோ೔ ሿ, ݅ ൌ 1,2 , and a common message set ࣱ ଴ ൌ ሾ1, … , 2 ௡ோబ ሿ , consists of two sets of encoder functions ൛ू௜,௧ ሺ. ሻൟ ௧ୀଵ ௡ ݅ , ൌ 1,2 , and a decoder function ुሺ. ሻ which are defined as follows:

For the case that the encoders have access to the CSI noncausally, the encoder functions are given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which generate ܺ ௜,௧ ൌ ू௜,௧ ሺ ܹ ௜ ܹ , ଴ ܵ , ௡ ሻ , ݅ ൌ 1,2 ;  while for the case  that  the  encoders  have  access  to  the  CSI  causally,  the encoder functions are given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which  generate ܺ ௜,௧ ൌ ू௜,௧ ሺ ܹ ௜ ܹ , ଴ ܵ , ௧ ሻ , ݅ ൌ 1,2 ;  the  decoder function ुሺ. ሻ for both non-causal and causal CSI is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which estimates the messages ܹ ଴ ܹ , ଵ ܹ , ଶ as: ൫ ܹ ෡ ଴ ܹ , ෡ ଵ ܹ , ෡ ଶ൯ ൌ ुሺ ܻ ௡ ሻ .  The  rate  of  the  code  is  the  triple ሺ ܴ ଴ ܴ , ଵ ܴ , ଶ ሻ .  The average error probability of decoding ܲ ௘ ԧ ೙ is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A triple of non-negative numbers ሺ ܴ ଴ ܴ , ଵ ܴ , ଶ ሻ is  said to be achievable  for  the  two-user  MACCM  with  CSI  if  for  every ߳ ൐ 0 and  for  all ݊ sufficiently  large,  there  exists  a  length-݊ code ԧ ௡ ሺ ܴ ଴ ܴ , ଵ ܴ , ଶ ሻ such that ܲ ௘ ԧ ೙ ൑ ߳ . The capacity region of the channel is the closure of all achievable rates.

We also investigate the two-user Gaussian MACCM in the presence  of  additive  interference ܵ known  non-causally  or causally to the transmitters. The channel is defined as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ൛ ܺ ௜,௧ ൟ ௧ୀଵ ௡ ݅ , ൌ 1,2 , and ሼ ܻ ௧ ሽ ௧ୀଵ ௡ are the Թ -valued transmitted  and  received  signals,  respectively.  The  process ሼ ܵ ௧ ሽ ௧ୀଵ ௡ is  the  additive  interference  known  non-causally  or causally to both transmitters, which is assumed to be Independent  Identically  Distributed  (i.i.d.)  such  that ܵ ௧ ݐ , ൌ 1, … , ݊ has  Gaussian  p.d.f.  with  zero  mean  and  variance ܲ ௌ . ሼ ܼ ௧ ሽ ௧ୀଵ ௡ is Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) with zero mean and variance ܲ ௓ , which is independent of ሼ ܵ ௧ ሽ ௧ୀଵ ௡ .

Encoding and decoding for the Gaussian channel in (2) is defined similar to the discrete channel model. Also, an average power  constraint is imposed  on  the codewords  of  each encoder,  and  the  encoder ݅ is  subject  to  an  average  power constraint ܲ ௜ א Թ ା , i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

B) The two-user  MACCE  with  CSI: In this network scenario, two private messages  are transmitted over the channel by two cooperative encoders which have been connected to each other by links of finite capacities ܥ ଵଶ and ܥ ଶଵ .  Each  encoder  cooperates  with  the  other  encoder  by holding  a  conference  before  the  transmission  begins.  Fig.  2 illustrates the channel.

Encoding  and  decoding: For  the  two-user  MACCE  with CSI  in  Fig.  2,  a  length-݊ code ԧ ௡ ሺ ܴ ଵ ܴ , ଶ ܥ , ଵଶ ܥ , ଶଵ ሻ with  two private message sets ࣱ ௜ ൌ ሼ1, … , 2 ௡ோ೔ ሽ, ݅ ൌ 1,2 ,  is  defined as follows:

Conferencing  before  the  transmission: The  definition  of conferencing  between  the  encoders  is  the  same  as  [4].  The code ԧ ௡ ሺ ܴ ଵ ܴ , ଶ ܥ , ଵଶ , ܥ ଶଵ ሻ consists of two sets of ܮ conferencing functions ൛ ߰ ௜,ଵ ሺ. ሻ, … , ߰ ௜,௅ ሺ. ሻൟ , ݅ ൌ 1,2 , and two sets  of  conferencing  (finite)  alphabets ൛ ࣰ ௜,ଵ , … , ࣰ ௜,௅ ൟ , ݅ ൌ 1,2 . The  conferencing  functions ߰ ௜,௟ ሺ. ሻ , ݅ ൌ 1,2 , ݈ ൌ 1, … , ܮ ,  are given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A conference is said  to  be ሺ ܥ ଵଶ ܥ , ଶଵ ሻ -admissible  [4]  if  the sets of conferencing functions are such that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ԡ ܣ ԡ denotes the cardinality of the set ܣ .

After  the  conferencing,  the  encoders  1  and  2  know  the sequences ܸ ଶ ௅ ൌ ൫ ܸ ଶ,ଵ , … , ܸ ଶ,௅ ൯ and ܸ ଵ ௅ ൌ ൫ ܸ ଵ,ଵ , … , ܸ ଵ,௅ ൯ , respectively.  The  code ԧ ௡ ሺ ܥ ଵଶ , ܥ ଶଵ ሻ consists  of  two  sets  of encoder functions ൛ू௜,௧ ሺ. ሻൟ ௧ୀଵ ௡ ݅ , ൌ 1,2 , and a decoder function ुሺ. ሻ defined as follows:

Figure  2.  The  two-user  MACCE  with  CSI:  For ܶ ൌ ݊ the  two  encoders have access to the CSI non-causally, while for ܶ ൌ ݐ the  two encoders have access to the CSI causally.

<!-- image -->

For the case that the encoders have access to the CSI noncausally, the encoder functions are given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which generate ܺ ଵ,௧ ൌ ूଵ,௧ ሺ ܹ ଵ ܸ , ଶ ௅ ܵ , ௡ ሻ and ܺ ଶ,௧ ൌ ूଶ,௧ ሺ ܹ ଶ ܸ , ଵ ௅ ܵ , ௡ ሻ ;  while  for  the  case  that  the  encoders  have access to the CSI causally, the encoder functions are given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which generate ܺ ଵ,௧ ൌ ूଵ,௧ ሺ ܹ ଵ ܸ , ଶ ௅ ܵ , ௧ ሻ and ܺ ଶ,௧ ൌ ूଶ,௧ ሺ ܹ ଶ ܸ , ଵ ௅ ܵ , ௧ ሻ ;  the  decoder  function ुሺ. ሻ for  both  causal and noncausal CSI is defined as the MACCM. The rate of the code is the pair ሺ ܴ ଵ ܴ , ଶ ሻ .

The definitions of the error probability of the code and also the  capacity  region  for  the  two-user  MACCE  with  CSI  are similar to  the  MACCM  and  are  omitted.  The  two-user Gaussian  MACCE  with  additive  interference  is  also  defined by (2) with the power constraints (3), where the encoding/decoding  and  the  conferencing  schemes  for  this channel  are  defined  in    the  same  way  as  the  discrete  model which are omitted.

In the next section, we state our main results for the channel models defined here.

## III. MAIN RESULTS

## III-A) The two-user MACCM with CSI :

In this section, we state and prove our main results for the two-user  MACCM  with  CSI.  We  first  consider  the  discrete memoryless channel, and then we will consider the Gaussian model.

In  the  following,  we  establish  achievable  rate  regions  for the discrete channels with non-causal and causal CSI:

Theorem  1  (Discrete  MACCM): Consider  the  two-user discrete memoryless MACCM with CSI:

I) For the case where the CSI is known non-causally to both transmitters, the following rate region is achievable:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܸ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଶ are  three  auxiliary  r.v.'s  with  finite  ranges ࣰ ,࣯ ଵ ࣰ , ଶ , respectively, and the joint p.d.f. of the r.v.'s ܺ ,ܷ ,ܵ ଵ ܸ , ଵ ܺ , ଶ ܸ , ଶ ܻ , is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the distribution ܲ ௑೔ |௏ ೔ ௎ௌ ሺ ݔ ௜ ݒ| ௜ ݏ ,ݑ , ሻ, ݅ ൌ 1,2 , is such that it  takes  its  values  from  the  set ሼ0,1ሽ ;  equivalently, ܺ ௜ ൌ ݂ ௜ ሺ ܸ ௜ ܵ ,ܷ , ሻ, where ݂ ௜ ሺ. ሻ, ݅ ൌ 1,2 ,  is  an  arbitrary  deterministic function.

- II) For  the  case  where  the  CSI  is  known  causally  to  both transmitters, the following rate region is achievable:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܸ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଶ are  three  auxiliary  r.v.'s  with  finite  ranges ࣰ ,࣯ ଵ ࣰ , ଶ , respectively, and the joint p.d.f. of the r.v.'s ܺ ,ܷ ,ܵ ଵ ܸ , ଵ ܺ , ଶ ܸ , ଶ ܻ , is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the distribution ܲ ௑೔ |௏ ೔ ௎ௌ ሺ ݔ ௜ ݒ| ௜ ݏ ,ݑ , ሻ, ݅ ൌ 1,2 , is such that it  takes  its  values  from  the  set ሼ0,1ሽ ;  equivalently, ܺ ௜ ൌ ݂ ௜ ሺ ܸ ௜ ܵ ,ܷ , ሻ, where ݂ ௜ ሺ. ሻ, ݅ ൌ 1,2 ,  is  an  arbitrary  deterministic function.

## Proof of Theorem 1:

Part I) Refer to [20].

Part II) The expression of the achievable rate region given by (6) for the channel with causal CSI can be interpreted as a special  case  of  Part  I,  where ܸ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଶ are  independent  of ܵ . Indeed, for coding with causal CSI since ܸ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଶ are independent  of ܵ ,  the  encoding  scheme  does  not  include binning.  At  each  transmitter,  the  common  message  and  the private message are encoded in a superposition fashion, such that  the  common  message  is  encoded  using  a  codeword constructed  based  on ܲ ௎ ሺ ݑ ሻ and  served  as  the cloud  center , and the private message is encoded using a codeword constructed  based  on ܲ ௏ ೔ |௎ ሺ ݒ ௜ ݑ| ሻ, ݅ ൌ 1,2 ,  and  served  as  the satellite . The transmitter ݅ ,݅ ൌ 1,2 , then sends ܺ ௜ ൌ ݂ ௜ ሺ ܸ ௜ ܵ ,ܷ , ሻ over the channel. A  jointly typical  decoding scheme is also used at the receiver. ■

Now, we deal with the Gaussian MACCM defined by (2). It is  worth  noting  that  the  Gaussian  channels  with  additive interference known non-causally to the transmitters, is usually called the 'dirty paper channels' [8]. In the next theorem, we prove that the capacity region of the dirty paper MACCM is the  same  as  the  clean  MACCM  wherein  the  interference (known noise) does not exist. In many situations the transmitters have access to the interference sequence causally. These  channels  sometimes  are  called  'dirty  tape  channels' [21]. The capacity of the single-user dirty tape channel is still an open problem; however, achievable rates were established for this channel in [21] and [22]. Recently, in [23] achievable rate  regions  were  established  for  the  multiuser  dirty  tape channels.  In  the  following,  we  use  the  same  approach  as  in [23] and obtain an achievable rate region for the two-user dirty tape MACCM.

Note that, we proved the rate regions given in (4) and (6) for  the  discrete  channel  model  with  non-causal  and  casual CSI,  respectively;  however,  one  can  exploit  these  results  to obtain achievable rate regions for the Gaussian setting in (2). Thus, we have the following theorem:

ҧ

Theorem  2  (Gaussian  MACCM): Consider  the  two-user Gaussian  MACCM  with  additive  interference  (2).  Denote ߉ ሺ ݔ ሻ ׷ ൌ ଵ ଶ logሺ1 ൅ ݔ ሻ , and ݔ ׷ ൌ1െ ݔ .

- I) For  the  case  where  the  additive  interference  is  known non-causally  to  both  transmitters  the  capacity  region  is  the same as the capacity when there is no interference and is given by:

ҧ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

ҧ

- II) For  the  case  where  the  additive  interference  is  known causally  to  both  transmitters  the  following  rate  region  is achievable:

ҧ

ҧ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܲ ෨ ௜ ׷ ൌ ܲ ௜ െ ߙ ௜ ଶ ܲ ௌ .

## Remarks:

1. By setting ܴ ଶ ൌ 0 and ߚ ଶ ൌ 0 in the rate region given by (8), we obtain the capacity region of the two-user Gaussian MAC with degraded message sets and with additive  interference  known  non-causally  to  both transmitters [18].
2. By setting ܴ ଴ ൌ 0 and ߚ ଵ ൌ ߚ ଶ ൌ 1 in the rate region given  by  (8),  we  obtain  the  capacity  region  of  the two-user  Gaussian  MAC  without  common  message with  additive  interference  known  non-causally  to both transmitters [14], [15].

## Proof of Theorem 2:

Part  I) To  prove  Part  I,  we  exploit  the  achievable  rate region (4). Let ܷ ෩, ܸ ෨ ଵ ܸ , ෨ ଶ be three independent Gaussian distributed  r.v.'s  with  zero  mean  and  unit  variance.  Also, assume that ܷ ෩, ܸ ෨ ଵ ܸ , ෨ ଶ are independent of the Gaussian interference ܵ .  Let ߚ ௜ א ሾ0,1ሿ, ݅ ൌ 1,2 ,  be  two  arbitrary  real numbers. Define the r.v.'s ܸ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଶ ܺ , ଵ ܺ , ଶ as follows:

ҧ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

ҧ

ҧ

Lemma 1: By definitions (10), the following equalities hold:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Proof of Lemma 1: Refer to [20].

Now by substituting the r.v.'s. ܸ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଶ ܺ , ଵ ܺ , ଶ as defined in (10)  in  the  rate  region  (4),  and  using  the  equalities  (11),  we obtain the achievability of (8). Furthermore, the rate region of (8) is the capacity region when there is no interference [3, 18]; hence it  is  also  an  upper  bound  on  the  capacity.  In  fact,  the rate region (8) is the capacity when the CSI, i.e., the additive interference ܵ , is also known at the receiver.

ҧ

ҧ

ҧ

ҧ

ҧ

ҧ

ҧ

Part II) To obtain the achievability of (9), we make use of Part  II  of  Theorem  1  and  also  the  approach  of  [23].  Let ܸ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଶ be three independent Gaussian distributed r.v.'s with zero  mean  and  unit  variance.  Also,  assume  that ܸ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଶ are independent of the Gaussian interference ܵ . Let also ߚ ௜ א ሾ0,1ሿ

and ߙ ௜ א ൤െට ௉ ೔ ௉ೄ , ට ௉ ೔ ௉ೄ ൨ , ݅ ൌ 1,2 ,  be  arbitrary  real  numbers. Define the r.v.'s ܺ ଵ ܺ , ଶ as follows:

ҧ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By substituting the r.v.'s ܸ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଶ ܺ , ଵ ܺ , ଶ in  the  rate  region (6),  we  obtain  the  achievability  of  (9).  In  fact  to  achieve  the rate  region  (9)  the  encoder ݅ , ݅ ൌ 1,2 ,  expends  a  part  of  its power, i.e., ߙ ௜ ଶ ܲ ௌ ,  for  partly  cleaning  the  interference ܵ from the channel and uses the rest of it, i.e., ܲ ௜ െ ߙ ௜ ଶ ܲ ௌ , to transmit its  private  message  and  also  the  common  message.  This completes the proof. ■

## III-B) The two-user MACCE with CSI:

Now  consider  the  two-user  MACCE  with  CSI.  We  first establish  achievable  rate  regions  for  the  discrete  memoryless channels with non-causal and causal CSI and then extend the results to the Gaussian channels with additive interference.

Theorem  3  (Discrete  MACCE): Consider  the  two-user discrete memoryless MACCM with CSI:

- I) For the case where the CSI is known non-causally to both transmitters, the following rate region is achievable:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܸ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଶ are  three  auxiliary  r.v.'s  with  finite  ranges ࣰ ,࣯ ଵ ࣰ , ଶ , respectively, and the joint p.d.f. of the r.v.'s ܺ ,ܷ ,ܵ ଵ ܸ , ଵ ܺ , ଶ ܸ , ଶ ܻ , is  given  in  the  same  way  as  Part  I  of Theorem 1.

- II) For  the  case  where  the  CSI  is  known  causally  to  both transmitters, the following rate region is achievable:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܸ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଶ are  three  auxiliary  r.v.'s  with  finite  ranges ࣰ ,࣯ ଵ ࣰ , ଶ , respectively, and the joint p.d.f. of the r.v.'s ܺ ,ܷ ,ܵ ଵ ܸ , ଵ ܺ , ଶ ܸ , ଶ ܻ , is  given  in  the  same  way  as  Part  II  of Theorem 1.

## Proof of Theorem 3:

Part  I) To  prove  the  achievability  of  (13),  we  utilize  the Willems'  approach  [4]  for  the  two-user  MACCE  with  CSI. Consider  a  length-݊ code ԧ ࢔ ሺ ܴ ଵ ܴ , ଶ ܥ , ଵଶ ܥ , ଶଵ ሻ with  private messages ܹ ଵ א ሾ1, … , 2 ௡ோభ ሿ and ܹ ଶ א ሾ1, … , 2 ௡ோమ ሿ for the transmitters 1 and 2, respectively. Define ܴ ෠ ଵ ׷ ൌ ݊݅݉ ሼ ܴ ଵ ܥ , ଵଶ ሽ and ܴ ෠ ଶ ׷ ൌ ݊݅݉ ሼ ܴ ଶ ܥ , ଶଵ ሽ . The set ሾ1, … , 2 ௡ோ೔ ሿ, ݅ ൌ 1,2 , is partitioned (in a deterministic procedure) into 2 ௡ோ ෠ ೔ cells each containing 2 ௡ሺோ ೔ ିோ ෠ ೔ ሻ elements.  Let ܿ ௜ א ൣ1, … , 2 ௡ோ ෠ ೔ ൧, ݅ ൌ 1,2 , denote the cells labels and ܽ ௜ א ൣ1, … , 2 ௡ሺோ ೔ ିோ ෠ ೔ ሻ ൧, ݅ ൌ 1,2 , denote the elements inside each cell. Define ܿ ௜ ሺ ݓ ௜ ሻ ׷ ൌ ࣷ ௜ ݅ , ൌ 1,2 , if ݓ ௜ is inside the cell ࣷ ௜ .

Since ܴ ෠ ଵ ൑ ܥ ଵଶ and ܴ ෠ ଶ ൑ ܥ ଶଵ ,  by  holding  a ሺ ܥ ଵଶ ܥ , ଶଵ ሻ -admissible conference, the encoder 1 is able to send ܿ ଵ ሺ ݓ ଵ ሻ א ൣ1, … , 2 ௡ோ ෠ భ ൧ to the encoder 2 and the encoder 2 is able to send ܿ ଶ ሺ ݓ ଶ ሻ א ൣ1, … , 2 ௡ோ ෠ మ ൧ to  the  encoder  1,  reliably.  Therefore, after  holding  a ሺ ܥ ଵଶ ܥ , ଶଵ ሻ -admissible  conference,  the  channel can be viewed as a two-user MAC with the following common message for transmitters:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that ܽ ଵ and ܽ ଶ remain still unknown for the encoders 2 and 1, respectively. Indeed, after conferencing, ݓ ଴ א ൣ1, … , 2 ௡ሺோ ෠ భ ାோ ෠ మ ሻ ൧ can  be  considered  as  the  common  message and ܽ ௜ א ൣ1, … , 2 ௡ሺோ ೔ ିோ ෠ ೔ ሻ ൧, ݅ ൌ 1,2 ,  as  the  private  messages. Therefore, by utilizing the achievable rate region (4) derived in Part I of Theorem 1 for the MACCM, we conclude that the rate pair ሺ ܴ ଵ ܴ , ଶ ሻ is achievable for the MACCE provided that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the joint p.d.f.'s of the r.v.'s is given by (5). Now, the achievability  of  the  rate  region  (13)  for  the  channel  with conferencing encoders is readily obtained from (15) by considering ܴ ෠ ଵ ׷ ൌ ݊݅݉ ሼ ܴ ଵ ܥ , ଵଶ ሽ and ܴ ෠ ଶ ׷ ൌ ݊݅݉ ሼ ܴ ଶ ܥ , ଶଵ ሽ .

Part II) Similar to Part I the achievability of (14) is obtained using the Willems' approach [4] to transform the channel with conferencing  encoders  to  a  channel  with  common  message, where the consequence of Part II of Theorem 1 is also applied. The details will be omitted. ■

Now,  consider  the  two-user  Gaussian  MACCE  (2).  As mentioned before, in [5] the capacity region of this channel for the  case  in  which  the  interference  is  known  non-causally  to both transmitters was established, where it was shown that the known  interference could be canceled without any rate penalty. In the following, we present an alternative proof for this  result  where  we  directly  apply  the  result  of  Part  I  of Theorem 3 and utilize a similar approach to the derivation of Part  I  of  Theorem  2.  We  also  establish  an  achievable  rate region for the situation in which the transmitters have access to the interference causally.

ҧ

Theorem  4  (Gaussian  MACCE): Consider  the  two-user Gaussian  MACCE  with  additive  interference  (2).  Denote ߉ ሺ ݔ ሻ ׷ ൌ ଵ ଶ logሺ1 ൅ ݔ ሻ , and ݔ ׷ ൌ1െ ݔ .

- I) For  the  case  where  the  additive  interference  is  known non-causally  to  both  transmitters,  the  capacity  region  is  the same as the capacity when there is no interference and is given by:

ҧ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

ҧ

- II) For  the  case  where  the  additive  interference  is  known causally  to  both  transmitters  the  following  rate  region  is achievable:

ҧ

ҧ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܲ ෨ ௜ ׷ ൌ ܲ ௜ െ ߙ ௜ ܲ ௌ .

## Proof of Theorem 4:

Part I) The  direct  part  is  derived  by  substituting  the  r.v.'s ܺ ,ܷ ଵ ܸ , ଵ ܺ , ଶ ܸ , ଶ defined  by  (10)  in  the  rate  region  given  by (13). Note that the mutual information functions and the joint p.d.f. of the r.v.'s appeared in the rate region (13) are exactly the same as the rate region (4). Therefore, the consequence of Lemma 1 can be directly applied here. For the converse part it should  be  noted  that  the  rate  region  of  (16)  is  the  capacity region when there is no interference [5]; hence, it is  also  an upper bound for the capacity. In fact, the rate region (16) is the capacity when the receiver is also informed of the CSI, i.e., the additive interference ܵ .

Figure 3. Achievable rate region for the two-user Gaussian MACCE with causal CSI. ܲ ଶ ൌ 2 ܲ ଵ ൌ 40 , ܲ ௌ ൌ 10 , ܲ ௓ ൌ 1 , and ܥ ଵଶ ൌ ܥ ଶଵ ൌ ܥ .

<!-- image -->

Part  II) The  achievability  of  (17)  is  obtained  using  the achievable rate region (14) derived for the channel with causal CSI, where the distribution of the r.v.'s is chosen as in Part II of Theorem 2. ■

In Fig. 3, we have plotted the achievable rate region (17) for the  two-user  Gaussian  MACCE  with  additive  interference known casually to both transmitters under different values of ܥ ,  where ׷ ܥ ൌ ܥ ଵଶ ൌ ܥ ଶଵ .  As  expected,  the  achievable  rate region is enlarged by increasing the value of ܥ .  However, no further  improvement  is  possible  for  the  values  of ܥ greater than כ ܥ ׷ ൌmax଴ஸఈభ,௔మஸଵ ߉ ൬ ௉ ෨ భ ା௉ ෨ మ ାଶඥ௉ ෨ భ ௉ ෨ మ ௉ೋାሺଵିఈభିఈమ ሻ మ ௉ ೄ ൰ , (for the parameters of Fig. 3 this value is about 3.38 (bps/Hz)). Indeed, one can verify that for all values of ܥ equal or greater than כ ܥ , the rate region (17) forms a triangle with boundaries determined by the lines ܴ ଵ ൌ 0 , ܴ ଶ ൌ 0 and:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, for these values of ܥ , no further improvement is possible on the achievable rate region.

## IV. CONCLUSION

This paper investigates the two-user MAC with cooperative encoders and CSI from an information theoretic point of view, where  two  different  situations  are  considered:  A  two-user MACCM and A two-user  MACCE.  For  both  situations,  the two cases where the CSI is known to the encoders either noncausally  or  causally  are  studied.  Achievable  rate  regions  are established for the discrete memoryless channels and also the Gaussian channels with additive interference. The achievable rate  regions  derived  for  the  Gaussian  models  with  additive interference known non-causally to the encoders are shown to coincide with the capacity region of the same channel with no interference,  therefore  yielding  the  capacity  region  for  these important cases. The extension of the results to the channels with partial CSI at the encoders would be an interesting next step.

## REFERENCES

- [1] D.  Slepian  and  J.  K.  Wolf,  'A  coding  theorem  for  multiple  access channels with correlated sources,' Bell Syst. Tech. J. , vol. 52, pp 10371076, 1973.
- [2] N. Liu, and S. Ulukus, 'Capacity Region and Optimum Power Control Strategies for Fading Gaussian Multiple Access Channels with Common Data,' IEEE Trans. on Communications, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1815-1826, Oct. 2006.
- [3] A.  Haghi,  R.  Khosravi-Farsani,  M.  R.  Aref,  and  F.  Marvasti.  'The capacity  region  of  fading  multiple  access  channels  with  cooperative encoders  and  partial  CSIT,'    in Proc.  IEEE  Int.  Symp.  Information Theory (ISIT 2010) , Austin, Texas, U.S.A., pp. 485-489, Jun. 2010.
- [4] F.  M.  J.Willems,  'The  discrete  memoryless  multiple  channel  with partially cooperating encoders,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 441-445, May 1983.
- [5] S. I. Bross, A. Lapidoth, and M. A. Wigger, 'The Gaussian MAC with conferencing  encoders,'  in Proc.  IEEE  Int.  Symp.  Information  Theory (ISIT 2008) , Toronto, ON, Canada, pp. 2702-2706, Jul. 2008.
- [6] C. E. Shannon, 'Channels with side information at the transmitter,' IBM Journal Res. and Develop., vol. 2, pp. 289-293, Oct. 1958.
- [7] S.  I.  Gelfand  and  M.  S.  Pinsker,  'Coding  for  channel  with  random parameters,' Prob. of Contr. Inf. Theory , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 19-31, 1980.
- [8] M. H. M. Costa, 'Writing on dirty paper,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 439-441, May 1983.
- [9] S. Sigurjonsson and Y. H. Kim, 'On multiple user channels with causal state information at the transmitters,' in Proc. IEEE  Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT'05) , Adelaide, Australia, pp. 72-76, Sep. 2005.
- [10] Y. Steinberg, 'Coding for the degraded broadcast channel with random parameters,  with  causal  and  noncausal  side  information,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2867-2877, Aug. 2005.
- [11] R.  Khosravi-Farsani,  B.  Akhbari,  M.  Mirmohseni  and  M.  R.  Aref, "Cooperative relay-broadcast channels with causal channel state information",  in Proc.  IEEE  Int.  Symp.  Information  Theory  (ISIT'09) , Seoul, South Korea, Jun./Jul. 2009, pp. 1174-1178.
- [12] S.  A.  Jafar,  'Capacity  with  causal  and  noncausal  side  information-A unified view,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 5468-5475, Dec. 2006.
- [13] H.  Permuter,  S.  Shamai  and  A.  Somekh-Baruch,  'Message  and  state cooperation in multiple access channels,' arxiv: 1006.2022, June 2010.
- [14] I-Hsiang Wang, 'Distributed interference cancellation in multiple access channel  with  transmitter  cooperation,'  Sep.  2010,  available  at  arxiv: 1009.4269.
- [15] S.  I.  Gel'fand  and  M.  S.  Pinsker,  'On  Gaussian channels with random parameters,' in Abstracts of Sixth International Symposium on Information Theory, Tashkent, U.S.S.R , Sep. 1984, pp. 247-250.
- [16] Y-H. Kim, A. Sutivong, and S. Sigurjonsson, 'Multiple user writing on dirty  paper,' in  Proc.  IEEE  Int.  Symp.  Information  Theory  (ISIT'04), Chicago, USA, Jun./Jul  2004, p. 534.
- [17] A. Zaidi and L. Vandendorpe, 'Rate regions for the partially-cooperative relay-broadcast  channel  with  non-causal  side  information,'  in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory , Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1246-1250.
- [18] M.  A.  Wigger , Cooperation  on the Multiple-Access  Channel , A. Lapidoth, Ed. Konstanz, Switzerland: Hartung-Gorre Verlag, 2008, vol. 3, ETH Series in Information Theory and its Applications.
- [19] I.  Csiszar  and  J.  K ِ orner, Information  Theory.  Coding  Theorems  for Discrete Memoryless Systems . London, U.K.: Academic, 1981.
- [20] R. Khosravi-Farsani, F. Marvasti, 'Multiple access channels with cooperative encoders and channel state information' Submitted to European Transactions on Telecommunications. Sep. 2010.
- [21] U.  Erez,  S.  Shamai  (Shitz),  and  R.  Zamir,  'Capacity  and  lattice strategies  for  canceling  known  interference,' IEEE Trans. Inf.  Theory , vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3820-3833, Nov. 2005.
- [22] F.  M.  J.  Willems,  'On  Gaussian  channels with side information at the transmitter,' in Proc. 9th Symp. Information Theory in the Benelux , The Netherlands, May 1988, pp. 129-135.
- [23] R.  Khosravi-Farsani,  B.  Akhbari,  and  M.  R.  Aref,  'Achievable  rate regions for dirty tape channels and joint writing on dirty paper and dirty tape,' IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW2010) , Dublin, Ireland, Sep. 2010.

R.  K-Farsani ,  (1986,  Farsan,  I.R.  Iran)  received  the  Double  Major Bachelor  of  Science  Degree  in  electrical  engineering  and  pure  mathematics from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in July 2010.

He  began  researching  on  the Mathematical  Foundations  of  Information Networks from June 2007. Up to now, he has been published several papers at the prestigious conferences related to the Information Theory.

He also received the Silver Medal from the Iranian Students Mathematical Olympiad, a country-wide competition, in 2003. From Sep. 2009, he has also been  a  research  scientist  with  the  Radio  Communication  Group,  Education and Research Institute for ICT (ERICT), Tehran, Iran.

F. Marvasti ,  received his BS, Ms and PhD degrees all from Renesselaer Polytechnic  Institute  in  1970,  1971  and  1973,  respectively.  He  has  worked, consulted  and  taught  in  various  industries  and  academic  institutions  since 1972.  Among  which  are  Bell  Labs,  University  of  California  Davis,  Illinois Institute of Technology, University of London, King's College. He was one of the  editors  and  associate  editors  of  IEEE  Trans  on  Communications  and Signal Processing from 1990-1997. He has about 60 Journal publications and has  written  several  reference  books.  His  last  book  is  on  Non-uniform Sampling: Theory and Practice by Kluwer in 2001. He is also a guest editor on Special Issue on Non-uniform Sampling for the Sampling Theory &amp; Signal and Image Processing journal.  Dr Marvasti is currently a professor at Sharif University  of  Technology  and  the  director  of  Advanced  Communications Research Institute (ACRI).