## Capacity Bounds for Multiuser Channels with Non-Causal Channel State Information at the Transmitters

Reza Khosravi-Farsani, Farokh Marvasti

Department of Electrical Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran

Adnaced Communications Research Institue (ACRI) Email: reza\_khosravi@alum.sharif.ir, marvasti@sharif.ir

Abstract -In  this  paper,  capacity  inner  and  outer  bounds  are established for multiuser channels with Channel State Information (CSI) known non-causally at the transmitters: The Multiple  Access  Channel  (MAC),  the  Broadcast  Channel  (BC) with common information, and the Relay Channel (RC). For each channel, the actual capacity region is also derived in some special cases. Specifically, it is shown that for some deterministic models with  non-causal  CSI  at  the  transmitters,  similar  to  Costa's Gaussian  channel,  the  availability  of  CSI  at  the  deterministic receivers does not affect the capacity region.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Channels with Channel State Information (CSI) known at the transmitters  have  been  investigated  in  many  papers.  This  study was initiated  by  Shannon  [1]  where  he  considered  a  single-user channel with CSI known causally at the transmitter and derived its  capacity.  The  capacity  of  the  scenario  where  the  transmitter has access to CSI non-causally was established in [2]. In [3] Costa considered a Gaussian channel with additive interference which is known  non-causally  at  the  transmitter  and  modeled  as  CSI.  He showed that for this channel the capacity is the same as when the receiver  is  also  informed  of  CSI,  thereby,  a  full  interference cancellation is achieved and the capacity is similar to the case of no interference. Up to now, many researchers have attempted to establish capacity results for multiuser channels with CSI. Specifically, Shannon's result for the case of causal CSI [1] was extended  to  some  multiuser  scenarios  [4],  [5]  wherein  capacity theorems  were  also  established.  Moreover,  in  [6]  it  was  shown that Costa's result [3] regarding achieving full interference cancellation  when  the  interference  is  known  non-causally  at  the transmitter, can be extended to some multiuser channels. For the case  of  non-causal  CSI,  capacity  inner  and  upper  bounds  have been also established for the discrete multiuser channels [4], [7], [8];  however,  there  exist  only  a  few  cases  for  which  a  full characterization  of  the  capacity  region  has  been  derived.  For  a comprehensive  review  of  the  existent  results  regarding  capacity bounds for different communication scenarios with CSI, see [9], [10] and the literature therein.

In  this  paper,  we  show  that  for  the  deterministic  single-user channel with CSI known non-causally at the transmitter, similar to Costa's Gaussian channel, the capacity is the same as when the receiver is also informed of CSI. Then, we study capacity bounds for multiuser channels with non-causal CSI. Firstly, we consider the Multiple Access Channel (MAC)  with  asymmetric  and correlated  CSI  at  the  transmitters.  We  establish  the  capacity region for the deterministic orthogonal MAC with correlated CSI at the transmitters, and demonstrate that in this case the capacity region is the same as when the receiver is also informed of CSI. Also, we derive a new outer bound on the capacity region of the (general) MAC with correlated CSI at the transmitters.

As  a  second  multiuser  scenario,  we  consider  the  two-user Broadcast  Channel  (BC)  with  common  message  and  with  CSI known non-causally at the transmitter. We first derive a new inner bound on the capacity region of this channel. The main framework  of  our  achievability  scheme  is  based  on  applying  a (multivariate) random binning technique. We also prove that our achievable rate region strictly contains previously derived ones in [11, Sec. V] and [12, p. 7-53] for the channel, as a subset.

Figure 1. The single-user channel with non-causal CSI.

<!-- image -->

Moreover, we derive an outer bound for the capacity region of the  channel.  When  there  is  no  CSI,  our  outer  bound  reduces  to that one derived by Nair and El Gamal in [13] for the BC without CSI. Then, we establish new capacity theorems for the channel in the following cases: 1) Two classes of deterministic BCs with CSI known only at the transmitter, 2) The semi-deterministic BC with CSI  known  at  the  transmitter  and  also  at  the  non-deterministic receiver,  3)  The  more-capable  BC  with  CSI  known  at  the transmitter and both receivers, 4) A special case of the degraded BC  with  CSI  known  only  at  the  transmitter,  wherein  the  nondegraded  receiver  receives  a  deterministic  function  of  channel input and channel state. Moreover, in those cases where a receiver receives  a  deterministic  function  of  channel  input  and  channel state, we show that assuming this receiver to be informed of CSI does not affect the capacity region.

Finally, we study the Relay Channel (RC) with CSI. We first consider  the  case  where  both  the  transmitter  and  the  relay  have access to perfect CSI non-causally. We derive a new achievable rate for this channel using the partial decode-and-forward technique. Then, we consider the case of degraded CSI wherein CSI at the relay is a degraded version of CSI at the transmitter. We derive an achievable rate for this scenario using the decodeand-forward technique. As the last scenario, we  study the degraded  Gaussian  RC  with  asymmetric  additive  interferences. We consider an interesting scenario regarding the availability of the interferences at the users, as follows. The CSI is composed of two parts: One part is the interference added to the relay received signal,  and  the  other  is  the  interference  added  to  the  received signal at the receiver (destination). We assume that the transmitter has access non-causally to both interferences, the relay has access non-causally  to  the  part  of  interference  which  is  added  to  the received signal at the receiver, and the receiver has access to the part  of  interference  which  is  added  to  the  received  signal  at  the relay. In this scenario, no interference subtraction can be performed at the relay and the receiver; nonetheless, we show that a full interference cancellation can be achieved, which yields the capacity of the channel.

The  main  results  are  stated  in  Section  II.  In  Appendix,  we  have provided  an  outline  of  the  proofs  for  most  of  our  theorems.  The proof of the remaining results will be reported in [14].

## II. MAIN RESULTS

In this section, we state the main results of the paper. Notations are as follows: Random Variables (RV) and their realization are denoted by upper case and lower case letters, respectively. For a RV ܺ with the range set ࣲ , the Probability Distribution Function (PDF)  is represented by ܲ ௑ ሺ ݔ ሻ ,  where ܺ א ݔ .  A  Gaussian distributed  RV,  e.g., ܺ ,  with  zero  mean  and  variance ߩ ଶ is denoted by ܺ ~ ࣨ ሺ0, ߩ ଶ ሻ .

## A. The single-user channel with CSI

Definition: The  single-user  channel  with  CSI,  denoted  by ሼ ܲ ,࣭ ௌ ሺ ݏ ሻ, ,ࣳ,ࣲ Զሺ ݏ ,ݔ|ݕ ሻሽ , is a channel with input alphabet ࣲ and output  alphabet ࣳ .  The  RV ܵ denotes  the  channel  state  which  is distributed over the alphabet ࣭ according to the known PDF ܲ ௌ ሺ ݏ ሻ . For  discrete  channels  all  alphabets  are  finite  sets.  The  transition probability  function Զሺ ݏ ,ݔ|ݕ ሻ describes  the  relation  of  channel input,  channel  state  and  channel  output.  The  channel  model  has been  depicted  in  Fig.  1.  In  this  paper,  we  assume  that  the  state process is non-causally known at the transmitter. The definition of the code and also the capacity for the channel can be found in the literature [9]. Here, due to limited space, they will be omitted.

As  mentioned,  the  capacity  of  this  channel  was  derived  in  [2] which is given by the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also, for the case where the CSI is available at both transmitter and receiver, the capacity is expressed as [15]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, let us assume that the channel is deterministic: There exists a deterministic function ࣲ :݂ ൈ ࣭ ՜ ࣳ such that ܻ ൌ ݂ ሺ ܵ ,ܺ ሻ . For this model, we show that similar to Costa's Gaussian channel with additive interference [3], the capacity when CSI is only available at  the  transmitter  is  the  same  as  when  it  is  available  at  both transmitter and receiver.

Observation: The capacity of the deterministic single-user channel with non-causal CSI at the transmitter is similar to the case where CSI is available at both transmitter and receiver and is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: The achievability is derived from (1) by setting ܷ ൌ ܻ . On the one hand, for deterministic channel, (2) reduces to (3). ■

As  the  channel  is  deterministic  (noiseless),  this  scenario  may  be well named as ' clean writing on dirty paper '.  Subsequently, we demonstrate a same result for some multiuser channels with noncausal CSI at the transmitters.

## B. The MAC with CSI

Now, consider the MAC  with non-causal CSI at the transmitters, as depicted in Fig. 2.

Definition: The two-user MAC with CSI, denoted by ൛ ࣭ ଵ ࣭ , ଶ ܲ , ௌ భ ௌ మ ሺ ݏ ଵ ݏ , ଶ ሻ, ࣲ ଵ ࣲ , ଶ ,ࣳ , Զሺ ݔ|ݕ ଵ ݔ , ଶ ݏ , ଵ ݏ , ଶ ሻൟ ,  is  a  channel with  input  alphabets ࣲ ଵ ࣲ , ଶ and  output  alphabet ࣳ .  The  channel state  is  the  random  pair ሺ ܵ ଵ ܵ , ଶ ሻ which  is  distributed  over  the  set ࣭ ଵ ൈ ࣭ ଶ according to ܲ ௌ భ ௌ మ ሺ ݏ ଵ ݏ , ଶ ሻ . The  transition probability function Զሺ ݔ|ݕ ଵ ݔ , ଶ ݏ , ଵ ݏ , ଶ ሻ describes the relation of channel inputs, channel state and channel output. As depicted in Fig. 2., the first transmitter has access to ܵ ଵ and the second one has access to ܵ ଶ ,  both  non-causally.  Each  transmitter  sends  a  private  message over the channel and the receiver decodes both messages.

The  MAC  with  CSI  has  been  investigated  in  [5],  [7],  [16]; specifically,  for  the  case  of  correlated ܵ ଵ ܵ , ଶ ,  an  achievable  rate region has been reported for the channel in [16]:

Lemma 1 [16]: The  following  rate  region  is  achievable  for  the MAC with non-causal CSI at the transmitters:

<!-- image -->

ሺ4ሻ

Figure 2. The MAC with asymmetric non-causal CSI.

<!-- image -->

In  [6],  it  was  shown  that  for  Gaussian  MAC  with  additive interference known non-causally at both transmitters the capacity region is the same as when the interference is known also at the receiver.  Now  the  question  is  that  if  this  property  holds  for  the deterministic MAC, similar to the single-user channel? Unfortunately, using the  achievable  rate  region  (4),  the  capacity region  of  the  deterministic  MAC  with  non-causal  CSI  at  the transmitters cannot be derived in general. Due to this, we restrict our attention to a subclass of MACs called orthogonal MAC .

Definition: The two-user MAC with CSI is said to be orthogonal if  the  receiver  alphabet ࣳ ൌ ࣳ ଵ ൈ ࣳ ଶ and  the  channel  transition probability function satisfies:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the orthogonal MAC with non-causal CSI at the transmitters, when ܵ ଵ ܵ , ଶ are independent, one can show that the capacity region is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the case of correlated ܵ ଵ ܵ , ଶ , the channel is not decomposed in two  separate  ones  and  hence  establishing  the  capacity  region  in general  case  is  still  difficult.  Nevertheless,  in  the  following,  we derive  the  capacity  region  of  the  deterministic  orthogonal  MAC with  CSI  for  the  case  of  correlated ܵ ଵ ܵ , ଶ .  In  this  model,  there exist  deterministic  functions ݂ ଵ ࣲ : ଵ ൈ ࣭ ଵ ՜ ࣳ ଵ and ݂ ଶ ࣲ : ଶ ൈ ࣭ ଶ ՜ ࣳ ଶ such that ܻ ଵ ൌ ݂ ଵ ሺ ܺ ଵ ܵ , ଵ ሻ and ܻ ଶ ൌ ݂ ଶ ሺ ܺ ଶ ܵ , ଶ ሻ .

Proposition 1: The capacity region of the deterministic orthogonal MAC with non-causal CSI at the transmitters, where ܵ ଵ ܵ , ଶ are  correlated,  is  the  same  as  when  both ܵ ଵ ܵ , ଶ are  also available at the receiver and is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: Refer to Appendix. ■

To the best of our knowledge, there is no capacity outer bound for the general MAC with non-causal CSI at the transmitters. In the next theorem, we present an outer bound on the capacity region of this channel.

Theorem 1: The following rate region is an outer bound for the capacity region of the two-user MAC with non-causal CSI at the transmitters ( ܵ ଵ ܵ , ଶ are correlated):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: Refer to Appendix. ■

Figure 3. The BC with non-causal CSI.

<!-- image -->

Remark: Consider the following rate region:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  mutual  information  functions  in  the  rate  region  (9)  are identical to the achievable rate region (4). However, the union in (9) is taken over a larger set of joint PDFs. It can be easily seen that the derived outer bound (8) is a subset of the rate region (9). Therefore,  the  rate  region  (9)  also  constitutes  an  outer  bound (weaker than (8)) on the capacity region.

## C. The BC with CSI

Then, consider the BC with common message and with CSI known non-causally at the transmitter.

Definition: The two-user BC with CSI, denoted by ሼ ܲ ,࣭ ௌ ሺ ݏ ሻ, ࣳ,ࣲ ଵ ࣳ , ଶ , Զሺ ݕ ଵ ݕ , ଶ ݏ ,ݔ| ሻሽ , is a channel with input alphabet ࣲ and output alphabets ࣳ ଵ ࣳ , ଶ .  The  channel  state  is  the RV ܵ which is distributed over the set ࣭ according to ܲ ௌ ሺ ݏ ሻ .  The transition probability function Զሺ ݕ ଵ ݕ , ଶ ݏ ,ݔ| ሻ describes the relation of channel input, channel state and channel outputs. The transmitter  has  access  to  CSI  non-causally.  The  channel  model has  been  depicted  in  Fig.  3.  The  transmitter  sends  two  private messages, as well as a common message over the channel. Each receiver  decodes  its  respective  private  message  and  also  the common message.

Firstly, we derive a new achievable rate region for this channel.

Theorem 2: The following rate region is achievable for the twouser BC with common message and with CSI known non-causally at the transmitter:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: Refer to [14]. ■

Remarks:

1.  By  setting ׎ ؠ ܵ ,  the  achievable  rate  region  (10)  reduces  to Marton's achievable rate region for the two-user BC [17], [18].
2.  Our  achievable  rate  region  (10) strictly contains  both  those ones derived in [11, Sec. V] and [12, p. 7-53], as a subset. The proof can be found in Appendix.

The achievable rate region (10) is optimal in some special cases. Specifically, consider the deterministic BC with CSI known noncausally  at  the  transmitter:  There  exist  deterministic  functions ݂ ଵ ࣲ : ൈ ࣭ ՜ ࣳ ଵ and ݂ ଶ ࣲ : ൈ ࣭ ՜ ࣳ ଶ such  that ܻ ଵ ൌ ݂ ଵ ሺ ܵ ,ܺ ሻ and ܻ ଶ ൌ ݂ ଶ ሺ ܵ ,ܺ ሻ .  In  [6]  and  [11],  it  was  shown  that  the  capacity region  of  the  two-user  Gaussian  BC  (without  common  message) with additive interferences is  the  same  as  when  the  interferences (CSI)  are  also  known  at  both  receivers.  In  the  next  theorem  we derive a similar result for the deterministic BC with CSI.

Theorem 3: The capacity region of the deterministic BC (without common message) with CSI known non-causally at the transmitter is  the  same  as  when  CSI  is  also  known  at  both  receivers  and  is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: The achievability is obtained from (10) by setting ܴ ଴ ൌ 0 , ׎ ؠ ܹ , ܸ ൌ ܻ ଵ and ܷ ൌ ܻ ଶ .  The  converse  part  is  derived  using the cut-set outer bound for channels with CSI [14]. ■

Remark: This  is  the  first  class  of  BCs  with  CSI  known  noncausally  only  at  the  transmitter  for  which  the  capacity  region  is characterized.

For the case of transmitting both common and private messages, we derive  the  capacity  region  of  the  deterministic  BC  with  CSI satisfying:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all joint PDFs ܲ ௑|ௌ .

Proposition 2: The capacity region of the deterministic BC with common message and with CSI known non-causally  only  at  the transmitter which satisfies the condition (12) is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: Refer to Appendix.

Remarks:

1.  Proposition  2  generalizes  the  result  of  [19,  Sec.  IV.A]  to  the case of both common and private messages.
2.  In  general,  the  capacity  result  established  in  Proposition  2, cannot  be  deduced  by  the  achievable  rate  region  previously derived in [11, Sec. V].

We  also  derive  an  outer  bound  on  the  capacity  region  of  the channel.

Theorem 4: The following rate region is an outer bound for the two-user BC with non-causal CSI at the transmitter:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: Refer to Appendix. ■

## Remarks:

1.  The  rate  region  (14)  continues  to  be  an  outer  bound  for  the channel when CSI is also available at both receivers.
2. By setting ׎ ؠ ܵ the rate region (14) reduces to Nair-El Gamal outer bound [13] on the capacity region of the two-user BC.

Now,  we  present some  classes of channels for which the achievability scheme (10) and the outer bound (14) agree, which yields  the  capacity  region.  As  the  first  scenario,  in  the  next theorem, we establish the capacity region of the two-user BC with non-causal  CSI  at  the  transmitter  where  one  receiver  receives  a deterministic function of the channel input and the channel state, and the other has access to CSI.

Theorem 5: Consider the semi-deterministic BC (without common message) with CSI known non-causally at the transmitter, wherein there exists a deterministic function ݂ ଵ ࣲ : ൈ ࣭ ՜ ࣳ ଵ such that ܻ ଵ ൌ ݂ ଵ ሺ ܵ ,ܺ ሻ .  Moreover, assume that the CSI is also known at  the  second  receiver.  In  this  case,  the  capacity  region  is  the same as when both receivers have access to CSI and is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: The achievability is obtained from (10) by setting ׎ ؠ ܹ , ܸ ൌ ܻ ଵ and replacing ܻ ଶ with ሺ ܻ ଶ ܵ , ሻ . The converse part is derived from  (14)  by  considering  that ܫ ሺ ܻ ;ܸ ଵ ܵ| ሻ ൑ ܪ ሺ ܻ ଵ ܵ| ሻ ,  and ܻ ଵ ൌ ݂ ଵ ሺ ܵ ,ܺ ሻ . ■

As another scenario, we also determine the capacity region of the more-capable BC with non-causal CSI at the transmitter, for the case where both receivers have access to CSI.

Definition: The BC with CSI known non-causally at the transmitter is said to be more-capable if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all joint PDFs ܲ ௑|ௌ ሺ ݏ|ݔ ሻ .

Proposition 3: The capacity region of the two-user more-capable BC (16) with common message and with CSI known non-causally at the transmitter and also at both receivers is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: The achievability is derived from (10) by setting ܷ ؠ ܹ , ܺ ؠ ܸ ,  and  also  replacing ܻ ଵ with ሺ ܻ ଵ ܵ , ሻ and ܻ ଶ with ሺ ܻ ଶ ܵ , ሻ .  The converse  part  is  obtained  from  the  outer  bound  (14)  where  the relation (16) is also exploited. ■

In [4] an achievable rate region was derived for the degraded BC with non-causal CSI at the transmitter using superposition coding technique.  However,  the  capacity  region  remains  still  unknown. In  the  following,  we  derive  the  capacity  region  of  this  channel under  the  condition  that  the  signal  of  the  stronger  receiver  is  a deterministic function of the channel input and the channel state.

Definition: The two-user BC with CSI is said to be degraded if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It can be easily verified that the degraded BC with CSI (18), also satisfies the more-capable condition (16).

Theorem  6: The  capacity  region  of  the  degraded  BC  (18)  with common  message  and  with  non-causal  CSI  at  the  transmitter, wherein there exists a deterministic function ݂ ଵ ࣲ : ൈ ࣭ ՜ ࣳ ଵ such that ܻ ଵ ൌ ݂ ଵ ሺ ܵ ,ܺ ሻ , is given by the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, the availability of CSI at the stronger receiver, i.e., ܻ ଵ , does not affect the capacity region.

Proof: Refer to Appendix. ■

## D. The RC with CSI

Finally, consider the RC with non-causal CSI.

Figure 4. The RC with non-causal CSI.

<!-- image -->

Definition: The RC with CSI denoted by ሼ ܲ ,࣭ ௌ ሺ ݏ ሻ, ࣲ,ࣲ ௥ ࣳ , ௥ ,ࣳ , Զሺ ݕ ,ݕ ௥ ݔ ,ݔ| ௥ ݏ , ሻሽ ,  is  a  channel  with  the source  input  alphabet ࣲ ,  the  relay  input  alphabet ࣲ ௥ ,  the  relay output alphabet ࣳ ௥ and the receiver (destination) output alphabet ࣳ . The channel state is the RV ܵ which is distributed over the set ࣭ according  to ܲ ௌ ሺ ݏ ሻ .  The  transition  probability  function  of  the channel Զሺ ݕ ,ݕ ௥ ݔ ,ݔ| ௥ ݏ , ሻ describes  the  relation  of  channel  input, channel  state  and  channel  outputs.  The  channel  model  has  been depicted  in  Fig.  4.  The  transmitter  sends  a  message  over  the channel  and  the  relay  assists  the  transmission  of  information  to the  receiver.  The  receiver  is  required  to  decode  the  transmitted message.

In  [6],  the  case  where  perfect  CSI  is  known  non-causally  at  the transmitter  and  also  at  the  relay  node  was  considered  and  an achievable rate was derived for the channel using the decode-andforward  technique.  In  the  next  theorem,  we  establish  a  new achievable rate for this channel based on the partial decode-andforward technique [20].

Proposition  4: The  following  is  an  achievable  rate  for  the  RC with CSI known non-causally at the transmitter and at the relay node:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  the  supremum  in  (20)  is  taken  over  all  joint  PDFs ܲ ௑ೝ௎ೝ௑௏௎|ௌ ሺ ݔ ௥ ݑ , ௥ ݏ|ݑ ,ݒ ,ݔ , ሻ that factor as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and subjected to:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: Refer to [14]. ■

Note  that  the  capacity  of  the  deterministic  and  orthogonal  RC without CSI is obtained using the achievable rate derived based on  the  partial  decode-and-forward  technique  [20],  [21],  [22]; unfortunately, for the channel with CSI it does not seem that the achievable rate (20) leads to the capacity for the deterministic or orthogonal RC with CSI.

As the second scenario, we consider the RC with CSI where CSI is  a  correlated  pair ܵ ൌ ሺ ܵ ଵ ܵ , ଶ ሻ :  The  transmitter has access noncausally to both ܵ ଵ and ܵ ଶ , while the relay has access non-causally only to ܵ ଵ .  In  the  next theorem, we derive an achievable rate for this channel using the decode-and-forward technique.

Theorem  7: Consider  the  RC  with  CSI ܵ ൌ ሺ ܵ ଵ ܵ , ଶ ሻ wherein  the transmitter  has  access  non-causally  to  both ܵ ଵ and ܵ ଶ ,  but  the relay  has  access  non-causally  only  to ܵ ଵ .  The  following  is  an achievable rate:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  the  supremum  in  (23)  is  taken  over  all  joint  PDFs ܲ ௑ೝ௎ೝ௑௎|ௌభௌమ ሺ ݔ ௥ ݑ , ௥ ݏ|ݑ ,ݔ , ଵ ݏ , ଶ ሻ that factor as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark: The  achievable  rate  (23)  will  be  used  in  Theorem  8  to prove  a  capacity  result  for  the  Gaussian  channel  with  additive interferences.

Finally, consider the degraded Gaussian RC  with additive interferences. The channel is formulated as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܺ and ܺ ௥ are  the  transmitter  input  and  the  relay  input, respectively; ܻ ௥ and ܻ are the received signals at the relay and the receiver, respectively; ܼ ௥~ ࣨ ሺ0, ܰ ௥ ሻ and ܼ ௗ ~ ࣨ ሺ0, ܰ ௗ ሻ are independent Gaussian noises and ܵ ௥~ ࣨ ൫0, ܲ ௌ ೝ ൯ and ܵ ௗ ~ ࣨ ൫0, ܲ ௌ ೏ ൯ are additive Gaussian interferences. The Gaussian noises ܼ ௥ and ܼ ௗ are independent of ሺ ܵ ௥ ܵ , ௗ ሻ , but ܵ ௥ and ܵ ௗ can be correlated. The input signals are power constrained, i.e., ॱሾ ܺ ଶ ሿ ൑ ܲ and ॱሾ ܺ ௥ ଶ ሿ ൑ ܲ ௥ .

Note  that  the  channel  (25)  when ܵ ௥ ܵ ؠ ௗ ׎ ؠ reduces  to  the degraded Gaussian RC for which the capacity was established in [20]. This channel was considered in [6] for the case of ܵ ௥ ܵ ؠ ௗ ؠ ܵ ሚ ,  where ܵ ሚ is  non-causally  known  at  the  transmitter  and  at  the relay.  It  was  shown  that  in  this  case  the  capacity  is  the  same  as when the interference ܵ ሚ is  also  available at the receiver; in other words,  the  capacity  is  the  same  as  when  there  is  no  additive interference  in  the  channel.  In  the  following,  by  considering  the generalized model (25) we derive new results.

Firstly,  we  consider  the  case  where  the  relay  node  knows  (noncausally) the pair ሺ ܵ ௥ ܵ , ௗ ሻ , but the transmitter knows only the part ܵ ௗ .  Since  the  relay  knows ܵ ௥ ,  this  part  of  interference  can  be subtracted  from  the  received  signal  at  the  relay;  thereby  the channel is equivalent to the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Again,  because  the  relay  knows ܵ ௗ ,  it  can  add  this  part  of  the interference to its received signal; thereby, the channel is equivalent to the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ܵ ௗ is available non-causally at the transmitter and the relay node.  On  the  other  hand,  the  model  (27)  is  similar  to  that  one considered in [6]. Therefore, the following result is established.

Proposition  5: The  capacity  of  the  degraded  Gaussian  RC  with additive  interferences  (25)  in  which  the  relay  has  access  noncausally to the pair ሺ ܵ ௥ ܵ , ௗ ሻ ,  but  the  transmitter has access noncausally  only  to  the  part ܵ ௗ ,  is  the  same  as  when  there  is  no additive interference in the channel and is given by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the previous scenario to achieve a full interference cancellation it  was  required  that  the  relay  knows  both  interferences,  i.e., ሺ ܵ ௥ ܵ , ௗ ሻ .    Now,  let  us  consider  an  interesting  scenario  regarding the  availability  of  the  interferences  at  the  users,  as  follows.  We assume  that  the  transmitter  has  access  non-causally  to  both interferences ሺ ܵ ௥ ܵ , ௗ ሻ , the relay has access non-causally to the part of  interference  which  is  added  to  the  received  signal  at  the receiver,  i.e., ܵ ௗ ,  and  the  receiver  has  access  to  the  part  of interference which is added to the received signal at the relay, i.e., ܵ ௥ .  Note  that  in  this  scenario  no  interference  subtraction  can  be performed  at  the  relay  and  the  receiver;  nonetheless,  in  the following  theorem  we  show  that  a  full  interference  cancellation can be achieved.

Theorem  8: The  capacity  of  the  degraded  Gaussian  RC  with additive  interferences  (25)  wherein  the  transmitter  knows  noncausally  both  interferences ܵ ௥ ܵ , ௗ ,  the  relay  knows  non-causally ܵ ௗ and  the  receiver  knows ܵ ௥ ,  is  the  same  as  when  there  is  no interference in the channel and is given by (28).

Proof: Refer to Appendix. ■

## III. CONCLUSION

In  this  paper,  new  capacity  inner  and  outer  bounds  were established for the multiuser channels with non-causal CSI at the transmitters,  and  also  the  actual  capacity  region  was  derived  in some  special cases. It seems that for discrete deterministic channels with non-causal CSI at the transmitters, the availability of CSI  at  the  deterministic  receivers  does  not  affect  the  capacity region.  This  result  is  similar  to  Gaussian  channel  with  additive interference wherein the capacity when the transmitter has access to CSI non-causally is the same as when the receiver also knows it.

## REFERENCES

- [1] C.  E.  Shannon,  'Channels  with  side  information  at  the  transmitter,' IBM Journal Res. and Develop., vol. 2, pp. 289-293, Oct. 1958.
- [2] S.  I.  Gel'fand  and  M.  S.  Pinsker,  'Coding  for  channel  with  random parameters,' Prob. of Contr. Inf. Theory , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 19-31, 1980.
- [3] M. H. M. Costa, 'Writing on dirty paper,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 439-441, May 1983.
- [4] Y.  Steinberg,  'Coding  for  the  degraded  broadcast  channel  with  random parameters,  with  causal  and  noncausal  side  information,' IEEE  Trans.  Inf. Theory , vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2867-2877, Aug. 2005.
- [5] S.  Sigurjonsson  and  Y.  H.  Kim,  'On  multiple  user  channels  with  state information at the transmitters,' in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT'05) , Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 72-76.
- [6] Y-H. Kim, A. Sutivong, and S. Sigurjonsson, 'Multiple user writing on dirty paper,' in  Proc.  IEEE  Int.  Symp.  Information  Theory  (ISIT'04), Chicago, USA, Jun./Jul  2004, p. 534.
- [7] S. A. Jafar, 'Capacity with causal and noncausal side information-A unified view,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 5468-5475, Dec. 2006.
- [8] A. Zaidi, S. P. Kotagiri, J. N. Laneman, and L. Vandendorpe, 'Cooperative relaying  with  state  available  noncausally  at  the  relay', IEEE  Trans.  Inf. Theory , vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2272-2298, May 2010.
- [9] G. Keshet, Y. Steinberg, and N. Merhav, 'Channel coding in the presence of side information,' Foundation and Trends in Communications and Information Theory , 2008.
- [10] R. Khosravi-Farsani, F. Marvasti, 'Multiple access channels with cooperative encoders and channel state information' Submitted to European Transactions on Telecommunications. Sep. 2010. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1009.6008.
- [11] Y.  Steinberg  and  S.  Shamai  (Shitz),  'Achievable  rates  for  the  broadcast channel  with  states  known  at  the  transmitter," in  Proc.  IEEE  Int.  Symp. Information Theory (ISIT'05) , Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 2184-2188.
- [12] A.  El  Gamal  and  Y.  H.  Kim,  'Lectures  on  network  information  theory,' 2010. Available online at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1001.3404.
- [13] C.  Nair  and  A.  El  Gamal,  'An  outer  bound  to  the  capacity  region  of  the broadcast channel,' IEEE Trans. Info. Theory , vol. IT-53, pp. 350-355, Jan. 2007.
- [14] R.  Khosravi-Farsani,  F.  Marvasti,  'Capacity  bounds  for  multiuser  channels with channel state information', in preparation.
- [15] T.  M.  Cover  and  M.  Chiang,  'Duality  between  channel  capacity  and  rate distortion with two-sided state information,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1629-1638, Jun. 2002.
- [16] T. Philosof and R. Zamir, 'On the loss of single-letter characterization: The dirty  multiple  access  channel,' IEEE Trans. Inf.  Theory ,  vol.  55,  no.  6,  pp. 2442-2454, Jun. 2009.
- [17] K.  Marton,  'A  coding  theorem  for  the  discrete  memoryless  broadcast channel,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 306-311, May 1979.
- [18] Y. Liang and G. Kramer, 'Rate regions for relay broadcast channels,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 3517-3535, Oct. 2007.
- [19] C.  Nair,  A.  El  Gamal,  and  Y-K.  Chia,  'An  achievability  scheme  for  the compound channel with state noncausally available at the encoder,' available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1004.3427.
- [20] T. Cover and A. El Gamal, 'Capacity theorems for the relay channel,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. IT-25, no. 5, pp. 572-584, Sep. 1979.
- [21] A.  El  Gamal  and  M.  Aref,  'The  capacity  of  the  semideterministic  relay channel,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. IT-28, no. 3, p. 536, May 1982.
- [22] A.  El  Gamal  and  S.  Zahedi,  'Capacity  of  relay  channels  with  orthogonal components,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory ,  vol.  51,  no.  5,  pp.  1815-1817, May 2005.
- [23] A. Aminzadeh Gohari, A. El Gamal, and V. Anantharam, 'On an outer bound and an inner bound for the general broadcast channel,' Int. Symp. on Info. Theory (ISIT) , Jul. 2010.

## ¾ Proof of proposition 1:

The  achievability  is  obtained  from  (4)  by  setting ܸ ௜ ൌ ܻ ௜ ݅ , ൌ 1,2 ,  where  the  equations ܪ ሺ ܻ ଵ ܻ| ଶ ܵ , ଵ ሻ ൌ ܪ ሺ ܻ ଵ ܵ| ଵ ሻ and ܪ ሺ ܻ ଶ ܻ| ଵ ܵ , ଶ ሻ ൌ ܪ ሺ ܻ ଶ ܵ| ଶ ሻ are applied. For the converse part, let us assume that the CSI ሺ ܵ ଵ ܵ , ଶ ሻ is available at the receiver. Consider a length-݊ code with vanishing average error probability for the channel. By Fano's inequality, one can show:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ߳ ଵ,௡ ՜ 0 as ݊ ՜ ∞ ,  equality  (a)  holds  because ܻ ௧ ൌ ൫ ܻ ଵ,௧ ܻ , ଶ,௧ ൯ is  a  deterministic  function  of ൫ ܺ ଵ,௧ ܺ , ଶ,௧ ܵ , ଵ,௧ ܵ , ଶ,௧ ൯ ,  and  equality (b) holds because ܻ ଶ,௧ is a deterministic function of ൫ ܺ ଶ,௧ ܵ , ଶ,௧ ൯ . Similarly, we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ߳ ଶ,௡ ՜ 0 as ݊ ՜ ∞ .  Note  that  the  PDF ܲ ൫ ݔ ଵ,௧ ݔ , ଶ,௧ ห ݏ ଵ,௧ ݏ , ଶ,௧ ൯, ݐ ൌ 1, … , ݊ ,  does  not  factor  as ܲ ൫ ݔ ଵ,௧ ห ݏ ଵ,௧ ൯ ܲ ൫ ݔ ଶ,௧ ห ݏ ଶ,௧ ൯ ;  however, due  to  the  orthogonal  property  of  the  channel  the  expressions  appeared  in ሺ .ܣ 1ሻ and ሺ .ܣ 2ሻ depend  only  on  the  marginal  PDFs ܲ ൫ ݔ ଵ,௧ ห ݏ ଵ,௧ ݏ , ଶ,௧ ൯ ൌ ܲ ൫ ݔ ଵ,௧ ห ݏ ଵ,௧ ൯ and ܲ ൫ ݔ ଶ,௧ ห ݏ ଵ,௧ ݏ , ଶ,௧ ൯ ൌ ܲ ൫ ݔ ଶ,௧ ห ݏ ଶ,௧ ൯ , respectively. Therefore, without loss of generality we can consider the bounds ሺ .ܣ 1ሻ and ሺ .ܣ 2ሻ under the PDFs of the form ܲ ൫ ݔ ଵ,௧ ห ݏ ଵ,௧ ൯ ܲ ൫ ݔ ଶ,௧ ห ݏ ଶ,௧ ൯, ݐ ൌ 1, … , ݊ , as desired. ■

## ¾ Proof of Theorem 1:

Consider a length-݊ code with vanishing error probability for the channel. Define new RVs ܸ ଵ,௧ ܸ , ଶ,௧ ݐ , ൌ 1, … , ݊ , as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Fano's inequality we can write:

ܴ݊

ଵ ൑

ܫ

ሺ

ܯ

ଵ

ܻ ;

௡ ,

ܯ

ଶ ሻ ൅

߳݊

ଵ,௡

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ߳ ଵ,௡ ՜ ∞ as ݊ ՜ ∞ . Now, using the Csiszar-Korner lemma, we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and also,

## APPENDIX

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By substituting ሺ .ܣ 5ሻ and ሺ .ܣ 6ሻ in ሺ .ܣ 4ሻ , we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Symmetrically, we can derive:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ߳ ଶ,௡ ՜ ∞ as ݊ ՜ ∞ . For the sum-rate by following the same lines as single-user channel [2] one can show:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by applying a standard time-sharing argument the outer bound (8) is derived. ■

## ¾ Proof of Remark 2 of Theorem 2:

First note that by setting ׎ؠܹ and ܴ ଴ ൌ 0 in (10), our achievable rate region reduces to the one reported in [12, p.7-53]. Based on the result of [23, Lemma 1], it is readily derived that our achievable rate region (10) strictly contains that of [12, p. 7-53]. In fact, this strict inclusion holds even for the case of ԡ ࣭ ԡ ൌ 1 . Now, consider the rate region reported in [11, Sec. V] which is expressed by the following constraints:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ሾ ܽ ሿ ା ൌ maxሼ0, ܽ ሽ .  The  achievable rate  region  of  [11,  Sec.  V]  is  the  set  of  all  triples ሺ ܴ ଴ ܴ , ଵ ܴ , ଶ ሻ satisfying ሺ .ܣ 10ሻ for  some joint PDFs ܲ ௑௏௎ௐ|ௌ ሺ ݏ|ݓ ,ݑ ,ݒ ,ݔ ሻ . Given such a joint PDF ܲ ௏௎ௐ௑ , we first show if ሺ ܴ ଴ ܴ , ଵ ܴ , ଶ ሻ satisfies ሺ .ܣ 10ሻ , it also belongs to our rate region (10). First note that, for every joint PDF ܲ ௑௏௎ௐௌ ሺ ݏ ,ݓ ,ݑ ,ݒ ,ݔ ሻ we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To see this equality, consider the left hand side of ሺ .ܣ 11ሻ . We can write:

ܫ ሺ ܵ;ܸ,ܹ ሻ ൅ ܫ ሺ ܵ;ܷ,ܹ ሻ ൅ ܫ ሺ ܵ ,ܹ|ܸ ;ܷ ሻ ൌ ܫ ሺ ܵ;ܹ ሻ ൅ ܫ ሺ ܹ|ܵ ;ܸ ሻ ൅ ܫ ሺ ܵ ,ܹ|ܸ ;ܷ ሻ ൅ ܫ ሺ ܵ;ܷ,ܹ

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also, since ሾ ܽ ሿ ା ൒ ܽ , we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, by definition of ሾ ܽ ሿ ା , one can easily derive:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Next, from ሺ .ܣ 10 ݀ כ ሻ and ሺ .ܣ 12ሻ , we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where equality (a) is obtained by ሺ .ܣ 11ሻ . Similarly,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, by adding the two sides of ሺ .ܣ 10 ܽ כ ሻ and ሺ .ܣ 1 ݀ כ ሻ , and also considering ሺ .ܣ 13ሻ , we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where (a) is due to ሺ .ܣ 11ሻ . Therefore, by ሺ .ܣ 10 ܾ כ ሻ , ሺ .ܣ 10 ܿ כ ሻ , ሺ .ܣ 14ሻ , ሺ .ܣ 15ሻ , and ሺ .ܣ 16ሻ , we derive that ሺ ܴ ଴ ܴ , ଵ ܴ , ଶ ሻ belongs to our rate region (10).

Then, we show that our rate region can strictly contain that of [11, Sec. V]. Consider the scenario of broadcasting only a common message, i.e., ܴ ଵ ൌ ܴ ଶ ൌ 0 . In this case, due to ሺ .ܣ 10 ܽ כ ሻ it is readily derived that the maximum common rate which can be achieved by the rate region of [11, Sec. V], denoted by ܴ ଴ ௌௌ , at most is as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where equality (a) holds because by setting ׎ؠܹ , the argument of the maximization given above is zero and hence it can take also non-negative values. Now, consider our achievable rate region (10). By setting ܴ ଵ ൌ ܴ ଶ ൌ 0 in (10), we obtain that the following rate can be achieved:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On  the  one  hand,  by  setting ׎ ؠ ܸ ؠ ܷ , ሺ .ܣ 18ሻ reduces  to ሺ .ܣ 17ሻ ,  (note  that,  for  every ܽ and ܾ ,  we  have min ሺ ܾ ,ܽ ሻ ൑ ௔ା௕ ଶ ); therefore, our lower bound on the common rate is at least as large as ܴ ଴ ௌௌ given by ሺ .ܣ 17ሻ .  Now, we show that indeed the common rate  achievable  by  our  rate  region  (10)  can  be  strictly  larger  than ܴ ଴ ௌௌ .  To  prove  this,  we  adapt  a  recent  result  derived  in  [19]  for broadcasting a common message to two receivers where the transmitter has access to non-causal CSI. Precisely speaking, the authors in [19, Th. 1] established the following achievable rate for this scenario, which we denote by ܴ ଴ ோீ஼ ,:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In general, ܴ ଴ ோீ஼ is  larger than both our lower bound given in ሺ .ܣ 18ሻ and ܴ ଴ ௌௌ given in ሺ .ܣ 17ሻ .  Nevertheless, we demonstrate that there exists channels for which our lower bound and ܴ ଴ ோீ஼ coincide and achieve the capacity, while ܴ ଴ ௌௌ is strictly suboptimal. In fact, one example is justly the channel considered in [19, Sec. III]. We do not discuss the details of this example as can be found in [19, Sec. III]. For the mentioned example, the authors proved that the capacity can be achieved by setting ׎ؠܹ , ܻ ؠ ܸ ଵ and ܻ ؠ ܷ ଶ in ሺ .ܣ 19ሻ ;  while ܴ ଴ ௌௌ is  strictly  suboptimal.  On  the  one  hand,  by  this  choice  of  auxiliary  RVs  our  lower  bound  given  in ሺ .ܣ 18ሻ and ܴ ଴ ோீ஼ coincide, which are equal to:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, for the example given in [19, Sec. III] our lower bound also achieves the capacity, while ܴ ଴ ௌௌ is strictly suboptimal. This proves the desired result. ■

## ¾ Proof of Proposition 2:

For the direct part, by setting ׎ؠܹ , ܻ ؠ ܸ ଵ , ܻ ؠ ܷ ଶ , in the achievable rate region (10) we derive:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

One  the  one  hand,  by  the  condition  (12)  we  have: ܪ ሺ ܻ ଵ ܻ , ଶ ܵ| ሻ ൌ ܪ ሺ ܻ ଵ ܵ| ሻ ൅ ܪ ሺ ܻ ଶ ܵ| ሻ .  Therefore,  the  third  constraint  of ሺ .ܣ 21ሻ is redundant. The converse part is derived using the cut-set outer bound for channels with CSI. ■

## ¾ Proof of Theorem 4:

Consider a length-݊ code with vanishing average error probability for the channel. Define new RVs ܷ ௧ ܸ , ௧ ݐ , ൌ 1, … , ݊ , as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Fano's inequality, one can write:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ߳ ଵ,௡ ՜ ∞ as ݊ ՜ ∞ . Also, we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ߳ ଶ,௡ ՜ ∞ as ݊ ՜ ∞ . For the sum rate, i.e., ܴ ଴ ൅ ܴ ଵ ൅ ܴ ଶ , we can write:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the first term of ሺ .ܣ 25ሻ we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also, for the second term of ሺ .ܣ 25ሻ we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By combining ሺ .ܣ 25ሻ -ሺ .ܣ 27ሻ , we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

One the one hand, based on the the Csiszar-Korner lemma we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, by substituting ሺ .ܣ 29ሻ in ሺ .ܣ 28ሻ we derive:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Again, for the sum rate we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the first term of ሺ .ܣ 31ሻ , we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also, for the second term of ሺ .ܣ 31ሻ , we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, by combining ሺ .ܣ 32ሻ and ሺ .ܣ 33ሻ , we derive:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where equality (a) is due to Csiszar-Korner lemma. Finally, by applying a time-sharing argument, we obtain (14). ■

## ¾ Proof of Theorem 6:

The achievability of (19) can be obtained from (10) by substituting ܹ ൌ ܷ and ܸ ൌ ܻ ଵ , (when the channel is degraded, the resulting rate region from this substitution includes (19) as a subset). Furthermore, the achievability of (19) can be directly proved using the superposition coding similar to [4]. For the converse part, consider a length-݊ code with vanishing error probability for the channel.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Define the RVs ܷ ௧ ؜ ሺ ܯ ଴ ܯ , ଶ ܻ , ଶ ௧ିଵ ܵ , ௧ାଵ ௡ ሻ, ݐ ൌ 1, … , ݊ .  The second bound of (19) is derived by following the same lines as [2]. To derive the first bound, we can write:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ߳ ଵ,௡ ՜ 0 as ݊ ՜ ∞ , equality (a) holds because the channel is degraded and inequality (b) holds because conditioning does not increase the entropy.  On the one hand, the presented proof  for the converse part continues to hold for the case where CSI is also available at the stronger receiver, i.e., the first receiver. ■

## ¾ Proof of Theorem 8:

Note that the scenario considered in this theorem can be derived from that one of Theorem 7 by replacing ܵ ଵ with ܵ ௗ , ܵ ଶ with ܵ ௥ , and ܻ with ሺ ܵ ,ܻ ௥ ሻ . Therefore, the following rate is achievable:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the supremum in ሺ .ܣ 37ሻ is  taken  over  all  joint  PDFs ܲ ௑ೝ௎ೝ௑௎|ௌೝௌ ೏ ൌ ܲ ௑ೝ௎ೝ|ௌ ೏ ܲ ௑௎|௎ೝௌೝ ௌ ೏ .  Let א ߙ ሾ0,1ሿ ,  and ܺ ௥~ ࣨ ሺ0, ܲ ௥ ሻ and ܺ ଴~ ࣨ ሺ0, ܲߙ ሻ be two independent Gaussian RVs which are also independent of ሺ ܵ ௥ ܵ , ௗ ሻ . Define:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By substituting ሺ .ܣ 38ሻ in ሺ .ܣ 37ሻ , we derive the rate (28). ■

where,