g3

g3

g3

g3

## Unsteady Hydromagnetic Flow Of Viscoelastic Fluid Down An Open Inclined Channel g3

S.Sreekanth1,, R.Saravana2, S.Venkataramana3, R.Hemadri Reddy4

1Department of Mathematics, Sreenivasa Institute of Technology and Management Studies, Chittoor 517127, A.P. India.

2 &amp; 3Department of Mathematics, Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati, A.P. India. 4School of Advanced Sciences, VIT University, Vellore - 632 014, T.N. India.

Abstract-In this paper, we study the unsteady hydromagnetic flow of a Walter's fluid (Model B') down an  open  inclined  channel  of  width  2a  and  depth  d under gravity, the walls of the channel being normal to the  surface  of  the  bottom  under  the  influence  of  a uniform transverse magnetic field. A uniform tangential  stress  is  applied  at  the  free  surface  in  the direction  of  flow.  We  have  evaluated  the  velocity distribution  by  using  Laplace  transform  and  finite Fourier Sine transform technique. The velocity distribution has been obtained taking different form of time dependent pressure gradient g(t), viz., i) constant ii)  exponential  decreasing  function  of  time  and  iii) Cosine  function  of  time.  The  effects  of  magnetic parameter M, Reynolds number R and the viscoelastic parameter K are discussed on the velocity distribution in three different cases.

Key  words:  Walter's  B'  fluid,  open  inclined  channel, Laplace  transform  and  finite  Fourier  Sine  transform technique.

## g1005g856g3g47g69g100g90g75g24g104g18g100g47g75g69g3g3

g3 A flowing liquid is said to have a free surface when the upper part of the bounding surface of the liquid  is  in  contact  with  the  overlying  atmosphere, rather than with a solid, as would be the case of the flow  were  in  a  pipe  completely  full  of  the  liquid.  A flow  with  a  free  surface  proceeding  in  a  natural  or artificial channel or conduit is called an openchannels  flow.  Open-channels  may  be  divided  into two types namely (i) Natural channels and (ii) Artificial  channels.  Natural  channels  range  inform from the bounder-strewn bed of a mountain torrent to the relatively uniform channel of a large river. Artificial channels are man-made and are constructed  in  many  forms.  A  pipe  in  which  water flows  with  a  free  surface  and  flume  of  rectangular cross section constructed of sheet iron are two kinds of artificial channels. Other types are canals excavated  in  earth  or  blasted  in  rock,  which  either are  left  unlined  or  lined  with  smooth  concrete  or another  suitable  material.  Unlined  or  lined  tunnels bored  through  rock  may  also  contain  free  surface flows.

The  flow  of  a  liquid  in  an  open  inclined channel with a free surface has a wide application in the designs of drainage, irrigation canals, flood discharge  channels  and  coating  to  paper  rolls  etc. Hence  the  flow  of  a  liquid  in  an  open  inclined channel  with  a  free  surface  under  gravity  has  long been studied  experimentally  and  several  interesting empirical results have been reported by many investigators [3, 6, 7, 10, 11, 14]. The steady laminar flow of a viscous fluid flowing down an open inclined channel  has  been  discussed  by  Satyaprakash  [13], Gupta et  al [4]  have  studied  the  flow  of  a  viscous fluid through  a  porous  medium  down  an  open inclined channel. Venkataramana and Bathaiah [18] have  studied  the  flow  of  a  hydromagnetic  viscous fluid  down  an  open  inclined  channel  with  naturally permeable  bed  under  the  influence  of  a  uniform transverse  magnetic  field.  Unsteady  laminar  flow  of an  incompressible  viscous  fluid  between  porous, parallel  flat  plates  has  been  investigated  by  Singh [12], taking (i) both plates are at rest and  (ii) Generalized plane Coutte flow. The free surface was exposed  to  atmospheric  pressure  and  bottom  was taken  as  impermeable.  Bakhmeteff  [1],  Henderson [5] and Chow [2] have discussed many types of open channel flows. Recently, many authors [8, 9 and 14] have studied the flow of Walter's B' fluid.

The subject of Rheology is of great technological importance in many branches of industry. The problem arises of designing apparatus to  transport  or  to  process  substances  which  cannot g3

g3

be  governed  by  the  classical  stress-strain  velocity relations.  Example of such substances and process are many, the extrusion of plastics, in the manufacture  of  rayon,  nylon  or  other  textile  fibres, viscoelastic  effects  transported  or  forced  through spinnerts and in the manufacture of lubricating grease and rubber.

Non-Newtonian fluids have wide importance in  the  present  day  technology  and  industries;  the Walter's  fluid  is  one  of  such  fluid.  The  model  of Walter's B fluid is chosen for our study as it involves non-Newtonian parameter. The Cauchy stress tensor T in  such  a  fluid  is  related  to  the  motion  in  the following manner

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In  this  equation P is  the  pressure, I is  the  Identity tensor  and  the  rate  of  strain  tensor  e  is  defined  by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v is  the  velocity  vector, ∇ is  the  gradient operator and t δ δ denotes the convicted differentiation  of  a  tensor  quantity  in  relation  to  the material  in  motion.  The  convicted  differentiation  of the rate of strain tensor is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here 0 η and are, respectively, the limiting viscosity at small rate of shear and the short memory coefficient which are defined through

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g3

( ) N τ being  the  relaxation  spectrum  as  introduced by Walter's [19,  20]. This  idealized  model is a  valid approximation of Walter's fluid (model B ' ) taking very short memory into account, so that terms involving

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

have been neglected.

In addition to equation (1.1), the equation of motion and continuity are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this paper, we study the unsteady hydromagnetic  flow  of  a  Walter's  fluid  (model  B ' ) down an open inclined channel under gravity of width 2a  and  depth  d,  the  walls  of  the  channel  being normal  to  the  surface  of  the  bottom,  under  the influence  of  uniform  transverse  magnetic  field.  A uniform tangential stress is applied at the free surface  in  the  direction  of  flow.  We  have  evaluated the  velocity  distribution  by  using  Laplace  Transform and Finite Fourier Sine Transform techniques. Here it  is  assumed  that  (i)  the  fluid  flows  in  the  steady state  for 0 t ≤ ,  (ii)  Unsteady  state  occurs  at 0 t &gt; and  (iii)  the  unsteady  motion  is  influenced  by  time dependent pressure gradient. The velocity distribution  has  been  obtained  in  some  particular cases i.e. when (i) ( ) * = g t c (ii) ( ) * bt g t c e -= and (iii) ( ) * cos g t c bt = ,  where  b  and * c are  constants. The  effects  of  magnetic  parameter  M,  Reynolds number R and viscoelastic parameter K are investigated on the velocity distribution in three different cases.

g3

g3

## 2. FORMULATION AND SOLUTION OF THE PROBLEM

We consider the unsteady Hydromagnetic flow of a Walter's  fluid  (model  B ' )  down  an  open  inclined channel of width  2a and depth  d under gravity, the walls  of  the  channel  being  normal to  the  surface  of the bottom under the influence of uniform transverse magnetic  field. A  uniform  tangential stress S  is applied at the free surface. The  bottom  of  the channel is taken at angle ( ) 0 / 2 β β π &lt; ≤ with the horizontal.  The  x-axis  is  taken  along  central  line  in the  direction  of  the  flow  at  the  free  surface,  y-axis along  the  depth  of  the  channel  and  z-axis  along width  of  the  channel.  A  uniform  magnetic  field  of intensity o H is  introduced  in  y-direction.  Therefore the  velocity  and  the  magnetic  field  are  given  by ( ) , 0, 0 q u = and ( ) 0 0, , 0 H H = .  The  fluid  being slightly  conducting,  the  magnetic  Reynolds  number is much less than unity, so that the induced magnetic field can be neglected in comparison with the applied magnetic  field  (Sparrow  and  Cess  [15]).  In the absence of  any  input  electric  field  the  equations  of continuity and motion of the unsteady hydromagnetic Walter's fluid  (model  B ' )  flowing  down  an  open inclined channel at t&gt;0 are given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where ρ = density of the fluid

g = acceleration due to gravity

p = pressure

µ = coefficient of viscosity

σ = electrical conductivity of the fluid

e µ = magnetic permeability

0 K = viscoelastic parameter

The boundary conditions are

g3

g3

g3

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 0 u is the initial velocity.

we introduce the following non-dimensional quantities

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  the  depth  of  the  channel  d  is  the  characteristic  length  and  the  mean  flow  velocity  U  is  the characteristic velocity.

In view of the equation (2.6), the equations (2.1) to (2.3) reduce to (dropping the superscript *)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The non-dimensional boundary conditions are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g3

g3

g3

## 3. METHOD OF SOLUTION

Assuming

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

substituting z = (2lf/ π )-1  in equation (2.7) reduces to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the boundary conditions are reduced to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, since 0 u is the initial velocity i.e. at 0 t ≤ , therefore taking ( ) g t P = in equation (3.2)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now to solve equation (3.2) we take Laplace transform of equation (3.2) with respect to t (Sneddon [16])

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

g3

g3

g3

Where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On taking the finite Fourier sine transform the equation (3.6) with respect to f (Sneddon [16])

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(3.8)

Where

2

2

1

=

+

+

-

s

M

H

Q

Ks

Now, the boundary conditions are reduced to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Integrating equation (3.8) under the boundary conditions (3.9), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, inverting the finite Fourier sine transform as given by (Sneddon [16])

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In equation (3.10) we get

g3

g3

g3

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On inverting Laplace transform as defined by (Sneddon[16])

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In equation (3.11), we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Particular cases

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using in equation (3.12), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If we take the limit 0, 0, M K → → ( ) * g t P C = = in equation (3.13) then we get the velocity distribution in the case of nonmagnetic and Newtonian fluid. In this case the velocity distribution is

g3

g3

g3

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is in agreement with Sathyaprakash [13]

## Case II

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## Case III

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4. CONCLUSIONS

Three distinct  time  dependent  pressure  gradient  namely  (i) ( ) * g t C = (ii) ( ) * bt g t C e -= and (iii) ( ) *cos g t C bt = have been chosen to discuss the velocity profiles. Figures (1) to (3), (4) to (6), (7) to (9) are

g3

g3

g3

drawn to investigate the effects of magnetic parameter M, time t and viscoelastic parameter K on the velocity distribution u in three different cases (i), (ii), (iii) respectively. In all the three cases we noticed that the velocity distribution increases with the increase in M or t where as it decreases with increase in K. Further we observe that in all the three cases the velocity profiles in nonmagnetic case are greater than with the magnetic case.

Table  (1)  is  drawn  to  bring  out  the  effects  of  Reynolds  number  R  on  velocity  distribution  in  three  different cases. We noticed that in all the three cases the velocity distribution decreases with the increase in R. Further it is observed that in all three cases the velocity profiles in nonmagnetic case are less than with the magnetic case.

## GRAPHS

<!-- image -->

g3

<!-- image -->

g3

g3

g3

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

g3

g3

g3

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

g3

g3

Table I

Case I   U against y for different R

Table II

Case II               U against y for different R

| R  M  y=0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  2  1  30.17  57  28.72  465  24.47  127  17.82  51  9.406  355  0  2  0  14.51  567  13.83  189  11.80  35  8.622  231  4.568  540  0  4  1  30.16  235  28.72  465  24.47  127  17.82  51  9.406  355  0  4  0  14.50  283  13.83  189  11.80  35  80622  231  4.568  54  0  6  1  30.14  952  28.72  465  24.47  127  17.82  51  9.406  355  0  6  0  14.48  990  13.83  189  11.80  35  8.622  231  4.568  54  0  8  1  30.13  668  28.72  465  24.47  127  17.82  51  9.406  355  0  8  0  14.47  716  13.83  189  11.80  35  8.622  231  4.568  54  0  1  0  1  30.12  385  28.72  465  24.47  127  17.82  51  9.406  35  0  1  0  0  14.46  432  13.83  189  11.80  35  8.622  231  4.568  54  0   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

g3

| R  M  y=0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  2  1  34.14  086  32.50  528  27.71  082  20.20  846  10.68  239  0  2  0  17.33  922  16.52  671  14.12  038  10.33  622  5.493  201  0  4  1  34.12  803  32.50  528  27.71  082  20.20  846  10.68  239  0  4  0  17.32  638  16.52  671  14.12  038  10.33  622  5.493  201  0  6  1  34.11  519  32.50  528  27.71  082  20.20  846  10.68  239  0  6  0  17.31  35  16.52  671  14.12  038  10.33  622  5.493  201  0  8  1  34.10  235  32.50  528  27.71  082  20.20  846  10.68  239  0  8  0  17.30  071  16.52  671  14.12  038  10.33  622  5.493  201  0  1  0  1  34.08  952  32.50  528  27.71  082  20.20  846  10.68  239  0  1  0  0  17.28  2788  16.52  671  14.12  038  10.33  622  5.493  201  0   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

g3

g3

## References

- [1] Bekhmeteff,  B.A.,  Hydralics  of  open  channels,  McGrawHill Book Company, New York, 1932.
- [2] Chow, V.T.,  open  channel  Hydraulics,  McGraw-Hill,  Inc., New-York, (1959).
- [3] Franzini, J.B., and Chisholm, P.S., Wat. Sewage wks 110, (1963), 342.
- [4] Gupta, P.C., Chaudhary, J.S., and Sharma, R.G., Indian J. Theor. Phys., 81 (1983), 65.
- [5] Henderson,  F.M.,  open  channel  flow,  The  Mac.  Millian company New York, 1966.
- [6] Johnson, J.W., Trans. Amc. Geophys. Un 25 (1944), 906.
- [7] Johnson,  J.W.,  and  O  Brieu,  M.P.,  Engng.  News.  Rec. 113(1934), 214.
- [8] Joneidi,  A.A.,  Domairry,  G.,  Babaelahi,  M.,  Meccanica Vol.45, (2010), 857-868.

[9]

- [10] Mahantesh  M.  Nandeppanavar.,  M.  Subhas  Abel.,  and Jagadish  Tawade,  Journal  of    Biorheology    Vol.  24.  No.1. (2009), 22-28.
- [11] Powell, R.W., Trans. ASCE, 3 (1946), 531.

g3

Table III Case III

## U against y for different R

| R  M  y=0  0.2  0.4  0.6  0.8  1  2  1  31.2881  29.79183  25.40008  18.52646  9.795776  0  2  0  15.78622  15.04873  12.86061  9.417838  5.008056  0  4  1  31.27597  29.79183  25.40008  18.52646  9.795776  0  4  0  15.77338  15.04873  12.86061  9.417838  5.008056  0  6  1  31.26314  29.79183  25.40008  18.52646  9.795776  0  6  0  15.76055  15.04873  12.86061  9.417838  5.008056  0  8  1  31.2503  29.79183  25.40008  18.52646  9.795776  0  8  0  15.74771  15.04873  12.86061  9.417838  5.008056  0  10  1  31.23747  29.79183  25.40008  18.52646  9.795776  0  10  0  15.73487  15.04873  12.86061  9.417838  5.008056  0   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

- [12] Powell, R.W., Trans. Amc, Geophys. Un. 31 (1950), 57.
- [13] Raveer Singh, Ph. D Thesis, Rajasthan University, Jaipur, 1992.
- [14] Satyaprakash, Indian J. Pure Appl. Maths. 2 (1971), 103.
- [15] Sharma  R.C,  Kumar  P,  Sharma  S.  Int.  J.  Appl.  Mech. Eng.Vol.7. No.2. (2002), 433-44.
- [16] Sparrow,  E.M.  and  Cess,  R.D.,  Trans.  ASME.,  J.  Appl. Mech., Vol. 29, No.1. (1962), 18.
- [17] Sneddon,  I.N., The  use  of integral transforms, Tata McGraw-Hill Book Co. Ltd.,        New Delhi,  (1974).
- [18] Vanoni, V.A., Civ. Engng., 11 (1941), 356.
- [19] Venkataramana, S., and Bathaiah, D., Ganit (J. Bangladesh Math Soc) Vol.2, No.2. (1972), P. 94-100.
9. [20]
10. Walter's, K., Quart. J. Math. Appl. Mech., 13 (1960), 444.