## EFFICIENT UTILIZATION OF CHANNELS USING DYNAMIC GUARD CHANNEL ALLOCATION WITH CHANNEL BORROWING STRATEGY IN HANDOFFS

Alagu S 1 , Meyyappan T 2

1 Research Scholar, Department of Computer Science and Engineering Alagappa University, Karaikudi, Tamilnadu, India

sivaalagu@hotmail.com

2 Associate Professor, Department of Computer Science and Engineering Alagappa University, Karaikudi, TamilNadu, India

meyslotus@yahoo.com

## ABSTRACT

User mobility in wireless data networks is increasing because of technological advances and the desire for voice and multimedia applications. These applications, however, require fast handoffs between base stations to maintain the quality of the connections. In this paper, the authors describe the use of novel and efficient  data  structure  which  dynamically  allocates  guard  channel  for  handoffs  and  introduces  the concept of channel borrowing strategy. The proposed scheme allocates the guard channels for handoff requests dynamically, based on the traffic load for certain time period. A new originating call in the cell coverage  area  also  uses  these  guard  channels  if  they  are  unused.  Our  basic  idea  is  to  allow  Guard channels  to  be  shared  between  new  calls  and  handoff  calls.  This  approach  maximizes  the  channel utilization.  The  simulation  results  prove  that  the  channel  borrowing  scheme  improves  the  overall throughput.

## KEYWORDS

Guard Channel, Dynamic, Channel Borrowing, Handoff,  QoS

## 1. INTRODUCTION

Mobility  is  the  most  important  feature  of  wireless  cellular  communication  system.  Usually continuous service  is achieved by supporting  handoff (or handover) from  one  cell to another. Handoff  is  the  process  of  changing  the  channel  (frequency,  timeslot,  spreading  code,  or combination of them) associated with the current connection while a call is in progress [3]. It is often initiated either by crossing a cell boundary or by deterioration in quality of signal in the current channel. Poorly designed handoff schemes tend to generate very heavy signaling traffic and thereby a dramatic decrease in the quality of service (QoS).

## 1.1. Mobile Communication system

A  cellular  network  allows  cellular  subscribers  to  wander  anywhere  in  the  region  and  remain connected  to  the  Public  Switched  Telephone  Networks  (PSTN)  via  their  wireless  mobile devices. A cellular network has a hierarchical structure and it is formed by connecting Mobile Stations (MS), Base Station (BS) and Mobile Switching Centre (MSC). The Base Station serves a cell which could be few kilometers in diameter. The cell is a part of a larger region, which has been partitioned into smaller regions such that there is a base station serving each cell. All BSs within the cluster are connected to MSC. Each MSC of a cluster is then connected to the MSC of  other  clusters  and  then  to  PSTN. The architecture  of the same  is  depicted in figure 1. The MSC stores information about the subscribers located within the cluster and is responsible for directing calls to them [5].

Neighboring cells overlap with each other to ensure the continuity of communications when the users  move  from  one  cell  to  another.  Certain  number  of  channels  is  allocated  to  each  base station. A channel in the system can be thought of as a fixed frequency bandwidth (FDMA), a specific  time-slot  within  a  frame  (TDMA),  or  a  particular  code  (CDMA),  depending  on  the multiple  access  technique  used.  BSs  and  MSCs  take  the  responsibility  of  allocating  channel resources to mobile stations [6].

Figure 1. Mobile Communication System

<!-- image -->

## 1.2. Handoff

Handoff (also called Handover) is the mechanism that transfers an ongoing call from one cell to another as a user moves through the coverage area of a cellular system. The handoff process is initiated  by  the  issuing  of  handoff  request.  The  power  received  by  the  MS  from  BS  of neighboring  cell  exceeds  the  power  received  from  the  BS  of  the  current  cell  by  a  certain amount.  This  is  a  fixed  value  and  is  called  the  handoff  threshold.  For  successful  handoff,  a channel must be granted to handoff request before the power received by the MS reaches the receiver's threshold. The handoff area is the area where the ratio of received power levels from the current and the target BS's is between the handoff and the receiver threshold [4][7][9]. Each handoff requires network resources to reroute the call to the new base station. Minimizing the expected  number  of  handoff  minimizes  the  switching  load.  Another  concern  is  delay.  If  the handoff does not occur quickly, the Quality of Service (QoS) may degrade below an acceptable level. Minimizing delay also minimizes co-channel interference. During handoff there is brief service  interruption.  As  the  frequency  of  these  interruptions  increases,  the  perceived  QoS  is reduced.  The  chance  of  dropping  a  call  due  to  factors  such  as  the  availability  of  channels increases  with  the  number  of  handoff  attempts.  As  the  rate  of  handoff  increases,  handoff algorithms  need  to  be  enhanced  so  that  the  perceived  QoS  does  not  degrade  and  the  cost  to cellular infrastructure does not increase.

## 2. LITERATURE SURVEY

Existing work addresses the concept of Fixed Channel Allocation Scheme (FCA) where there are no separate channels allocated for handoffs. The available channels are shared by both new originating calls and handoff calls in first come first serve basis [8]. Here handoff request and new  call  request  are  dealt  with  equality.  The  cell  doesn't  consider  the  difference  between Handoff request and new call request. It is intuitively clear that the termination of an ongoing call  due  to  handoff  failure  is  less  desirable  than  the  new  call  blocking.  Hence  the  Quality  of Service is not satisfied because the handoff blocking rate is as same as new call blocking rate. Many papers in the literature of related work address the categorization of the schemes based on guard  channel  concept  [1].  The  so  called  'Guard-channel'  (GC)  concept  offers  a  means  of improving the probability  of  a  successful  handoff  by  reserving  a  certain  number  of  channels allocated  exclusively  for  handoff  requests.  The  remaining  channels  can  be  shared  equally between handoff requests and new calls. Allocating Guard channels for Handoff improves the overall throughput which was discussed in our previous papers [10][11]. If the guard channel number is too big, the new call blocking rate will be high because several channels are set aside for handoff requests even when the traffic load is low. In this case, the resources are wasted by not serving either for handoff request or new call request. If the number is too small, the handoff blocking rate can't be guaranteed under high traffic load. So this scheme enhances the QoS by reducing  the  handoff  blocking  rate  in  a  stable  traffic  load.  While  when  the  traffic  load  is changing periodically or dynamically due to big event or working rush hours, it is not flexible enough to get good QoS.

## 3. PROPOSED WORK

In  this  paper,  the  authors  devise  a  scheme  called  Dynamic  Guard  Channel  Allocation  with Channel Borrowing Strategy (DGCA-CBS). In this scheme the channels for handoff requests are dynamically allocated based on the observation of certain past period of time in the network. Also, this scheme introduces a concept of channel borrowing in which the guard channels could be allocated to the new originating calls if they are unused. When a new originating call arises and if all the available channels are occupied it will check for the guard channels. If it is unused the new call will occupy the guard channel. The main aim is to utilize the available resources efficiently and also to balance the load in the network traffic. The following section presents the proposed scheme.

## 3.1. Dynamic Guard Channel Allocation with Channel Borrowing Strategy (DGCA-CBS)

A call being forced to terminate during the service is more annoying than a call being blocked at its  start.  Hence  the  handoff  call  blocking  probability  is  much  more  stringent  than  new  call blocking probability. Therefore, in the proposed scheme, priority is given to handoff requests by assigning SR channels  exclusively  for  handoff  calls  among  the  S  channels  in  a  cell.  The remaining SC (=S-SR) channels are shared by both originating calls and handoff requests. The selection  of  number  of  guard  channels  exclusively  for  handoff  call  is  essentially  important factor  to  get  good  Quality  of  Service.  For  different  type  of  traffic  load  and  mobility  factor, different  number  of  guard channels is needed to  be allocated. The  number of  guard channels can't  be  fixed  when  the  traffic  load  is  changing  with  the  time.  Hence  the  guard  channel allocation is  dynamically changed by  monitoring the  traffic condition for certain  time period. Also,  the  proposed  scheme  introduces  the  concept  of  channel  borrowing  strategy.  In  this strategy the exclusive guard channels are borrowed and allocated to new originating calls if the channel is unused. An originating call is blocked if channel is  not available in the target cell. The channel allocation model is shown in figure 2.

Figure 2. Dynamic Channel allocation model with priority for handoff calls.

<!-- image -->

In the proposed scheme, when a new call originates the BS will check for available channels in SC.  If  channel  is  not  free  in  S C  it  will  check  for  non  utilized  channels  in  S R.  If  channels  are available in SR then BS borrows the channels and assigns it to the new originating calls. The BS monitors the traffic for certain time period and records it. Based on the network traffic the BS dynamically  allocates  the  number  of  Guard  channels  exclusively  for  handoffs.  Generally  the number of handoff requests will be high in peak hours and is low during night and non peak hours. Hence based on the observed measurements the BS reallocates the guard channel. The entire  operation  is  controlled  by  BS  and  MSC  and  hence  the  scheme  is  Network  controlled handoff scheme [2].

As  the  number  of  Guard  Channels  allotted  plays  a  vital  role  to  the  key  performance,  it  is dynamically  altered  every  specific  time  period  say  t.  In  this  approach  the  number  of  guard channels  which  is  to  be  allocated  is  determined  through  optimizing  certain  performance  goal with service quality constraints. When a base station experiences high handoff blocking rate, the number of guard channels will be increased until the handoff blocking rate drops to below its threshold. When a base station does not get to use a significant portion of the guard channels over a period  of time, the  number  of  guard channels  is gradually  decreased until  most of the guard  channels  are  used  frequently.  By  doing  this,  the  handoff  blocking  rate  is  controlled  to close to its threshold. The flow chart for the proposed scheme is depicted in figure 3.

<!-- image -->

Figure 3. Flowchart represents DGCA-CBS

<!-- image -->

## 4.  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

The  authors  simulate  the  DGCA-CBS  algorithm  in  six  cells  as  a  part  of  full  network.  The simulation  program  is  implemented  in  Turbo  C++,  version  3.0,  and  run  under  MS  DOS  6.2 environment.  Object  oriented  approach  is  used  to  implement  the  real  world  environment. Results are directed to a text file and  graphs for the same are  obtained using MATLAB. The following graphs show the comparative study of the four schemes - Fixed Channel Allocation, Static Guard  Channel  Allocation,  Dynamic  Guard  Channel Allocation without channel borrowing and Dynamic Guard Channel Allocation with Channel Borrowing Strategy.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4. Fixed Channel Assignment scheme

Figure 5. Static Guard Channel Allocation scheme

<!-- image -->

Figure 6. Dynamic Guard Channel Allocation without Channel Borrowing scheme

<!-- image -->

Figure 7. Dynamic Guard Channel Allocation with Channel Borrowing strategy (DGCA-CBS)

<!-- image -->

Figure 4 shows the simulated output of the Fixed Channel Assignment scheme where there is no separate guard channels allocated for handoff request. From the  graph it is clear that handoff request  rejection  rate  is  high  than  the  new  call  rejection  rate.  Hence  the  performance  is  not satisfactory as handoff requests should be  given  higher priority. Figure 5 shows the  graph of Static Guard Channel Assignment scheme. This graph proves that the handoff blocking rate is reduced but the new call blocking rate is increased. Figure 6 shows the output of the Dynamic Guard channel allocation without channel borrowing scheme. From the graph it is apparant that the handoff blocking rate is considerably less than the new originating call blocking rate and the new call blocking rate is also better than graph in figure 5. Figure 7 shows the simulated output of the proposed scheme, Dynamic Guard Channel Allocation scheme with Channel Borrowing Strategy.  From  the  graph  it  is  evident  that  there  is  no  difference  for  handoff  calls  when compared to the  graph  in  figure  6,  but  for  new  call  there  is  an  improvement.  The  simulated output shows that there is a significant improvement in reducing the handoff request blocking rate and new call blocking rate in the proposed scheme DGCA-CBS, compared to the existing schemes. Hence there is a tradeoff.

## 5. CONCLUSION

In wireless mobile networks, as the cell size becomes smaller, handoffs occur more frequently. Careful  design  of  call  admission  control  scheme  guarantees  QoS  to  the  mobile  users.  In  this paper,  the  authors  approached  the  channel  allocation  control  scheme  in  a  new  way.  A  new Dynamic  Guard  Channel  Allocation  with  Channel  Borrowing  Strategy  (DGCA-CBS)  is designed  and  implemented.  The  objective  of  this  scheme  is  to  utilize  the  available  channel effectively.  The  main  disadvantage  of  Dynamic  Guard  channel  allocation  scheme  without channel borrowing strategy is new calls starving for channels while the guard channels remain unused.  The  concept  of  channel  borrowing  is  incorporated  in  the  proposed  scheme  which promises improvement in the new call blocking rate.

## REFERENCES

- [1] Guerin R, 'Queuing Blocking System with Two Arrival Streams and Guard Channels', IEEE Transactions on Communications, 1998.
- [2] Yi  Zhang  and  Derong  Liu, 'An  Adaptive  Algorithm  for  Call  Admission  Control  in  Wireless Networks' , IEEE 2001
- [3] QING-AN-ZENG and DHARMA P.AGARWAL, 'Handbook of Wireless Networks and Mobile Computing' ,John wiley &amp; sons, Inc., 2002
- [4] A.  Iera,  A.  Molinaro  and  S.  Marano, 'Handoff  Management  with  Mobility  Estimation  in Hierarchical Systems' ,  IEEE  Transactions  on  Vehicular  Technology,  vol.  51,  Sept.  2002,  pp. 915-934.
- [5] A. Hills and J. Schlegel, 'Rollabout: A wireless design tool,' IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 42, pp. 132-138, February 2004.
- [6] F. Siddiqui and S. Zeadally, "Mobility Management across Hybrid Wireless Networks: Trends and Challenges," Computer Communications, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1363-1385, May 2006.
- [7] Nasser.N,  Hasswa.  A  and  Hassanein.  H, 'Handoffs  in  Fourth  Generation  Heterogeneous Networks' , IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 44, pp. 96-103, 2006
- [8] Rami Tawil, Jaques Demergian, Guy Pujolle, 'A Trusted Handoff Decision Scheme for the Next Generation  Wireless  Networks' ,  IJCSNS  International  Journal  of  Computer  Science  and Network Security, VOL.8 No.6, June 2008
- [9] Yoo, S.-J.,et al., 'Analysis of fast handover mechanisms for hierarchical mobile IPv6 network mobility' , Wireless Personal Communications, 48(2), 215-238., 2009.
- [10] Alagu.S and Meyyappan.T, 'Analysis of Algorithms for Handling Handoffs in Wireless Mobile Networks' ,  International  Journal  of  P2P  Network  Trends  and  Technology-  Volume1Issue22011 ISSN: 2249-2615, pg 49-56
- [11] Alagu S and Meyyappan T, 'Analysis of Handoff Schemes in Wireless Mobile Network', IJCES International  Journal  of  Computer  Engineering  Science' ,  Volume1  Issue2,  November  2011 ISSN : 2250:3439,pg 1 - 12

## Authors

Mrs.S.Alagu, M.Sc., M.Phil., currently a Research Scholar  in Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Alagappa University, Karaikudi. She has a teaching experience of 10 years. She has published research papers in National and International Journals and Conferences. Her research area includes Wireless Mobile Networks.

Dr.  T.  Meyyappan  M.Sc.,  M.Phil.,  M.B.A.,  Ph.D., currently,  Associate  Professor, Department  of  Computer  Science  and  Engineering,  Alagappa  University,  Karaikudi, TamilNadu.  He  has  obtained  his  Ph.D.  in  Computer  Science  in  January  2011  and published  a  number  of  research  papers  in  National  and  International  journals  and conferences.  He  has  been  honored  with  Best  Citizens  of  India  Award  2012  by International  Publishing  House,  New  Delhi.    He  has  developed  Software  packages  for Examination,  Admission  Processing  and  official  Website  of  Alagappa  University.  His research  areas  include  Operational  Research,  Digital  Image  Processing,  Fault  Tolerant computing, Network security and Data Mining.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->