## On The Secrecy of the Cognitive Interference Channel with Channel State

Hamid G. Bafghi, Babak Seyfe

Department of Electrical Engineering, Shahed University, Tehran, Iran.

Emails: {ghanizade, seyfe}@shahed.ac.ir

Abstract

-In  this  paper  the  secrecy  problem  in  the  cognitive  state-

dependent interference channel is considered. In this scenario we have a

primary  and  a  cognitive transmitter-receiver pairs.

The  cognitive

transmitter has the message of the primary sender as side information.

In addition, the state of the channel is known at the cognitive encoder.

So,  the  cognitive  encoder  uses  this  side  information  to  cooperate  with

the primary transmitter and sends its individual message confidentially.

An achievable rate region and an outer bound for the rate region in this

channel are derived. The results are extended to the previous works as

special cases.

Index Terms

-

I.

Cognitive radio, secrecy capacity, side information, perfect secrecy.

INTRODUCTION

Contemporaneous of arising the interference channels as

a

basic model in studying the

communication literature, using the channel state in communication channel models was introduced

by Shannon in his landmark paper [1]. He assumed the channel side information at the transmitter

(CSIT).  Gelfand  and  Pinsker  in  their  essential  work  [2]  proved  that  the  capacity  of  the  discrete

memoryless channel with  non-causal  CSIT  is  given  by

the maximum is taken over all input distributions

variable

ܷ

.

Costa in his famous paper, named

݌

ሺ

ܥ

ݒ|ݔ ,ݑ

ൌ max௣ሺ௨,௫|௩ሻ

ሾ

ܫ

ሺ

ܻ ;ܷ

ሻ െ

ܫ

ሺ

ܸ ;ܷ

ሻሿ, where

with a finite alphabet auxiliary random

writing on dirty paper

ሻ

, extended Gelfand and Pinsker's (GP) coding

to  the  Gaussian  channel  and  showed  that  for  this  channel,  interference  does  not  affect  the  main

channel capacity [3]. He chose

all quantities of

ߙ

ܷ

ൌ

ܺ

൅

ܸߙ

and maximized the Gelfand and Pinsker's capacity over

and proved that for the optimum value of

ߙ

and for independent Gaussian

ܺ

and

ܸ

,

the capacity of the channel reduces to the primary main channel without side information.

Mitrpant  et  al.,  extended  the  dirty  paper  channel  to  the  basic  Gaussian  wiretap  channel  with  side

information [4]. They introduced an achievable rate region and an upper bound for this channel. Chen

and Vinck investigated Wyner's wiretap channel with side information [5]. They based their results on

the previous work on the wiretap channel and the discrete memoryless channel with state information

and  gave  an  achievable  rate  region  which  is  established  on  the  combination  of  Gelfand-Pinsker coding  and  the random  coding used  in  wiretap  channels  [6].  They  extended  their  results  to  the Gaussian  wiretap  channel  with  side  information  using  a  technique  like  dirty  paper  coding.  They proved that known channel state at the transmitter  can  increase  the  secure  rate  region  in  the  statedependent wiretap channel. The effect of the channel state on the achievable rate in cognitive interference channel was considered in [7]. The coding and the rate region in this paper was based on [8] for the MAC. The achievable rate and the outer bound for the cognitive interference channel in which the cognitive transmitter knows the  channel state non-causally was derived in [7]. They proved that this side information make the cognitive encoder to increase the pair rate in a cooperative manner. The secrecy rate of the cognitive interference channel was studied in [9]. In this work, the cognitive encoder has the primary sender's message and an individual message. At the recievers, the primary receiver acts as a wiretapper for the cognitive one and the aim is to decrease the lekage information to the  unintended  reciever,  i.e.,  primary  reciever.  The  random  coding  used  and  the  achievable equivocation rate region was derived. The authors in [10] studied the cognitive interference channel with two confidential messages. In this scenario, each receiver acts as an eavesdropper for the other one. So, the message of the primary and the secondary transmitter must be secure at the unintended destinations. In this model the cognitive encoder, which knows the message of the primary encorder non-causally, acts in a manner that both the messages whould be secure at the unintended recievers. In  this  paper  we  consider  the  cognitive  state-dependent  interference  channel  with  a  confidential message, in which the channel state models the interfering signals. As we can see in Fig. 1, we have two  transmitter-receiver  pairs.  The  secondary  transmitter,  i.e.,  the  cognitive  transmitter  knows  the message of the primary transmitter and the state of the channel as the side information. Each receiver, decodes its individual message. The message of the cognitive transmitter must be kept confidential in unintended receiver. On the other hand, the primary receiver acts as an eavesdropper for the cognitive encoder. Not considering the secrecy issue, our model reduces to the model studied in [7]. Furthermore, the cognitive  channel  without  channel  state  is  like  the  one  considered  in  [9].  We  employ  the  coding scheme used in [5] and establish the equivocation rate region for the cognitive interference channel, which  characterizes  the  tradeoff  between  the  achievable  rates  and  the  achievable  secrecy  at  the primary receiver, i.e., the eavesdropper. So, we derive the achievable rate and the outer bound for this channel. This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the channel model is introduced. In Section III, the main results are presented.  The paper is concluded in Section V. The proofs for the theorems are presented in the Appendices.

Fig. 1. The cognitive state-dependent interference channel with a confidential message.

<!-- image -->

## II. CHANNEL MODEL

Consider a memoryless stationary state-dependent interference channel with finite input alphabets ࣲ ଵ and ࣲ ଶ ,  finite  output  alphabets ࣳ ଵ and ࣳ ଶ ,  the  state  alphabet ࣭ with  distribution ࣪ ௌ and  a conditional  probability  distribution ܲ ௒ భ ,௒ మ |௑ భ , ௑ మ ,ௌ .  In  the  sequel,  we  use ݔ ௡ and ݔ ௜ ௡ to  indicate  the vectors ሺ ݔ ଵ ݔ , ڮ , ௡ ሻ and ሺ ݔ ௜ ݔ , ڮ , ௡ ሻ , respectively. The ݐ -th encoder wishes to transmit the message ܹ ௧ uniformly distributed on the set ࣱ ௧ ൌ ሼ1, ܯ,ڮ ௧ ሽ ,  where ݐ ൌ 1, 2 .  The  message ܹ ଵ is  known in both  encoders  but  the  message ܹ ଶ is  just  known  at  the  encoder  2.  This  encoder  assumed  as  the cognitive transmitter.

The  conditional  distribution  of  the  channel  output  n-sequences ܻ ଵ ௡ , ܻ ଶ ௡ given  the  inputs  and  the states, ݊ -sequences ܺ ଵ ௡ , ܺ ଶ ௡ , ܵ ௡ take the product form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The encoders for the channel are defined by the mappings

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the decoders for the channel are defined by the mappings

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We denote the error probability ܲ ௘ ሺ௡ሻ ൌ max൫ ܲ ௘,ଵ ሺ௡ሻ ܲ , ௘,ଶ ሺ௡ሻ ൯ in which

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 1: We define ܴ ௜ ൌ ቔ ଵ ௡ log ܯ ௜ ቕ for ݐ ൌ 1, 2 .

Definition  2: The  rate-triple ሺ ܴ ଵ ܴ , ଶ ܴ , ௘ଶ ሻ is  achievable  if  for  any ߳ ௡ ൐ 0 there  exists  a ሺ ܯ ଵ , ܯ ଶ ܲ ,݊ , ௡ሻ code such that ܲ ௘ ൑ ߳ .

The  secrecy  level  of  the  secondary  encoder's  message  at  the  primary  receiver  is  measured  by normalized equivocation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

for ݐ ൌ 1, 2 .

Definition 3: The capacity region is the closure of the set of all achievable rate-triples.

## III. MAIN RESULTS: INNER AND OUTER BOUNDS

As  we  explained  in  the  previous  section,  in  our  scenario  the  cognitive  encoder  has  non-causal access to the message of the primary sender. In addition, the state of the channel is assumed to be known at  the  cognitive  transmitter.  The  following  results  give  the  achievable  region  for  the  finite alphabet cognitive interference channel with CSIT.

Theorem 1: (achievable rate) The closure of the convex hull of the set of rate-triples ሺ ܴ ଵ , ܴ ଶ , ܴ ௘ଶ ሻ satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for input distribution factors as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is achievable for the finite alphabet cognitive interference channel with CSIT.

Proof: The details on the proof and the computation of the equivocation rate are relegated to the Appendix A. As a hint, the cognitive encoder uses the mutual information between its message ܺ ଶ and the state of the channel and the output signal in the receiver 1, to randomize its message. Using the random  coding,  message  of  encoder  2  remains  confidential  at  the  receiver  1  and  by  Gelfand  and Pinsker coding scheme the effect of the channel state is canceled.

Corollary 1: We note that this result without secrecy issue reduces to the result of [6, Th. 1] for the cognitive state-dependent interference channel.

Corollary  2: The equivocation-rates  (7)-(9)  without  channel  state,  i.e.,  in  the  case  that ܵ ൌ ׎ ,  is reduced to the result derived in (6) of [9].

Corollary 3: In the special case, when we have ܫ ሺ ;ܸ ܺ ,ܷ ଵ ܵ , ሻ ൐ ܫ ሺ ;ܸ ܺ ,ܷ ଵ ܻ , ଵ ሻ , the achievable rate region  (7)-(9)  reduces  to  the  achievable  rate  region  of  the  state-dependent  cognitive  interference channel in [7]. In this case, the coding scheme used in [7], achieves the secure rate for the cognitive transmitter.

Corollary  4: In  a  special  case,  when ܫ ሺ ;ܸ ܺ ,ܷ ଵ ܵ , ሻ ൏ ܫ ሺ ;ܸ ܺ ,ܷ ଵ ܻ , ଵ ሻ ,  the  achievable  rate  region (7)-(9) reduces to the following remark.

Remark 1: The closure of the convex hull of the set of rate-pairs ሺ ܴ ଵ ܴ , ଶ ሻ satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for  input  distribution  factors  as  (10),  is  an  achievable  secure  rate  region  for  the  finite  alphabet cognitive interference channel with CSIT in special case, when ܫ ሺ ;ܸ ܺ ,ܷ ଵ ܵ , ሻ ൏ ܫ ሺ ;ܸ ܺ ,ܷ ଵ ܻ , ଵ ሻ .

Theorem 2: (outer  bound) The set of achievable rate-triples of the cognitive interference channel with CSIT is contained in the closure of the set rate-triple ሺ ܴ ଵ , ܴ ଶ , ܴ ௘ଶ ሻ that satisfy

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for input distribution factors as (10).

Proof: We relegate the details on the proof of the above theorem to the Appendix B, but we should note that the equations (13) and (14) are equal to the result in [7, Theorem 2], i.e., the outer bound in Theorem 2 is reduced to the result in [7] without secrecy issue. The equation (15) is derived with the technique presented in [10].

## IV. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper the secrecy problem of the state-dependent cognitive interference channel with noncausally CSIT was considered. The achievable rate region and the outer bound on the rate region was derived. The results are compared with the previous works in the special cases.

## APPENDIX A: PROOF OF THE THEOREM 1

In  this  Appendix,  we  present  the  proof  of  the  Theorem  1.  First  of  all,  we  introduce  the  coding scheme.  In this section,  we  denote  the  messages  by ܹ ଵ ࣱ א ଵ ൌ ሼ1,2, … , 2 ௡ோభ ሽ and ܹ ଶ ࣱ א ଶ ൌ ሼ1,2, … , 2 ௡ோమ ሽ , respectively. The notation ܶ ఢ ௡ ሺ ܲ ௎௑భ௑మ௒ భ ௒ మ ሻ is used to indicate the strong typical set based on the distribution ܲ ௎௑భ௑మ௒ భ ௒ మ .

## A. Code Generation:

The code generation scheme is as following

- 1Generate 2 ௡ோభ codeword ݑ ௜ ௡ , ݅ ൌ ሼ1,2, … , 2 ௡ோభ ሽ , each uniformly drawn from the set ܶ ఢ ௡ ሺ ܲ ௎ሻ .
- 2For each ݑ ௜ ௡ , generate 2 ௡ோమ sequences ݒ ௜,௞ ௡ , ݇ ൌ ሼ1,2, … , 2 ௡ோమ ሽ ,  each uniformly drawn from the set ܶ ఢ ௡ ሺ ܲ ௏|௎ ሻ .
- 3For  using  the  random  coding  scheme    to  keep  the  cognitive  message  be  secret  at  the unintended  receiver,  distribute  the ݒ ௡ sequences  randomly  to 2 ௡ோ bin  such  that  each  bin contains 2 ௡ሾ୫ୟ୶ሼூሺ௑ మ ;௒ భ ,௎,௑ భ ሻ,   ூሺ௑ మ ;ௌ,௎,௑ భ ሻሽሿ sequences and ܴ ൌ ܴ ଶ െmaxሼ ܫ ሺ ܺ 2 ܻ ; 1 ܺ ,ܷ , 1 ሻ, ܫ ሺ ܺ 2 ܺ ,ܷ ,ܵ ; 1 ሻሽ . Now, we index each bin by א ݆ ሼ1, 2, ,ڮ 2 ௡ோ ሽ . Next, partition 2 ௡ሾ୫ୟ୶ሼூሺ௑ మ ;௒ భ ,௎,௑ భ ሻ,   ூሺ௑ మ ;ௌ,௎,௑ భ ሻሽሿ sequences in every bin into

2 ௡ሾ୫ୟ୶ሼூሺ௑ మ ;௒ భ ,௎,௑ భ ሻ,   ூሺ௑ మ ;ௌ,௎,௑ భ ሻሽିூሺ௑ మ ;௒ భ ,௎,௑ భ ሻሿ subbin each subbin contains 2 ஻ ൌ 2 ௡ሾூሺ௑ మ ;௒ భ ,௎,௑ భ ሻሿ sequences. Index each subbin by א ܽ ൛1,2, … , 2 ௡ሾ୫ୟ୶ሼூሺ௑మ;௒ భ ,௎,௑ భ ሻ,ூሺ௑ మ ;ௌ,௎,௑ భ ሻሽିூሺ௑ మ ;௒ భ ,௎,௑ భ ሻሿ ൟ and let ܣ be the random variable to represent the index of the subbin. This step of code generation is illustrated in Fig 2.

## B. Encoding:

Now,  we  define ࣛ ൌ ሼ1,2, … , ܣ ሽ , ࣜ ൌ ሼ1,2, … , ܤ ሽ where ܣ and ܤ were  defined  before.  So,  we  let ࣱ ଶ ൌ ࣛ ൈ ࣝ where ࣝ ൌ ሼ1,2, … , ܤ ሽ . We define mapping ࣜ ՜ ࣝ to be partitioning ࣜ into ࣝ subsets with nearly equal size, where 'nearly equal size' means

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Encoder 1 chooses ݑ ௜ ௡ according  to  its  message  index ݅ .  Encoder  2,  tries  to  find  the ݇ such  that ሺ ݑ ௜ ௡ ݒ , ௜,௞ ௡ ሻ ܶ א א ௡ . This index, contains the individual message of the cognitive encoder. Then, it finds ݆ , ܽ

Fig. 2. Code generation scheme for the cognitive interference channel with CSIT.

<!-- image -->

and ܾ such that ሺ ݒ ௜,௞,௝,௔,௕ ௡ ݑ , ௜ ௡ ݏ , ௡ ሻ ܶ א א ௡ . So, it lets ܹ ଶ ൌ ሺ ܿ ,ܽ ሻ ՜ ሺ ܾ ,ܽ ሻ with ܾ randomly, uniformly from the set ݃ ିଵ ሺ ݆ ሻ ؿ ࣜ . Encoder 1 and 2 send ݔ ଵ,௜ ௡ and ݔ ଶ,௜,௞,௝,௔,௕ ௡ according to ݌ ሺ ݔ ଵ,௜ ௡ | ݑ ௜ ௡ ሻ ൌ ∏ ݌ ሺ ݔ ଵ,௜ | ݑ ௜ ሻ ௡ ௜ୀଵ and ݌ ሺ ݔ 2, ܾ,ܽ,݆,݇,݅ ݊ ݒ| ܾ,ܽ,݆,݇,݅ ݊ ݑ , ௜ ௡ , ݏ ௡ ሻ ൌ ∏ ݌ ൫ ݔ 2, ܾ,ܽ,݆,݇,݅ | ܾ,ܽ,݆,݇,݅ݒ ݑ , ௜ ݏ , ௜ ൯ ௡ ௜ୀଵ , respectively.

## C. Decoding:

Receiver 1 tries to find ଓ̂ such that ൫ ݔ ଵ,ప̂ ௡ ݕ , ଵ ௡ ൯ ܶ א א ௡ . If no such ଓ̂ is found, the error is declared.

Receiver 1, if given the indices ܾ ,ܽ ,݆ ,݇ ,݅ ,  declares that the index of ݔ ଶ,௜,௞,௝,௔,௕ ௡ is ܾ ෠ ,  if  it  is  a  unique index such that ൫ ݔ ଵ,௜ ݔ , ଶ,௜,௞,௝,௔,௕ ෠ ݕ , ଵ ௡ ൯ ܶ א א ௡ . If no such ܾ ෠ is found, an error is declared.

Receiver 2, tries to find the ଓ, ො ݇ ෠ , ଔ̂, ܽ ො, ܾ ෠ such that ൫ ݔ ଶ,ప, ො௞ ෠ ,ఫ̂,௔ ො,௕ ෠ ݑ , ప̂ ௡ ݕ , ଶ ௡ ൯ ܶ א א ௡ . If there are not such indices, the error is indicated.

## D. Error Computation:

We can compute the average error by the standard techniques as in [11], where the average is taken over  the  random  codebook  ensembles.  So,  we  can  show  that  the  average  error  is  less  than ߣ for sufficiently large codeword length ݊ .

## E. Equivocation Computation:

In this section, we compute the equivocation of the ܹ ଶ at the receiver 1, in following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

- ሺ ܽ ሻ follows from the fact that we have ܪ ሺ ܹ ଶ ܹ ,ܣ , ଵ ܻ , ଵ ௡ , ܺ ଶ ௡ ሻ ൒ 0 ;
- ሺ ܾ ሻ follows from the fact that ܪ ሺ ܹ ,ܣ ଵ ܹ| ଶ ܻ, ଵ ௡ ሻ ൌ ܪ ሺ ܹ|ܣ ଶ ܻ, ଵ ௡ ሻ ൅ ܪ ሺ ܹ ଵ ܹ ,ܣ| ଶ ܻ, ଵ ௡ ሻ ൑ ܪ ሺ ܣ ሻ ൑ |ࣛ|݃݋݈ , because of the fact that ܪ ሺ ܹ ଵ ܹ ,ܣ| ଶ ܻ, ଵ ௡ ሻ ൌ 0 ;
- ሺ ܿ ሻ follows from the fact that for the ݊ ՜ ∞ , we have ܫ ሺ ܺ ଶ ௡ ; ܻ ଵ ௡ ሻ ൌ ݊ ܫ ሺ ܺ ଶ ܻ ; ଵ ሻ , ܫ ሺ ܺ ଶ ௡ ; ܻ ଶ ௡ ሻ ൌ ݊ ܫ ሺ ܺ ଶ ܻ ; ଶ ሻ and |ࣛ|݃݋݈ ൌ ݊ ሾmaxሼ ܫ ሺ ܺ ଶ ܻ ; ଵ ܺ ,ܷ , ଵ ሻ, ܫ ሺ ܺ ଶ ܺ ,ܷ ,ܵ ; ଵ ሻሽ െ ܫ ሺ ܺ ଶ ܻ ; ଵ ܺ ,ܷ , ଵ ሻሿ ;
- ሺ ݀ ሻ is because of the fact that ܫ ሺ ܺ ଶ ܻ ; ଵ ܺ ,ܷ , ଵ ሻ െ ܫ ሺ ܺ ଶ ܻ ; ଵ ሻ ൌ ܫ ሺ ܺ ଶ ܺ ,ܷ ; ଵ ܻ| ଵ ሻ ൒ 0 .

Now, for the last term in (17), we define

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, by Fano's inequality, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ߳ is small for sufficiently large ݊ .

By combining (6), (17) and (20), the achievable rate region in Theorem 2 is derived. ז

## APPENDIX B: PROOF OF THE THEOREM 2

Proof: As we mentioned later, the equations (13) and (14) in Theorem 2 are similar to the results derived by [7]. In this section we prove (15) in Theorem 2. First we define the following notations

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, we consider the equivocation rate bound applying the techniques in [12]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ሺ ݁ ሻ and ሺ ݂ ሻ are because of Fano's inequality and ߳ ௡ is negligible for enough large ݊ . So,we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us define random variable ܶ , independent of ݓ ଵ ݓ , ଶ ݔ , ଵ ௡ , ݔ ଶ ௡ , ݕ ଵ ௡ , ݕ ଶ ௡

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Substituting these variables we obtain (20). ז

## REFERENCES

- [1] C. Shannon, 'Channels with side information at the transmitter,' J. Res. Devel .,  vol. 2, pp. 289293, 1958.

- [2] S.  I.  Ge'lfand  and  M.  S.  Pinsker,  'Coding  for  channel  with  random  parameters,' Probl.  Inf. Theory , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 19-31, 1980.
- [3] M. H. M. Costa, 'Writing on dirty paper ,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. IT-29, no. 3, pp. 439-441, May 1983.
- [4] C. Mitrpant, H. Vinck, and Y. Luo, 'An achievable region for the Gaussian wiretap channel with side information,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 2181-2190, 2006.
- [5] Y. Chen and H. Vinck, 'Wiretap channel with side information,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 395-402, 2008.
- [6] A. Wyner, 'The wire-tap channel,' Bell. Syst. Tech. J. , vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1355-1387, Jan. 1975.
- [7] A. Somekh-Baruch, S. Shamai (Shitz), and Verdu Sergio, 'Cognitive interference channels with state information,' in Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT ), Toronto, Canada, July 6-11, 2008, pp. 13531357.
- [8] A. Somekh-Baruch, S. Shamai (Shitz), and Verdu Sergio, 'Cooperative multiple-access encoding with states available at one transmitter,' IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory , vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 44484469, Oct. 2008.
- [9] Y.  Liang,  A.  Somekh-Baruch,  H.  Vincent  Poor,  Shlomo  Shamai  (Shitz),  and  Sergio  Verdo, 'Capacity of cognitive interference channels with and without secrecy,' IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory , vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 604-618, Feb 2009.
- [10] H. G. Bafghi, S. Salimiy, B. Seyfe, and M. R. Aref, 'Cognitive interference channel with two confidential messages,' in Int. Symp. Inf. Theory and Applic. (ISITA) , 2010, pp. 952-956.
- [11] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory , J. Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2006.
- [12] I. Csiszar and J. Korner, 'Broadcast channels with confidential messages,' IEEE Trans. on Inf. Theory , vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 339-348, May 1978.