## MODELING OF STOCK RETURNS AND TRADING VOLUME

## TAISEI KAIZOJI 1

Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,

International Christian University,

3-10-2 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8585, Japan

## Abstract

In  this  study,  we  investigate  the  statistical  properties  of  the  returns  and  the  trading volume. We show a typical example of power-law distributions of  the return and of the trading volume. Next, we propose an interacting agent model of stock markets inspired from  statistical  mechanics  [24]  to  explore  the  empirical  findings.  We  show  that  as  the interaction among the interacting traders  strengthens both the returns and the trading volume present power-law behavior.

## 1. Introduction

Over half a century, a considerable number of researches have been made on trading volume and its relationship with asset returns [1-12]. Although the existence of the relationships between trading volume and future prices is inconsistent with the weak  form  of  market  efficiency  [10],  the  analysis  of  the  relationship  has  received increasing  attention  from  researchers  and  investors.  One  of  the  causes  of  great attention to the relationship is that many have considered that price movements may be predicted by trading volume.

The researchers in a new field of science called 'econophysics' have worked on this problem from a slightly different angle. In the literature of econophysics [13-20], most  studies  on  price  fluctuations  and  trading  volume  have  focused  primarily  on finding some universal characteristics which are often observed in complex systems with a large number of interacting units, such as power laws, and have modeled the statistical properties observed. Generally speaking, studies on price-volume relations tend  to  be  very  data-based,  and  the  models  are  more  statistical  than  economic  in character.

1   The corresponding author: Taisei Kaizoji, International Christian University, 3-10-2 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8585, Japan. E-mail: kaizoji@icu.ac.jp

The aims of this study are two-fold. We first investigate the statistical properties of  returns  and  trading  volume  using  a  database  that  records  daily  transaction  for securities listed in the Tokyo Stock Exchange from 1975 to 2002. As a typical example of company, we take Fujita Corporation who is a middle-size construction company. We find  that  the  probability  distributions  of  returns  and  of  trading  volume  follow power-laws.  To  give  an  explanation  on  these  findings,  we  next  study  a  model  that expresses trading volume and its relationship with asset returns. Our previous work [21-24] proposed interacting-agent models of price fluctuations in stock markets. In these  studies  we  applied  the  so-called  Ising  models  [25,26],  which  is  a  well-known model  in  statistical  mechanics,  to  stock  markets,  and  described  the  interaction  of agents. In this paper we utilize our model [24], and formulate the relationship between returns and trading volume. In the model [24] the stock market is composed of the two typical groups of traders: the fundamentalists who believe that the stock price will be equal  to  the  fundamental  value  [29],  and  the  interacting  traders  who  tend  to  get influenced by the investment attitude of other traders. We derive the market-clearing prices and the trading volume from demand for and supply of shares of a stock. We show that the probability distributions of returns and trading volume generated by computer simulations of the model have power-law tails when the interaction among the interacting traders, the so-called conformity effect, strengthens.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews briefly the empirical  findings.  Section  3  describes  the  interacting  agent  model,  and  section  4 shows results of computer simulations, and section 5 gives concluding remarks.

## 2. The empirical results

In this section, we  examine  the  statistical properties of the probability distributions  of  returns  and  of  trading  volume  using  a  database  that  records  daily transaction for all securities listed in the Tokyo Stock Exchange. We use the daily data for the closing price and the trading volume on the company in the 28-year period from January 1975 to January 2002 when corresponds to Japan's asset bubble and eventual burst. As a typical example of companies, we selected Fujita Corporation (Ticker: 1806), who  is  a  middle-size  construction  company  in  Japan.  We  find  that  the  probability distributions  of  returns  and  of  trading  volume  on  the  company  present  power-law decay. Return is defined as the logarithmic price change of the stock from one day's close to the next day's close, and trading volume is defined as the number of shares traded in a trading day. Figure 1 (a) and Figure 1 (b) display the time series of returns and the probability distribution of returns drawn from the corresponding time series in Figure 1 (a). The time series of returns has clustered volatility that consists of laminar phases and chaotic bursts. Figure 1 (b) displays the semi-log plot of the probability distribution of the returns, and indicates that the tails of the return distribution have apparently longer than tails of an exponential distribution 2 . Figure 1(b) shows that the tails  of  return  distribution  are  fit  approximately  by  a  power  law,   P R x x   , where R denotes returns, and  the power-law exponent.

2   If the tails of the probability distribution can be approximated by a liner line, then

Figure 1: The time series of (a) returns and (b) the probability distribution of returns for Fujita from January 1975 to January 2002. The tails of the probability distribution of returns displays power-law decay.

<!-- image -->

We next analyze the statistics of the trading volume. Figure 2 (a) and Figure 2 (b) show the time series of the trading volume, and the semi-log plot of the probability distribution  of  the  trading  volume  calculated  by  the  corresponding  time  series  in Figure 2 (a). We also find that the probability distribution of the trading volume in Figure 2(b) also displays a power-law behavior.

To  investigate  the  reason  why  power-laws  for  returns  and  trading  volume  are observed, we present an interacting agent model in the following section.

the probability distributions follow an exponential function.

<!-- image -->

Figure 2: The time series of (a) the trading volume and (b) the probability distribution of the trading  volume  for  Fujita  Corporation  from  January  1975  to  January  2002.  The  tail  of  the probability distribution of the trading volume displays power-law decay.

<!-- image -->

## 3. An interacting-agent model

In  this  section  we  introduce  an  interacting-agent  model  proposed  in  [24].  We consider a stock market where shares of a stock are traded at price, j S , per share. Two groups of traders with different trading strategies, interacting traders and, fundamentalists participate in the trading. The number of fundamentalists, m , and the  number  of  interacting  traders, n ,  are  assumed  to  be  constant.  The  model  is designed to describe movements of the price of the stock, and of the trading volume over a trading day. In the following, a more precise account of the decision making of each trader type is given.

## 2.1. Interacting traders

An interacting trader is described in the literature of financial research as noise trader.  Noise  trader  is  frequently  regarded  as  a  trader  who  trade  randomly  [28].

However, an interacting trader is not idiot but makes decisions regarding buying or selling  based  on perceived market moods rather than fundamentals. An interacting trader buys when the others seem to be buying and sells when the others seem to be selling.

Each interacting trader is labeled by an integer , ( 1,2..., ) i i n  . The investment attitude  of  interacting  trader i is  represented  by  the  random  variable, i u ,  and  is defined as follows. If interacting trader i is a buyer of shares during a given day, then 1 i u   , otherwise he/she sells shares, and then 1 i u   . Consider that the investment attitude i u is  updated  with  transition  probabilities.    We  adopt  the  following functions of the average investment attitude over interacting traders 1 1 n i i X u n    as the transition probabilities.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  denotes intensity of interaction among interacting traders. We assume that  vary randomly in time. If more than a half number of interacting traders are buyers, then the average investment attitude X is positive, and if more than a half number of interacting traders are sellers, then the average investment attitude X is negative. As  the  average  investment  attitude X increases,  the  transition  probability  from  a seller to a buyer ( ) W X  is  higher, and at the same time, the transition probability from a buyer to a seller ( ) W X  is lower. Inversely, as the average investment attitude X decreases, the transition probability from a buyer to a seller ( ) W X  is higher, and the transition probability from a seller to a buyer ( ) W X  is simultaneously lower.

One  can  derive 3   a  following  dynamic  equation  of  the  average  investment attitude X from the above transition probabilities (1)-(2):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where     tanh K X X   ,     2 1 tanh Q X X n        ,  and   W t is  the  Wiener process. To perform the numerical simulation, we consider a discretized version of the stochastic differential equation (3)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here,   j j X X t  , 1 j j j t t t     , and     1 j j j W W t W t     . j W  is the increment  of  the  Winner  process  or  a  white  noise.  Following  [24],  we  assume  that intensity of the interaction changes randomly in time j , and furthermore, define the randomness as j j W     where the parameter  is  a  constant,  and j W  is  the increment  of  the  Winner  process.  We  name  the  parameter,  ,  which  describes  the intensity of interaction among interacting traders, the conformity effect.

Each interacting trader chooses to either buy or sell shares, and is assumed to trade a fixed amount, b , of the shares in a day. Then the interacting-traders' excess demand for shares is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.2. Fundamentalists

In  finance  theories,  the  fundamental  value, * j S ,  of  the  firm  is  estimated  by forecasting future cash flows and discount rates [29]. Fundamentalists are assumed to have fundamental valuation techniques to find the fundamental value, * j S , and have information of the fundamentals of the firm. If the price, j S , is below the fundamental value, * j S , a fundamentalist tends to buy shares because he estimates the stock to be undervalued in a stock market, and if the price, j S , is above the fundamental value, * j S ,  a  fundamentalist  tends  to  sell  shares.  Hence  we  assume  that  fundamentalists' demand function is given by:

3   For the detail deviation of equations (3), and (4), see [24],and [27].

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where m is the number of fundamentalists, and a parametrizes the reaction on the discrepancy between the fundamental value and the market price.

## 2.3. Market clearing price

The  mechanism  of  trading  in  stock  exchanges  differs  from  one  exchange  to another. However, the price movements in any trading mechanism are governed by the forces of demand and supply. We here consider here an auction market which a market maker mediates the trading, and matches buyers with sellers  at a market clearing price. The market transaction is performed when the buying orders are equal to the selling orders. The balance of demand and supply is written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence the market price is calculated as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where bn am   . Using the price equation (7), we can categorize the market situations as follows. If 0 j X  , the market price, j S , is equal to the fundamental value, * j S . If 0 j X  ,  the  market  price, j S ,  exceeds  the  fundamental  value, * j S ,  (bull  market regime).  If 0 j X  ,  the  market  price, j S ,  is  less  than  the  fundamental  value, * j S , (bear market regime). The price changes are defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Changes in the market price depend on changes in the interacting-traders' orders, and changes in fundamental value. We here assume that changes in the fundamental price   * * 1 ln ln j j S S   are  unpredictable  and  random 4 .  This  is  a  logical  entailment  of  a well-known efficient market hypothesis [30]. In the efficient market, the price, j S , is basically equal to the fundamental value, * j S . However, in this model, market clearing price, j S ,  depends on not only fundamental value, * j S ,  but  also  interacting traders' orders. Hence, the efficient market does not hold. From the market clearing condition (7), the trading volume, which is defined as the number of shares traded in a trading day, is calculated by the following,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3. Simulations

4   We assume that the term   * * 1 ln ln j j S S   is a white noise.

In this section we perform computer simulations of the model (9)-(10) proposed in the preceding section. Hereafter, the model will be simulated numerically with the parameters given by 0.1 j t   , 1   ,  and  the  fixed  number  of  interacting  traders, 100,000 n  . We investigate statistical properties of the dynamics of returns, j R , and of  trading  volume, j V ,  for  three  different  values  of  the  conformity  effect,  which indicates  intensity  of  interaction  among  the  interacting  traders, 0.1   ,  2  and  8. Figure 3 (a) and Figure 3 (b) display the typical evolutions of the returns, j R , and of the trading volume, j V ,  for  a  weak conformity effect, 0.1   .  Both the time series have only narrow Gaussian fluctuations. In Figure 3 (c) and in Figure 3 (d) we show the probability distributions of returns, j R , and of trading volume, j V , for 0.1   . The tails of both the probability distributions of returns, j R , and of trading volume, j V , can be approximated by normal distributions.

Figure 3: A weak conformity effect 0.1   .  The  time  series of  (a)  returns and  of  (b)  trading volume are generated from the model with 0.1   , 0.1 j t   , 1   ,  and 100,000 n  . The  semi-log  plots  of  probability  distributions  of  (c)  returns  and  of  (d)  trading  volume  for 0.1   .  When  we  assume  a  weak  conformity  effect, 0.1   ,  the  tails  of  the  probability distributions of returns and of trading volume follow normal distributions.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4 (a) and Figure 4 (b) display the time series of returns, j R , and trading volume, j V ,  for  a  moderate conformity effect, 2   .  Both the time series are more volatile than the time series of returns, j R , and of trading volume, j V , for the very weak conformity effect 0.1   .  The tails of the probability distributions of returns, j R ,  and  of  trading  volume, j V ,  for 2   can  be  approximated  by  exponential distributions (Figure 4 (c) and in Figure 4 (d)).

Figure 4: A moderate conformity effect 2   . The time series of (a) returns and of (b) trading volume are generated from the model with 2   , 0.1 j t   , 1   , and 100,000 n  . The semi-log plots of  probability  distributions  of  (c)  returns  and  of  (d)  trading  volume  for 2   . When we assume a moderate conformity effect, 2   , the tails of the probability distributions of returns and of trading volume follow exponential distributions.

<!-- image -->

Let us raise the value of the parameter 8   from 2   .  Figure 5 (a) and Figure  5  (b)  display  the  time  series  of  returns, j R ,  and  trading  volume, j V ,  for  a strong  conformity  effect, 8   .  Both  the  time  series  of  the  returns, j R ,  and  the trading volume, j V , for 8   have clearly clustered volatility, and consist of laminar phases  and  chaotic  bursts.  For  a  strong  conformity  effect, 8   the  tails  of  the probability  distributions  of  returns, j R ,  and  trading  volume, j V ,  shows  power-law decay (Figure 5 (c) and Figure 5 (d)).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 5: A strong conformity effect, 8   .  The  time  series  of  (a)  returns  and  of  (b)  trading volume are generated from the model with 8   , 0.1 j t   , 1   , and 100,000 n  . The semi-log  plots  of  probability  distributions  of  (c)  returns  and  of  (d)  trading  volume  for 8   . When we assume a strong conformity effect, 8   ,  the tails of the probability distributions of returns and of trading volume follow power-law distributions.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

It can be seen that, as the conformity effect  increases, clustered volatility comes to be observed more definitely. With strengthening the conformity effect,  , the shape  of  the  probability  distributions  of  returns, j R ,  and  of  trading  volume, j V , change  from  Gaussian  distributions  to  power-law  distributions.  To  sum  up,  as  the interaction  among the interacting traders  strengthens,  the  returns  and  the  trading volume present a power-law behavior.

## 4. Concluding remarks

In this paper we present an interacting agent model of a stock market which is modeled from the point of view of statistical mechanics. In our model the stock market is  composed  of  the  two  groups  of  traders:  the  fundamentalists  and  the  interacting traders.  The  point  of  the  results  shown  by  the  simulation  is  that  intensity  of  the interaction among the interacting traders is a key factor which generates power-law distributions of returns and of trading volume.

The  question,  which  has  been  touched  in  introduction  but  not  explored,  is analysis  of  the  relationships  between  returns  and  trading  volume.  It  needs  further consideration.

## 5. Acknowledgement

This research was supported by the Grant-in-Aid, No. 25380404 from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).

## 6. References

- [1]  M.  F.  M.  Osborne.  Brownian  motion  in  the  stock  market.  Operations  Research, 7(2):145-173, March/Apr 1959.
- [2] Charles C. Ying. Market prices and volumes of sales. Econometrica, 34(3):676-685, July 1966.
- [3]  Thomas  W.  Epps.  Security  price  changes  and  transaction  volumes:  Theory  and evidence. American Economic Review, 65:586-597, Sept 1975.
- [4] Thomas E. Copeland. A model of asset trading under the assumption of sequential information arrival. Journal of Finance, 31(4):1149-1168, September 1976.
- [5] Jonathan M. Karpoff. The relation between price changes and trading volume: a survey. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 22(1):109-126, 1987.
- [6] Schwert, G. W., Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time?, Journal of Finance, 44, 1115 -1153, 1989.
- [7] Gallant, A. R., P. E. Rossi, and G. E. Tauchen, Stock prices and volume, Review of Financial Studies, 5, 199 -242, 1992.
- [8]  John  Y.  Campbell,  Sanford  J.  Grossman,  and  Jiang  Wang.  Trading  volume  and serial correlation in stock returns. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(4):905939, 1993.
- [9]  Charles  M.  Jones  Gautam  Kaul  Marc  L.  Lipson,  Transactions,  volume,  and volatility, The Review of Financial Studies, 7, 4, 631-651, 1994.
- [10] John Y. Campbell, Andrew W. Lo, and A. Craig MacKinlay. The Econometrics of Financial Markets. Princeton University Press, first edition, 1997.
- [11] Andrew W. Lo and Jiang Wang. Trading volume: Definitions, data analysis, and implications of portfolio theory. The Review of Financial Studies, 13(2):257-300, 2000.

- [12] Andrew W. Lo and Jiang Wang. Trading volume: Implications of an intertemporal capital  asset  pricing  model.  in  Advances  in  Economic  Theory:  Eighth  World Congress, pages 1-23, 2002.
- [13]  G.  Iori, Avalanche  Dynamics  and  Trading  Friction  Effects  on  Stock  Market Returns, Int. Mod. Phys. C10, 1149-1162, 1999.
- [14] Giovanni Bonanno, Fabrizio Lillo, Rosario N. Mantegna, Dynamics of the Number of Trades of Financial Securities, Physica A 280, 136-141, 2000.
- [15] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, X. Gabaix, L. A. N. Amaral, and H. E. Stanley, Price Fluctuations,  Market  Activity,  and  Trading  Volume,  Quantitative  Finance  1, 262-269, 2001.
- [16] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, X. Gabaix, and H. E. Stanley, Quantifying Stock Price Response to Demand Fluctuations, Phys. Rev. E 66, 027104, 2002.
- [17] Fabrizio Lillo, J. Doyne Farmer, and Rosario N. Mantegna, Econophysics: Master curve for price-impact function, Nature 421, 129-130, 2003.
- [18] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan, and H. E. Stanley, Econophysics: Two-phase behaviour of financial markets, Nature 421, 130, 2003.
- [19] X. Gabaix, P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou, and H. E. Stanley, A theory of power-law distributions in financial market fluctuations, Nature 423, 267-270, 2003.
- [20] T. Kaizoji and M. Nuki, Scaling Law for the Distribution of Fluctuations of Share Volume, Fractals 12, Issue 01, 49, 2004.
- [21] T. Kaizoji, Speculative bubbles and crashes in stock markets: an interacting-agent model of speculative activity, Physica A287, 493 -506, 2000.
- [22]  T.  Kaizoji,  A  model  of  international  financial  crises  ,Physica  A  299    279-293, 2001.
- [23] T. Kaizoji, S. Bornoldt, and Y. Fujiwara, Dynamics ofprice and trading volume in a

spin model of stock markets with heterogeneous agents, Physica A316, 441 -452, 2002.

- [24] T. Kaizoji and M. Kaizoji, Empirical Laws of a Stock Price Index and a Stochastic Model, Advances in Complex Systems 6(3) 303-312, 2003.
- [25] D. Chowdhury and D. Stauffer, A generalized spin model of financial markets, Eur. Phys. J. B8, 477-482, 1999.
- [26] S. Bornholdt, Expectation bubbles in a spin model of markets: Intermittency from frustration across scales, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C12, 667-674, 2001.
- [27] C.W. Gardiner, Handbook of Stochastic Methods, Second Edition, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York, Tokyo, 1985.
- [28]  Kyle,  Albert  S.,  'Continuous  Auctions  and  Insider  Trading,'  Econometrica  53: 1315-1335, 1985.
- [29]  Gordon,  Myron.  The  investment,  financing  and  valuation  of  the  corporation. Homewood, Ill.: Irwin., 1962.
- [30] Burton G. Malkiel, The Efficient Market Hypothesis and Its Critics, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Volume 17, Number 1, 59 - 82, 2003.