## Strangeness in Quark Matter: Opening Talk

J. Steinheimer 1 , T. Lang 1 , H. van Hees 1 , A.S. Botvina 2 , 3

,

K.K. Gudima 4 , I.N. Mishustin 1 , 5 , H. St¨ ocker 1 , 6 , 7 and M. Bleicher 1 , 7

E-mail: steinheimer@fias.uni-frankfurt.de

1 Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies, Johann Wolfgang Goethe

Universit¨ at, Ruth-Moufang-Str. 1, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

2 Institute for Nuclear Research, Russian Academy of Sciences, 117312 Moscow, Russia

3 Helmholtz-Institut Mainz, J.Gutenberg-Universit¨ at, 55099 Mainz, Germany

4 Institute of Applied Physics, Academy of Sciences of Moldova, MD-2028 Kishinev, Moldova

5 Kurchatov Institute, Russian Research Center, 123182 Moscow, Russia

6 GSI Helmholtzzentrum f¨ ur Schwerionenforschung GmbH, Planckstr. 1, 64291 Darmstadt, Germany

7 Institut f¨ ur Theoretische Physik, Goethe Universit¨ at, Max-von-Laue-Str. 1, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Abstract. We discuss several new developments in the field of strange and heavy flavor physics in high energy heavy ion collisions. As shown by many recent theoretical works, heavy flavored particles give us a unique opportunity to study the properties of systems created in these collisions. Two in particular important aspects, the production of (multi) strange hypernuclei and the properties of heavy flavor mesons, are at the core of several future facilities and will be discussed in detail.

As strange quarks have to be newly produced during the hot and dense stage of a relativistic nuclear collision, they carry information, on the properties of the matter that was created [1, 2, 3, 4], to the observed final particle state. The enhancement of strange particle production is discussed [5, 6, 7, 8, 9] as a possible signal for the creation of a deconfined phase. Recently several observables, regarding strange and charm quarks have shown the importance of understanding the dynamics of strangeness and charm production in heavy ion collisions:

- Strange particle ratios and yields from the ALICE collaboration may indicate that there is either no unique chemical freeze out point for strange an non-strange particles [10, 11, 12, 13], or the light quark phase space is severely over-saturated [14].
- Lattice calculations on the stability of the H-dibaryon indicate it might be either very loosely bound or a resonant state [15, 16, 17].
- Viscous hydrodynamics, with fluctuating initial conditions [18] and finite but small viscous corrections, seems to describe strange hadron observables even at large baryon densities [19, 20].
- The hydrodynamic model calculations show sensitivity on the life time of the system and the applied equation of state [21].
- There are indications that systems created in high energy p+p and p+Pb collisions can thermalize/equilibrate to a certain degree and show signs of collectivity [22, 23, 24, 25].
- A polarization of Λ's due to the finite angular momentum of the fireball is expected [26].
- Possible signals for the observation of quarkionic matter where proposed [27].
- There still is the unexplained puzzle of the strongly enhanced Ξ -yield at the HADES experiment [28].

In addition to these interesting results we will focus on two topics which are at the core of present and upcoming experimental programs, FAIR with CBM [29] and NICA, namely the production of strange clusters and hypernuclei and the description of heavy quark transport in nuclear collisions.

## 1. Hypernuclei

Although abundantly produced, the interactions of strange hadrons are not very well understood but important for the description of the hadronic phase of a heavy ion collision and dense hadronic matter as can be found in compact stars. Hypernuclear physics offers a direct experimental way to study hyperon-nucleon ( Y N ) and hyperon-hyperon ( Y Y ) interactions.

Exotic forms of deeply bound objects with strangeness [30] and later the H di-baryon [31] was proposed by theory. Recent lattice QCD calculations suggest that the H-dibaryon is either a weakly bound system or a resonant state [32, 33, 16, 17], and there could be strange di-baryon systems including Ξ's that can be bound [34]. An experimental confirmation of such a state would therefore be an enormous advance in the understanding of the hyperon interaction.

Hypernuclei are known to be produced in heavy ion collisions already for a long time [35, 36, 37, 38], and the recent discoveries of the first anti-hypertriton [39] and antiα [40] has fueled the interest in the field of hypernuclear physics. One can discriminate two distinct mechanisms for hypercluster formation in heavy ion collisions. First, the absorption of hyperons in the spectator fragments of non central collisions [41, 42, 43, 44]. The hyper-systems obtained here are rather large and moderately excited, decaying into hyper fragments later on [44, 45].

Alternatively, (hyper-)nuclear clusters can emerge from the hot and dense fireball region of the reaction. In this scenario the cluster is formed at, or shortly after, the (chemical-)freeze out of the system. A general assumption is, that these clusters are then formed through coalescence of different newly produced hadrons [46]. To estimate the production yield we compare two distinct approaches. First we use the hadronic transport model DCM [47] to provide us with the phase space information of all hadrons produced in a heavy ion collision. This information then serves as an input for a coalescence prescription [48]. On the other hand it has been shown that thermal models consistently describe the production yields of hadrons (and nuclei [49]) very well. We can therefore assume thermal production of clusters from a fluid dynamical description to heavy ion collisions [50, 51]. Figures 1 and 2 show the results for di-baryon and hypernuclei yields in the mid-rapidity region of central, b &lt; 3 . 4 fm, heavy ion collisions at different beam energies. We compare results from the coalescence approach (symbols) with those from the fluid dynamical model (solid lines). It is clearly visible that large and multi-strange nuclear clusters exhibit a production maximum at a lower beam energy of E lab = 10 A GeV. This means that experiments at the future facilities in Dubna and at FAIR will be well suited for the search of these new and exotic clusters.

Λ-hyperons are produced mainly in the hot and dense fireball, however, they have a broad rapidity distribution, so that a certain fraction of them can be found in the spectator kinematical region. Some of these Λ-hyperons are captured by nuclear spectator fragments produced in peripheral collisions [42]. The production of large excited spectator residues is well established in relativistic heavy-ion collisions[55]. We expect that the capture of hyperons by spectators leads to their exitation and break-up into fragments [45]. Using the DCM [47] and UrQMD [56, 57] models we simulate peripheral (b=8 . 5 fm) relativistic nuclear reactions to calculate the local nucleon density ρ at the positions of the hyperons created. This local density is then used to determine the effective potential V Λ ( ρ ) = -α ρ ρ 0 [ 1 -β ( ρ ρ 0 ) 2 / 3 ] , parameterized in Ref. [58].

s32

<!-- image -->

Figure 1. Yields of di-baryons in the mid rapidity region ( | y | &lt; 0 . 5) of most central collisions of Pb+Pb/Au+Au. Thermal production in the UrQMD hybrid model (lines) is compared to coalescence results with the DCM model (symbols). Black lines and symbols depict the production of Λ's from both models, compared to data (grey crosses) from [52, 53, 54].

<!-- image -->

s108s97s98

Figure 2. Yields per event of different (hyper-)nuclei in the mid rapidity region ( | y | &lt; 0 . 5) of most central collisions of Pb+Pb/Au+Au. Shown are the results from the thermal production in the UrQMD hybrid model (lines) as compared to coalescence results with the DCM model (symbols).

Here α = 57 . 5 MeV, and β = 0 . 522. A Λ can be considered as absorbed when its kinetic energy, relative to the spectator, is smaller then the binding energy due to the nuclear density. Figure 3 shows the space coordinates of the absorption of Λ's, by the spectators, for different time intervals, calculated with the DCM transport model. One can clearly see how the Λ's are absorbed in the spectator region. In figure 4 we show the probabilities for the formation of a strange spectator residual for two different beam energies, calculated with the DCM and UrQMD transport model. Both models predict residuals with even 3 absorbed Λ's.

## 2. Charm Transport

Heavy quarks are an ideal probe for the QGP, mainly produced in the initial hard processes of a heavy ion collision. The most interesting observables are the nuclear modification factor, R AA , and the elliptic flow, v 2 . The measured large elliptic flow, v 2 , of open heavy-flavor mesons indicate a high degree of thermalization of the heavy quarks with the bulk medium. A quantitative analysis of the degree of thermalization of heavy-quark degrees of freedom may lead to an understanding of the transport properties of QCD. We use a hybrid model, consisting of the UrQMD model [57, 56] and a full (3+1)-dimensional ideal hydrodynamical model [62, 63] to simulate the bulk medium created in an ultra relativistic nuclear collision (for alternative approaches see [64, 65, 66]). The heavy-quark propagation in the medium is described by a relativistic Langevin approach [67]. Within this framework we use different drag and diffusion coefficients of heavy flavors on the heavy-quark observables and compare the results with the experimental data from the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) and the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). To make comparisons to experiment we coalesce a light quark with a heavy

s32

Figure 3. Coordinates of Λ absorption in the X-Z plane. The number of hyperons n Λ (per 2 · 10 5 events) captured in the participant and spectator zones during these intervals is noted on the right side.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4. Formation probability of strange spectator residuals (top), and their mean mass numbers (bottom) versus the number of captured Λ hyperons (H), calculated with DCM and UrQMD model for p + Au and Au + Au collisions with energy of 2 GeV (left), and 20 GeV per nucleon (right).

<!-- image -->

quark [68]. Figures 5 through 8 show our results on the v 2 and R AA of electrons from heavy quark decays for two different beam energies. One can see that our model is in rather good agreement with the data when a late decoupling criterion is chosen.

## 3. Summary

We have shown two important aspects of present and future experimental programs dedicated on the study of strange and heavy flavor physics. The study of hypernuclei and multi strange clusters can deepen our understanding of hyperon interactions as well as hadron formation in heavy ion collisions. Charm quarks on the other hand can serve as an important probe for the hot and dense QGP phase of the collision and are now used to extract information on the transport properties of the QCD medium.

## 4. Acknowledgements

This work has been supported by GSI and Hessian initiative for excellence (LOEWE) through the Helmholtz International Center for FAIR (HIC for FAIR). T. Lang gratefully acknowledges support from the Helmholtz Research School on Quark Matter Studies. I.M. acknowledges partial support from grant NS-215.2012.2 (Russia). The computational resources were provided by the LOEWE Frankfurt Center for Scientific Computing (LOEWE-CSC).

Figure 5. Elliptic flow v 2 of electrons from heavy quark decays in Au+Au collisions at √ s NN = 200 GeV using a coalescence mechanism, compared to data [59]. We use a rapidity cut of | y | &lt; 0 . 35.

<!-- image -->

Figure 7. Flow v 2 of D-mesons in Pb+Pb collisions at √ s NN = 2 . 76 TeV compared to data from the ALICE experiment [60]. A rapidity cut of | y | &lt; 0 . 35 is employed.

<!-- image -->

## References

- [1] Koch P, Muller B and Rafelski J 1986 Phys. Rept. 142 167
- [2] Rafelski J 1982 Phys. Rept. 88 331
- [3] Rafelski J and Muller B 1982 Phys. Rev. Lett. 48 1066 [Erratum-ibid. 56 2334].
- [4] Biro T and Zimanyi J 1982 Phys. Lett. B 113 6
- [5] Adams J et al [STAR Collaboration] 2005 Nucl. Phys. A 757 102
- [6] Back B B et al 2005 Nucl. Phys. A 757 28
- [7] Arsene I et al [BRAHMS Collaboration] 2005 Nucl. Phys. A 757 1
- [8] Gazdzicki M et al [NA49 Collaboration] 2004 J. Phys. G 30 S701
- [9] Gazdzicki M and Gorenstein M I 1999 Acta Phys. Polon. B 30 2705
- [10] Bellwied R, Borsanyi S, Fodor Z, Katz S D and Ratti C 2013 Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 202302
- [11] Becattini F et al 2013 Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 082302
- [12] Milano L et al [ALICE Collaboration] 2013 Nucl. Phys. A904-905 2013 531c
- [13] Bass S A and Dumitru A Phys. Rev. C 61 064909
- [14] Petran M, Letessier J, Petracek V and Rafelski J 2013 Phys. Rev. C 88 034907
- [15] Beane S R et al. 2011 Mod. Phys. Lett. A 26 2587
- [16] Inoue T et al [HAL QCD Collaboration] 2011 Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 162002
- [17] Buchoff M I, Luu T C and Wasem J 2012 Phys. Rev. D 85 094511
- [18] Bleicher M et al 1998 Nucl. Phys. A 638 391
- [19] Karpenko I A, Bleicher M, Huovinen P and Petersen H 2013 arXiv:1310.0702 [nucl-th]
- [20] Petersen H, Li Q, Zhu X and Bleicher M 2006 Phys. Rev. C 74 064908
- [21] Li Q F, Steinheimer J, Petersen H, Bleicher M and St¨ ocker H 2009 Phys. Lett. B 674 111
- [22] Vogel S, Gossiaux P B, Werner K and Aichelin J 2011 Phys. Rev. Lett. 107 032302
- [23] Lang T and Bleicher M 2013 Phys. Rev. C 87 024907
- [24] Werner K, Bleicher M, Guiot B, Karpenko I and Pierog T 2013 arXiv:1307.4379 [nucl-th]
- [25] Bozek P, Broniowski W and Torrieri G 2013 Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 172303
- [26] Becattini F, Csernai L and Wang D J 2013 Phys. Rev. C 88 034905
- [27] Torrieri G, Vogel S and B¨ auchle B 2013 Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 012301
- [28] Agakishiev G et al. [HADES Collaboration] 2011 Eur. Phys. J. A 47 21
- [29] Senger P et al Lect. Notes Phys. 814 681
- [30] Bodmer A R 1971 Phys. Rev. D 4 1601
- [31] Jaffe R L 1977 Phys. Rev. Lett. 38 195
- [32] Beane S R et al [NPLQCD Collaboration] 2011 Phys. Rev. Lett. 106 162001
- [33] Beane S R et al 2011 Mod. Phys. Lett. A 26 2587
- [34] Beane S R et al [NPLQCD Collaboration] 2012 Phys. Rev. D 85 054511
- [35] Braun-Munzinger P and Stachel J 1995 J. Phys. G 21 L17
- [36] Ahn J K et al. 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 132504
- [37] Takahashi H et al 2001 Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 212502
- [38] Andronic A, Braun-Munzinger P, Stachel J and St¨ ocker H 2011 Phys. Lett. B 697 203
- [39] STAR Collaboration 2010 Science 328 58
- [40] STAR Collaboration 2011 Nature 473 353
- [41] Ko C M 1985 Phys. Rev. C 32 326
- [42] Gaitanos T, Lenske H and Mosel U 2008 Phys. Lett. B 663 197
- [43] Gaitanos T, Lenske H and Mosel U 2009 Phys. Lett. B 675 297
- [44] Botvina A S et al 2011 Phys. Rev. C 84 064904
- [45] Botvina A S and Pochodzalla J 2007 Phys. Rev. C 76 024909
- [46] Scheibl R and Heinz U W 1999 Phys. Rev. C 59 1585
- [47] Toneev V D and Gudima K K 1983 Nucl. Phys. A 400 173C
- [48] Steinheimer J et al 2012 Phys. Lett. B 714 85
- [49] Andronic A, Braun-Munzinger P and Stachel J 2009 Phys. Lett. B 673 142
- [50] Steinheimer J et al 2009 Phys. Lett. B 676 126
- [51] Petersen H, Steinheimer J, Burau G, Bleicher M and St¨ ocker H 2008 Phys. Rev. C 78 044901
- [52] Ahmad S et al 1996 Phys. Lett. B 382 35
- [53] Mischke A et al [NA49 Collaboration] 2002 J. Phys. G 28 1761
- [54] Alt C et al [NA49 Collaboration] 2008 Phys. Rev. C 78 034918
- [55] Botvina A S et al 1995 Nucl. Phys. A 584 737
- [56] Bleicher M et al 1999 J. Phys. G 25 1859
- [57] Bass S A et al 1989 Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 41 255 [Prog. Part. Nucl. Phys. 41 225 ]
- [58] Ahmad I, Mian M and Rahman Khan M Z 1985 Phys. Rev. C 31 1590
- [59] Adare A et al [PHENIX Collaboration] 2011 Phys. Rev. C 84 044905
- [60] Abelev B et al [ALICE Collaboration] 2013 Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 102301
- [61] Abelev B et al [ALICE Collaboration] 2012 JHEP 1209 112
- [62] Rischke D H, Bernard S and Maruhn J A 1995 Nucl. Phys. A 595 346
- [63] Rischke D H, Pursun Y and Maruhn J A 1995 Nucl. Phys. A 595 383
- [64] Uphoff J, Fochler O, Xu Z and Greiner C 2010 Phys. Rev. C 82 044906
- [65] Gossiaux P B, Aichelin J, Gousset T and Guiho V 2010 J. Phys. G 37 094019
- [66] Linnyk O et al 2013 Phys. Rev. C 87 014905
- [67] Rapp R and van Hees H 2010 Quark Gluon Plasma 4, World Scientific 111
- [68] Lang T, van Hees H, Steinheimer J and Bleicher M 2012 arXiv:1211.6912 [hep-ph]

Figure 6. Nuclear modification factor R AA of electrons from heavy quark decays in Au+Au collisions at √ s NN = 200 GeV using a coalescence mechanism, compared to data [59]. We use a rapidity cut of | y | &lt; 0 . 35.

<!-- image -->

Figure 8. R AA of D-mesons in Pb Pb collisions at √ s NN = 2 . 76 TeV compared to experimental data from ALICE [61]. A rapidity cut of | y | &lt; 0 . 35 is employed.

<!-- image -->