## EO-polymer waveguide based high dynamic range EM wave sensors

Che-Yun Lin a , Alan X. Wang b , Xingyu Zhang a , Beom Suk Lee a , and Ray T. Chen* a a Microelectronic Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin,  10100 Burnet Rd, Bldg 160MER, Austin, TX-78758, USA b Oregon State University, 3097 Kelley Engineering Center Corvallis, OR 97331-5501, USA

## ABSTRACT

In this paper, we present the design and experimental demonstration of a high dynamic range electric field sensor based on electro-optic (EO) polymer directional coupler waveguides that offers the strong and ultra-fast EO response of EO polymer. As compared to conventional photonic electric field sensors, our directional coupler waveguide design offers several advantages such as bias-free operation, highly linear measurement response up to 70dB, and a wide electric field detection range from 16.7V/m to 750kV/m at a frequency of 1GHz.

Keywords: photonic sensors, electro-optic polymer, polymer waveguides.

*raychen@uts.cc.utexas.edu; phone 1-(512) 471-7035; Address: 10100 burnet Road, Bldg 160MER, Austin, TX-78758

## 1. INTRODUCTION

There has been rapidly increasing interest in electric field (E-field) sensors during past decades [1-4]. Electro-magnetic (EM) wave measurement has played a crucial role in various scientific and technical areas, including process control, Efield  monitoring  in  medical  apparatuses,  ballistic  control,  electromagnetic  compatibility  measurements,  microwave integrated  circuit  testing,  and  detection  of  directional  energy  weapon  attack.  Conventional  EM  wave  measurement systems use active metallic probes, which can disturb the EM waves to be measured and make the sensor very sensitive to electromagnetic noises. Photonic E-field sensors exhibit significant advantages with respect to the electronic ones due to  their  smaller  size,  lighter  weight,  higher  sensitivity,  and  extremely  broad  bandwidth.  Because  of  these  exclusive merits, photonic E-field sensors based on integrated optical devices and optical fibers have emerged in the last ten years [2, 3, 5, 6]. These photonic E-field sensors using Mach-Zehnder (MZ) interferometer or ring resonator, however, offer very limited spurious free dynamic range (SFDR) that are not capable of high fidelity measurement of the EM waves. For  example,  the  inherent  nonlinear  distortion  resulted  from  the  sinusoidal  transfer  curve  make  the  linearity  of  a conventional MZ interferometer only to be about 70% [7], which is too small for the EM wave measurement with large dynamic  range.  Another  important  limiting  factor  is  that  MZ  interferometer  designs  are  bias  sensitive.  The  intrinsic sinusoidal optical response to the driving voltage requires the device to be biased at the half power point to achieve the best  measurement  linearity.  The  optimum  bias  point  could  drift  slowly  due  to  charging  effects  [8],  changes  in  the ambient environment such as the variation of temperature, optical power, and wavelength shifts [9]. This characteristic makes the bias control for MZ interferometer a critical issue, which requires additional bias control circuitry that will inevitably  increase  the  complexity  of  the  device.  By  contrast,  the  operation  of  a  Y-fed  directional  coupler  is automatically set at 3dB point, which provides bias free operation. Also, the optical response to the driving voltage can be tailored to achieve very high linearity. These features make Y-fed directional coupler a better candidate for designing a high dynamic range E-field sensor.

## 2. DESIGN

In this paper, we present the design and experimental results of a photonic E-field sensor based on domain inverted E-O polymer  Y-fed  directional  coupler  for  electromagnetic  wave  detection.  The  Y-fed  directional  coupler  was  originally proposed  as  a  linear  E-O  modulator  for  RF  photonic  communication  system  to  achieve  a  large  SFDR  [10].  In  the following  years,  more  in-depth  theoretical  investigation  was  published  on  how  the  linearity  of  a  Y-fed  directional coupler can be improved by optimizing the lengths and number of the domain inverted sections [11], and experimental results  with  significantly  suppressed  intermodulation  distortion  signals  and  enhanced  SFDR  were  successfully

Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/06/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms demonstrated [12, 13]. We follow the same design principle as our previous work on E-O polymer linear modulator in this paper, but with the removal of the bottom and top electrode to sense the electric field in the free space.

The schematic of  the  photonic  E-field  sensor  is  shown  in  Figure  1(a).  One  input  waveguide  branches  into  a  pair  of symmetric waveguides that are optically coupled with each other. Because of the symmetry, equal optical power with the same phase is launched into the coupled waveguides and, hence, the operating point is automatically set at the 3 dB point without any bias voltage. Phase modulation ( Δβ ) reversal can be realized by poling the E-O polymer waveguide with a lumped electrode that  zigzags  from  one  waveguide  to  the  neighboring  waveguide  in  the  two  adjacent  domains.  This configuration  creates  an  equivalent Δβ reversal  without  domain-inverted  poling  of  the  EO  polymer  waveguide.  The schematic of the cross sectional view shown in Figure 1 (b). After removing the poling electrode, the uniform electric field from free space (far field pattern with wavelength much longer than the E-field sensor dimension) will induce equal phase modulation with reversed polarity. The key design parameters such as the E-O polymer waveguide dimension and the length of the inverted domains exactly follow those in [12, 13].

Figure 1. (a) Schematic of the photonic electric field sensor based on domain inverted E-O polymer Y-fed directional coupler (b) Cross sectional view of the directional coupler waveguide with equivalent domain inversion.

<!-- image -->

## 3. DEVICE FABRICATION

The photonic E-field sensors are fabricated on silicon wafer carrier. The bottom cladding polymer (UV-15LV) is spin coated and cured to obtain a 3.5 μ m film. Ridge waveguide structures are formed by etching 0.42 μ m × 5 μ m trench using reactive  ion  etching  (RIE),  and  then  followed  by  spin-coating  a  1.8 μ m-thick  EO  polymer  layer  (excluding  the  ridge depth). The E-O polymer core layer is made by doping AJ-CKL1 chromophore into amorphous polycarbonate (APC) with 25% weight percentage and then dissolved in cyclopentanone. The solution phase E-O polymer can be spun-on to any substrate and has demonstrated excellent capability to fill narrow trenches [14, 15], which offers great processing simplicity. In the next step, another polymer layer (UFC-170A) is coated on top of the E-O polymer layer and cured to serve as the top cladding. Electrodes for poling are patterned by photolithography, metal deposition, image reversal and lift  off.  During  the  poling  process,  the  sample  is  heated  up  to  the  glass  transition  temperature  (T g )  of  E-O  polymer (Tg=135°C) under  a  strong  DC  poling  electric  field  (100V/ μ m)  between  the  poling  electrode  and  the  bottom  silicon substrate to align the dipole moment of the E-O polymer molecules. Upon reaching the glass transition temperature, the heater is switched off and the sample is naturally cooled down to room temperature under the same DC electric field. This process freezes the aligned E-O polymer molecules, which preserves electro-optic response of the E-O polymer film without the presence of poling electric field. After poling, the poling electrode is removed by metal etchant. Finally, the photonic E-field sensor devices are diced and polished to for characterization.

## 4. DEVICE CHARACTERIZATION

The fabricated photonic E-field sensors are tested under a microstrip transmission line that can generate electric field at RF frequency in a direction that is perpendicular to the directional coupler waveguides. The characteristic impedance of

Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/06/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms the microstrip line is experimentally measured to be 55.6-j5.4 without the insertion of the EM wave sensor and 55- j4.9 with the insertion of the EM wave sensor at 1GHz. The testing setup is shown in Figure 2. The input optical signal coming  from  a  tunable  laser  source  with  TM  polarization  is  butt-coupled  to  the  directional  waveguide  using  a polarization maintaining single mode fiber. The output optical signal is collected using a single mode fiber at one branch of the directional waveguide. The measured insertion loss is around 21dB, which corresponds to 6dB propagation loss and 7.5dB/facet coupling loss, respectively. When the RF electrical signal is guided on the microstrip line, it generates electrical field that oscillates in the vertical direction that can modulate the refractive index of the E-O polymer. Similar to  an  electro-optic  modulator  for  optical  communication  application,  this  modulation  in  refractive  index  induces  the modulation of the output optical signal, which can be detected with a high-speed avalanche photodiode and analyzed with a microwave spectrum analyzer. It is worth noting that the insertion of the EM wave sensor can slightly enhance the electric field by ~9%. The uniformity of the electric field under the microstrip line is almost unaffected. Also, due to the difference of the dielectric constant between polymer ( ε r~3.2) and air ( ε r=1), the electric field in the polymer layers is ~31% of that in the air.

The disturbance of electric field profile under a microstrip line (MSL) with the insertion of the E-field sensor is also studied.  Simulation  results  in  COMSOL  Multiphysics  show  the  insertion  of  the  electric  field  sensor  does  alter  the amplitude of local electric field slightly. Because the thickness of the electric field sensor is small compared to the height of the MSL, the electric field in the air-filled region under the MSL is slightly enhanced by ~9%. The uniformity of the electric  field  under  the  MSL  is  almost  unaffected  as  shown  in  Figure  3.  Also,  due  to  the  difference  of  the  dielectric constant between polymer ( ε r~3.2) and air ( ε r=1), the electric field in the polymer layers would be ~31% of that in the air. This is explained with the simulated potential and electric field distribution shown in Figure 3.

In our experiment, we use 1GHz RF wave as the simulant electric field. The photonic E-field sensors are expected to sense EM waves with much higher frequency in free space (limited by the silicon substrate absorption); however, the microstrip line that we use in our testing setup has significant limited bandwidth due to the skin effect and dielectric absorption.  The  response  from  the  photonic  E-field  sensor  is  shown  in  Figure  4  with  20dBm  RF  input  power.  The photonic E-field sensor shows optical response at the same frequency with 35dB signal to noise ratio (SNR).

Figure 2. Testing setup for the photonic E-field sensor with the microstrip line that generates vertical electric field, polarization maintaining single mode fiber for input coupling, and single mode fiber for output coupling. The microstrip line

<!-- image -->

Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/06/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms is connected to a RF source with an SMA cable on one end and terminated with a 50ohm terminator on the other end to avoid reflection.

Figure 3. Electric field and potential distribution under the microstrip line used without (a) and with (b) the insertion of or electric field sensor. The contour plot shows the electric potential distribution. The electric field is color-coded and the arrows show its direction.

<!-- image -->

To test the sensitivity of the photonic E-field sensor, the input RF power is gradually decreased until the sensing signal from the sensor is buried under the noise level. The signal intensity of the photonic E-field sensor is plotted against the input electric field as shown in Figure 5. The electric field E inside the microstrip line can be calculated from the input RF  power  (Pin)  [16]: E u r = 2 ⋅ P in ⋅ Z 0 ,  where  Z0  is  the  characteristic  impedance  of  the  microstrip  line.  The measurement shows that the minimum detectable electric field is found to be 16.7V/m. In our experiment, we measured the electric field up to 550V/m. This is NOT the upper sensing limit of sensor, but simply due to the fact that our RF power source has a maximum output of 20dBm. The variation of the measured curve in Figure 5 is attributed to the instability of optical coupling and laser power fluctuation.

Figure 4. The response of the photonic E-field sensor with 20dBm RF input power at 1GHz.

<!-- image -->

Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/06/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms In order to determine the maximum electric field the device can sense, we measured another photonic E-field on the same chip without removing the poling electrode on top. By this means, we can apply the driving voltage across a very narrow gap (~8 μ m) to generate a much stronger electric field. The photonic E-field sensor shows over modulation at 6V, which corresponding to an electric field intensity of 750kV/m. Taking consideration of the sensible electric field E from

Figure 5. Response from the photonic E-field sensor as a function of the electric field.

<!-- image -->

16.7V/m to 750kV/m, and the Poynting vector of the EM wave is given by S = 1 2 ε 0 ε r cE 2 ,  this  corresponds  to  a

power range from 1.04W/m 2 to 2.09×10 9 W/m 2 , which is as large as 93dB dynamic range. To measure the spurious free measurement range of the photonic E-field sensor, we use two tone RF signals (100kHz and 105kHz) to drive the sensor with top electrode. It shows the maximum noise free dynamic range of 70dB, which is shown in Figure 6. This result would be of high significance for high fidelity measurement of the EM waves.

Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/06/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms

Figure 6. The photonic E-field sensor shows a noise free dynamic range of 70dB.

<!-- image -->

## 5. SUMMARY

In  conclusion,  we  have  successfully  demonstrated  electric  field  sensor  based  on  domain  inverted  electro-optic  (E-O) polymer Y-fed directional coupler for electromagnetic wave detection. The sensor can detect electric field from 16.7V/m to  750kV/m, corresponding to EM waves with large dynamic range of power from 1.04W/m 2 to  2.09×10 9 W/m 2 .  The fabricated photonic E-field sensor also achieves a noise free dynamic range of 70dB. Further optimization of E-field sensor  through  fine  tuning  the  fabrication  processes,  improving  the  poling  efficiency,  and  reducing  the  optical waveguide loss should allow better performance in sensitivity.

## 6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors would like to acknowledge the U.S. ARMY Space &amp; Missile Defense Command/Army Forces Strategic Command  (USASMDC/ARSTRAT)  for  supporting  this  work  under  the  SBIR  grant  W9113M-10-P-0076  that  is monitored by Dr. Mark Rader.

## REFERENCES

- [1] P. Drexler, and P. Fiala, 'Methods for High-Power EM Pulse Measurement,' IEEE Sensors Journal , 7(7), 10061011 (2007).
- [2] N. Kuwabara, K. Tajima, R. Kobayashi et al. , 'Development and analysis of electric field sensor using LiNbO3 optical modulator,' IEEE Transactions on Electromagnetic Compatibility , 34(4), 391-396 (1992).
- [3] S. C. Rashleigh, 'Magnetic-field sensing with a single-mode fiber,' Optics Letters , 6(1), 19-21 (1981).
- [4] J. Kanwisher, and K. Lawson, 'Electromagnetic flow sensors,' Limnology and Oceanography , 20(2), 174-182 (1975).
- [5] S. S. Sriram, and S. A. Kingsley, "Sensitivity enhancements to photonic electric field sensor." 5435, 143-152.

Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/06/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms

- [6] K. Tajima, R. Kobayashi, N. Kuwabara et al. , 'Optical Fibers and Devices. Development of Optical Isotropic EField Sensor Operating More than 10GHz Using Mach-Zehnder Interferometers,' IEICE Trans Electron , 85(4), 961-968 (2002).
- [7] E. M. Zolotov, and R. Tavlykaev, 'Integrated optical Mach-Zehnder modulator with a linearized modulation characteristic,' Quantum Electronics , 18(3), 401-402 (1988).
- [8] R. L. Jungerman, C. Johnsen, D. J. McQuate et al. , 'High-speed optical modulator for application in instrumentation,' IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology , 8(9), 1363-1370 (1990).
- [9] R. A. Becker, 'Circuit effect in LiNbO3 channel-waveguide modulators,' Optics Letters , 10(8), 417-419 (1985).
- [10]  R. F. Tavlykaev, and R. V. Ramaswamy, 'Highly linear Y-fed directional coupler modulator with low intermodulation distortion,' IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology , 17(2), 282-291 (1999).
- [11]  X. Wang, B.-S. Lee, C.-Y. Lin et al. , 'Electroptic Polymer Linear Modulators Based on Multiple-Domain Y-Fed Directional Coupler,' Lightwave Technology, Journal of , 28(11), 1670-1676 (2010).
- [12]  B. Lee, C. Y. Lin, A. X. Wang et al. , 'Linearized electro-optic modulators based on a two-section Y-fed directional coupler,' Applied Optics , 49(33), 6485-6488 (2010).
- [13]  B. Lee, C. Lin, X. Wang et al. , 'Bias-free electro-optic polymer-based two-section Y-branch waveguide modulator with 22 dB linearity enhancement,' Optics Letters , 34(21), 3277-3279 (2009).
- [14]  X. Wang, C.-Y. Lin, S. Chakravarty et al. , 'Effective in-device r33 of 735pm/V on electro-optic polymer infiltrated silicon photonic crystal slot waveguides,' Optics Letters , 36(6), 882-884 (2011).
- [15]  C.-Y. Lin, X. Wang, S. Chakravarty et al. , 'Electro-optic polymer infiltrated silicon photonic crystal slot waveguide modulator with 23 dB slow light enhancement,' Applied Physics Letters , 97(9), 093304 (2010).
- [16]  K. C. Gupta, and I. J. Bahl, 'Microstrip lines and slotlines,' Microstrip lines and slotlines, (1996).

Downloaded From: http://proceedings.spiedigitallibrary.org/ on 03/06/2014 Terms of Use: http://spiedl.org/terms