## On the Generalized Degrees of Freedom of the Noncoherent Interference Channel

Joyson Sebastian, Suhas Diggavi

## Abstract

We study the generalized degrees of freedom (gDoF) of the block-fading noncoherent 2 -user interference channel (IC) with a coherence time of T symbol durations and symmetric fading statistics. We demonstrate that a standard training-based scheme for the noncoherent IC is suboptimal in several regimes. We study and analyze several alternate schemes: the first is a new noncoherent scheme using rate-splitting. We also consider a scheme that treats interference-as-noise (TIN) and a time division multiplexing (TDM) scheme. We show that a standard training-based scheme for the noncoherent IC is outperformed by one of these schemes in several regimes: our results demonstrate that in the very weak interference regime, the TIN scheme is the best; in the strong interference regime, the TDM scheme and the noncoherent rate-splitting scheme give better performance; in other cases either of the TIN, TDM or noncoherent rate-splitting scheme could be preferred. We also study the noncoherent IC with feedback and propose another noncoherent rate-splitting scheme. Again for the feedback case, our results demonstrate that a standard training-based scheme can be outperformed by other schemes.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Noncoherent wireless channels where neither the transmitter nor the receiver knows the channel [1], [2], [3], [4], [5] have been studied for point-to-point communication systems. To the best of our knowledge, the noncoherent interference channel (IC) has not been studied from an information theoretic viewpoint. In this paper, we consider the noncoherent 2 -user IC with symmetric statistics and study the generalized degrees of freedom (gDoF) region as a first step towards understanding its capacity region.

Our model is illustrated in Figure 1. We have two transmitters, each with its own intended receiver. The transmitted signals are multiplied by random fading channels. Each receiver receives a sum of signals from both transmitters and with additive white Gaussian noise. In our model, the power P at transmitters is set to be equal to the average signal-to-noise ratio 1 ( SNR ), the direct channel links are set to be of unit power, and the additive noise at the receivers are also set to be of unit power. We consider the symmetric IC interfering links with average power equal to the average interference-to-noise ratio ( INR ) with INR = SNR α -1 . The parameter α (interference level) is used to capture the relative strength of the interference at the receiver:

This work was supported in part by NSF grant 1514531, UC-NL grant LFR-18-548554 and a gift from Guru Krupa Foundation.

Figure 1. The channel model without feedback.

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The interference level is typically less than one. When α &lt; 1 / 2 , we have the very weak interference regime. When 1 / 2 &lt; α &lt; 1 , we have the weak interference regime. For mathematical completeness, we also consider α &gt; 1 which is the strong interference regime. We consider a block fading model where the channels remain constant for a coherence time of T symbol durations and hence we model our system with vectors of size T . We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the X i , Y i , Z i with i ∈ { 1 , 2 } are transmitted symbols, received symbols and noise at receivers respectively. The variables X i , Y i , Z i with i ∈ { 1 , 2 } are 1 × T vectors. The noise Z 1 , Z 2 are independent of each other and their realizations are i.i.d. across time. The entries of the vector Z i are i.i.d. according to CN (0 , 1) . The fading channels are indicated by scalar random variables g ij with i, j ∈ { 1 , 2 } . The realizations of g ij for any fixed ( i, j ) , i, j ∈ { 1 , 2 } are i.i.d.

1 We use the abbreviation SNR for the average signal-to-noise ratio in the context of fading channels and not for the (instantaneous) signal-to-noise ratio. Similarly, we use the abbreviation INR for the average interference-to-noise ratio.

for i ∈ { 1 , 2 } .

We also consider a feedback model (Figure 2), where each receiver reliably feeds back the received symbols 2 to the corresponding transmitter. We consider the feedback of symbols in blocks of T : the symbols are fed back after all the symbols in a coherence period of T are received. However, the results that we derive are valid even if the feedback is performed after receiving each symbol.

The main metric used in this paper to evaluate the performance of achievability schemes is the gDoF. It is desirable to have an exact capacity characterization, but this is unknown even for the coherent IC except for some regimes [7], [8]. For the noncoherent case, the exact capacity characterization is open even for point-to-point channels. Hence, we give a characterization for the noncoherent IC in terms of the asymptotic approximation of the

2 The IC with rate limited feedback is considered in [6] where outputs are quantized and fed back. Our schemes can also be extended for such cases.

Figure 2. The channel model with feedback.

<!-- image -->

across time, and the realizations for different ( i, j ) are independent. We consider the case with symmetric fading statistics g 11 ∼ g 22 ∼ CN (0 , 1) , g 12 ∼ g 21 ∼ CN (0 , INR ) , INR = SNR α -1 . Neither the receivers nor the transmitters have knowledge of any of the realizations of g ij , but the channel statistics are known to all the receivers and transmitters. The average power constraint on the transmitted signals gives

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

capacity region defined by the gDoF region. For this, we consider a series of channels with a fixed interference level α and letting SNR , INR → ∞ . Let C ( SNR , INR ) denote the capacity region of the channel and let ˜ D C be a scaled version of C ( SNR , INR ) given by ˜ D C ( SNR , INR ) = { ( R 1 / log ( SNR ) , R 2 / log ( SNR )) : ( R 1 , R 2 ) ∈ C ( SNR , INR ) } . Following [7], we define the generalized degrees of freedom region as the asymptote of the scaled capacity region:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In other words, D C ( α ) contains elements ( d 1 , d 2 ) iff ( d 1 , d 2 ) lies within ˜ D C ( SNR , INR ) in the asymptotic case of SNR , INR →∞ with fixed α . This can be formally stated as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If we have any rate region R ( SNR , INR ) , we can similarly define a prelog region D R ( α ) in the following manner:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

An achievable prelog region is the prelog region derived from an achievable rate region. Just as the capacity region is the maximal achievable rate region, so the gDoF region is the maximal achievable prelog region 3 . Our scaling process in the above definitions not only scales the input power, but also scales the interfering link simultaneously to obtain an asymptotic region that is dependent on the interference level. If we scale only the transmit power P , we would just obtain an asymptotic region that corresponds to the case with the interfering signal at the same strength as the desired signal at the receivers, and we would not be able to capture the effect of different interference levels. This method of characterization was first used in [7] to characterize the asymptotic behavior of the capacity region of a 2-user symmetric IC for high SNR. In [7], the received signal strengths through the four links of the IC were set to scale as SNR , SNR α , SNR α , SNR . The method of scaling the received signal strengths on different links with different SNR exponents to obtain the gDoF region is also used in other works like [9], [10], [11], [5]. In this paper, we also assume that T ≥ 2 , since if T = 1 , the gDoF region of the IC is null following the result for the noncoherent multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) channel [12], [13], [11].

3 For point-to-point channels, the prelog of an achievable rate R from a scheme can be defined as lim SNR →∞ R/ log ( SNR ) and the DoF is the maximal achievable prelog.

A standard training-based scheme estimates the channel at the receiver using known training symbols sent from the transmitter and uses the estimate to operate a coherent decoder. Such a scheme is known to be DoF optimal for the noncoherent single-user MIMO channel [3]. A natural question to ask is whether operating the noncoherent IC with such a standard trainingbased scheme achieves the gDoF region. The main observation in this paper is that we can improve the prelog region of the standard training-based coherent schemes in several regimes for the noncoherent IC.

We provide the coding schemes and analysis for the following schemes.

- 1) We develop a noncoherent version of the simplified Han-Kobayashi scheme from [7] for the 2-user IC, where the transmitters use superposition coding, rate-splitting their messages into common and private parts based on the INR. Each receiver noncoherently decodes its own private message and the common messages from both users.
- 2) Similar to the previous scheme, another noncoherent scheme is developed for the 2-user IC with feedback extending the coherent scheme from [14]. This scheme involves B blocks. In the first block, each transmitter splits its own message into common and private parts and then sends a codeword superimposing the common and private messages. In subsequent blocks, the common message from the other user is decoded at the transmitter using the feedback. Each transmitter generates new common and private messages, conditioned on the previous common messages from both users. After a total of B blocks, each receiver performs backward decoding. Each decoding step in this scheme is performed noncoherently.
- 3) A training-based scheme is analyzed for the noncoherent IC without feedback. The first two symbols in every coherence period of T symbols is used for estimating the channels 4 . The rest of the symbols are used for transmitting data. The part of data transmission is performed according to a rate-splitting scheme [7] for the coherent IC: the transmitters use

4 As we are considering high SNR behavior, one training symbol is sufficient for each link.

superposition coding, rate-splitting their messages into common and private parts based on the INR. Each receiver uses the channel estimates and decodes its own private message and the common messages from both users.

- 4) A training-based scheme is analyzed for the noncoherent IC with feedback. The first two symbols in every coherence period of T symbols is used for estimating the channels. The rest of the symbols are used for transmitting data. The part of data transmission is performed according to a rate-splitting scheme [14] for the coherent IC with feedback. This is similar to the scheme 2) above that we described for the noncoherent case, except that the decoding is performed coherently using the estimated channel values.
- 5) We consider a scheme which treats interference-as-noise (TIN) where each receiver treats the symbols from the other user as interference. The first symbol in every coherence period is used for estimating the channels. Each user estimates its own channel while treating the other user as interference.
- 6) We also consider a time division multiplexing (TDM) between single-user transmissions with equal time-sharing between the users. Alternate blocks of length T are used by alternate users. For each user, the first symbol in the block of length T is used for estimating its channel.

The TIN and TDM schemes are implemented using one training symbol in each coherence period, as there is only one channel coefficient to be estimated for each user. The TIN and TDM schemes can also be implemented in a noncoherent manner without training symbols, but it can be verified that the prelog performance remains the same. We evaluate the achievable prelog region with the above schemes and compare the performance. Our main results on the prelog of the noncoherent IC are illustrated in Figure 3 and Figure 4.

When the INR is much lower than the SNR in the absence of feedback, the TIN scheme is better than other schemes that decode part of the interfering message. In contrast, for the case when the channel is perfectly known, the TIN scheme has the same performance as a rate-splitting scheme without feedback when the INR is much lower than the SNR. However, for the noncoherent case, rate-splitting schemes without feedback have lower prelog. We believe that this is due to the added uncertainty in the interfering link along with the uncertainty of the interfering message to be decoded. Due to this added uncertainty, it also is better to avoid interference using the TDM scheme when the interference level α is close to 1.

In general, the noncoherent schemes perform better than the standard training-based schemes.

<!-- image -->

,

Figure 3. Symmetric achievable prelog of the noncoherent IC for coherence time T = 4 .

<!-- image -->

,

Figure 4. Symmetric achievable prelog of the noncoherent IC for coherence time T = 6 .

The schemes with feedback have larger prelog than the corresponding schemes without feedback. With feedback, the performance of noncoherent rate-splitting schemes is in general better than the TIN scheme. However, the TDM scheme is still the best around α = 1 .

We also provide some numerical results to show that our results can provide improvements in the rates compared to the standard training-based schemes at finite SNRs, the rate-SNR points are given in Table III on page 15.

## A. Related Work

To the best of our knowledge, the capacity of the noncoherent interference channel has not received much attention in the literature. Hence, we give an overview of the existing works on noncoherent wireless networks and the related work on the interference channels. The noncoherent wireless model for the MIMO channel was studied by Marzetta and Hochwald [1]. In their model, neither the receiver nor the transmitter knows the fading coefficients and the fading gains remain constant within a block of length T symbol periods. Across the blocks, the fading gains are independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) according to a Rayleigh distribution. The capacity behavior at high SNR for the noncoherent MIMO channel was studied by Zheng and Tse in [3]. The main conclusion of that work was that a standard training-based scheme was DoF optimal for the noncoherent MIMO channels, a message distinct from our conclusions in this paper for the noncoherent IC. Some works have specifically studied the case with T = 1 [12], [2], [13]. In [2], it was demonstrated that for T = 1 , the capacity is achieved by a distribution with a finite number of mass points, but the number of mass points grows with the SNR. The capacity for the case with T = 1 was shown to behave double-logarithmically in [13].

There have been other works that studied noncoherent relay channels. The noncoherent single relay network was studied in [4], where the authors considered identical link strengths and unit coherence time. They showed that under certain conditions on the fading statistics, the relay does not increase the capacity at high SNR. In [15], similar observations were made for the noncoherent MIMO full-duplex single relay channel with block-fading. The authors showed that Grassmanian signaling can achieve the DoF without using the relay. Also for certain regimes, decode-and-forward with Grassmanian signaling was shown to approximately achieve the capacity at high SNR.

The above works considered a DoF framework for the noncoherent model in the sense that for high SNR, the link strengths are not significantly different, i.e., the links scale with the same SNR-exponent. The gDoF framework for the noncoherent MIMO channel was considered in [16], [11] and it was shown that several insights from the DoF framework may not carry on to the gDoF framework. It was shown that a standard training-based scheme is not gDoF optimal and that all antennas may have to be used for achieving the gDoF, even when the coherence time is low, in contrast to the results for the MIMO channel with i.i.d. links. In [5], the gDoF of the 2-relay diamond network was studied. The standard training-based schemes were proved to be sub-optimal and a new scheme was proposed, which partially trains the network and performs a scaling and quantize-map-forward operation [17], [18], [19] at the relays.

In this work, we study the noncoherent 2-user IC with symmetric statistics. This, we believe, is the first information theoretic analysis of noncoherent channels in multiple unicast networks with interference. The capacity of the (coherent) 2-user Gaussian IC is well studied [20], [21], [7], [14] when the channels are perfectly known at the receivers and transmitters. The capacity region of the 2-user IC without feedback was characterized in [7], to within 1 bit per user. In [14], a similar result was derived for the 2-user Gaussian IC with feedback, obtaining the capacity region within 2 bits per user. In [22], the approximate capacity region (within a constant additive gap) for 2-user fast fading interference channels (FF-IC), with no instantaneous CSIT but with perfect channel knowledge at the receiver, was derived. There, the authors used a rate-splitting scheme based on the average interference-to-noise ratio, extending the existing rate-splitting schemes for the IC [7], [14]. The approximate capacity region was derived for the FF-IC without feedback and also for the case with feedback; the feedback improves the capacity region for the FF-IC, similar to the case for the static IC [14]. In this work, we extend the results from [22] for the FF-IC (where the receivers know the channel, but not the transmitters) to the case when both transmitters and receivers do not know the channel, i.e., the noncoherent IC.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we explain the notations used. In Section III, we discuss our results on the noncoherent IC without feedback and in Section IV, we discuss the noncoherent IC with feedback. In Section V, we give the conclusions and remarks. Some of the proofs for the analysis are deferred to the appendices.

## II. NOTATIONAL CONVENTIONS

We use the notation CN ( µ, σ 2 ) for circularly symmetric complex Gaussian distribution with mean µ and variance σ 2 . The logarithm to base 2 is denoted by log () . We use the symbol ∼ with overloaded meanings: one to indicate that a random variable has a given distribution and second to indicate that two random variables have the same distribution. We use the notation . = for order equality, i.e. , we say f 1 ( SNR ) . = f 2 ( SNR ) if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

.

.

The use of symbols ≤ , ≥ are defined analogously. When we have an SNR -dependent term t 1 in evaluating the rate of a scheme, we have the prelog of the term t 1 as the limit lim SNR →∞ t 1 / log ( SNR ) . Similarly, an upper bound in prelog can be defined. We use a bold script for random variables and the normal script for deterministic variables. We use small letters for scalars, capital letters for vectors and capital letter with underline for matrices. The following capital letters being a common notation are used for scalars: P for power, B for number of codeblocks, T for the coherence time, R for rate and C for capacity. The special script of the form A , E is used to indicate sets. The notation CN ( µ, σ 2 ) is reserved for complex Gaussian distribution with mean µ and variance σ 2 . The notation x i,j indicates the j th element of X i . Similar definitions follow for y i,j and z i,j . The random variables g ij with i, j ∈ { 1 , 2 } are scalar random variables to capture the block fading.

## III. NONCOHERENT IC WITHOUT FEEDBACK

In this section, we provide our results for the noncoherent IC without feedback. We compare the achievable prelog using a standard training-based scheme to our noncoherent rate-splitting scheme and we also compare it with the TIN and TDM schemes.

Theorem 1. Using a noncoherent rate-splitting scheme, the prelog region given in Table I is achievable.

Table I ACHIEVABLE PRELOG REGION FOR DIFFERENT REGIMES OF α .

| α &lt;  1  /  2  1  /  2  ≤  α  ≤  1  α &gt;  1  d  1  ≤  (1  -  1  /T  )  -  α/T  d  2  ≤  (1  -  1  /T  )  -  α/T  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  2 (1  -  1  /T  )  -  2  α  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  (2  -  3  /T  )  -  α  (1  -  1  /T  )  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  2 (1  -  2  /T  )  α  2  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  (2  -  3  /T  )  -  α/T  d  1  +2  d  2  ≤  (2  -  3  /T  )  -  α/T  d  1  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  d  2  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  (1  -  1  /T  )  α  -  1  /T   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Proof: The proof follows by analyzing a Han-Kobayashi scheme [20], [21] with rate-splitting based on the average interference-to-noise ratio [22]. The message for User 1 is split into two parts, a common message w c 1 at rate R c 1 and a private message w p 1 at rate R p 1 . The common message w c 1 is mapped into Gaussian vector symbols represented by U 1 and private message w p 1 is mapped into Gaussian vector symbols represented by X p 1 where U 1 , X p 1 are independent. The vectors are of size T . The transmitted symbols at Transmitter 1 are of the form X 1 = U 1 + X p 1 . The power allocation to the symbols are determined based on the average interference-to-noise ratio. The power of each element of X p 1 is 1 / INR and the power of each element of U 1 is P -1 / INR .

Similarly at Transmitter 2, we have a common message w c 2 at rate R c 2 and a private message w p 2 at rate R p 2 . The common message w c 2 is mapped into Gaussian vector symbols represented by U 2 and private message is mapped into Gaussian vector symbols represented by X p 2 , where U 2 , X p 2 are independent. The transmitted symbols at Transmitter 2 are of the form X 2 = U 2 + X p 2 . The power of each element of X p 2 is 1 / INR and the power of each element of U 2 is P -1 / INR .

Each receiver, in a noncoherent manner jointly decodes its own private message and the common messages from both users, i.e. , receiver 1 decodes w c 1 , w c 2 , w p 1 and receiver 1 decodes w c 1 , w c 2 , w p 2 . The details of the coding scheme and its analysis are in Section III-B. We now compare our achievable prelog with that of a standard training-based scheme.

Theorem 2. A standard training-based scheme for the noncoherent IC can achieve the prelog region described in Table II.

Table II ACHIEVABLE PRELOG REGION FOR DIFFERENT REGIMES OF α .

| α &lt;  1  /  2  1  /  2  ≤  α  ≤  1  α &gt;  1  d  1  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  d  2  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  2 (1  -  2  /T  ) (1  -  α  )  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  ) (2  -  α  )  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  2 (1  -  2  /T  )  α  2  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  2 (1  -  2  /T  )  d  1  +2  d  2  ≤  2 (1  -  2  /T  )  d  1  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  d  2  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  α   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Proof: With two users, in every coherence period of T symbols, we need at least two symbols for training. For training, the first transmitter can send a known symbol while the second transmitter remains turned off. With this, both receivers can estimate the channels from the first transmitter. Next the second transmitter can send a known symbol while the first transmitter remains turned off. With this, both receivers can estimate the channels from the second transmitter. The rest of the symbols in every coherence period of T symbols can be used to transmit data using a Han-Kobayashi scheme scheme similar to that described in Theorem 1. The detailed analysis for obtaining the prelog is given in Appendix C.

Remark 1 . The capacity region of the coherent FF-IC is known within a constant gap from [22] and hence its gDoF region is known. The prelog region from the above theorem is the same as the gDoF region for the coherent FF-IC with a multiplication factor of (1 -2 /T ) . Hence the prelog region obtained in Theorem 2 is the best among any scheme that uses two symbols for training in every coherence period of T symbols.

We also consider the strategy of treating-interference-as-noise (TIN) with Gaussian codebooks. Transmitter i sends a message w i at rate R i using vector Gaussian symbols X i of length T , i ∈ { 1 , 2 } . Each receiver i decodes w i , treating the symbols from the other transmitter as noise. Using standard analysis, it can be shown that the prelog region

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 5. Prelog region for α &lt; 1 / 2 , T ≥ 2 . The solid line gives the prelog region achievable for a noncoherent scheme and the dotted line gives the prelog for the scheme that uses 2 symbols for training.

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is achievable by the TIN scheme.

Another strategy is time division multiplexing (TDM). Again transmitter i can send a message w i at rate R i using vector Gaussian symbols X i of length T , i ∈ { 1 , 2 } . For the TDM case, each transmitter transmits in every alternate time periods of length T . While one transmitter is ON, the other is OFF. Each reciever obtains symbols only from the intended transmitter and can perform typicality decoding. Using standard analysis we can obtain that the prelog region

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is achievable.

## A. Discussion

In Figure 5 and Figure 6, the prelog region achievable using our noncoherent scheme is compared with the prelog region achievable using the aforementioned training-based scheme. It can be observed that our noncoherent scheme outperforms the standard training-based scheme.

In Figure 7 and Figure 8, we give the achievable symmetric prelog with coherence time T = 3 and T = 5 respectively for the strategies that we discussed. In the overview of our results in Section I, we had noticed that TIN outperforms rate-splitting schemes. In fact, it can

Figure 6. Prelog region for 1 / 2 &lt; α , T ≥ 3 . For T = 2 no prelog region is achievable using known schemes. The solid line gives the prelog region achievable for a noncoherent scheme and the dotted line gives the prelog region for a scheme that uses 2 symbols for training.

<!-- image -->

Figure 7. Symmetric achievable prelog for coherence time T = 3 : feedback and nonfeedback cases.

<!-- image -->

,

Figure 8. Symmetric achievable prelog for coherence time T = 5 . Training-based scheme uses 2 symbols for training.

<!-- image -->

be calculated from our prelog regions that the TIN scheme outperforms TDM scheme also for very weak interference level ( α &lt; 1 / 2 ).

For a broad region of α , the TDM scheme outperforms the noncoherent rate-splitting scheme. This can be clearly seen by looking at the points with α = . 5 and α = 1 . For these values of α , the noncoherent rate-splitting scheme gives a prelog of (1 / 2) (1 -2 /T ) and the TDM scheme gives a prelog of (1 / 2) (1 -1 /T ) . Hence, for α = . 5 and α = 1 , the noncoherent scheme effectively behaves as a TDM scheme that uses two training symbols per coherence period, where actually the TDM scheme can be implemented with only one training symbol per coherence period.

Although our main results are on the prelog of the system, we can provide guidelines for specific scenarios depending on the interference level. For example with transmit SNR 6 dB, coherence time T = 5 , and all the links with average strength 1 , using the TDM scheme can improve the rate by 6% compared to the standard training-based schemes used with rate-splitting. More rate points are illustrated in Table III. The rates for training-based scheme is obtained by numerically evaluating the expression in (65) for the point in the rate region where both users have the same rate. The expressions used for obtaining the rates for the TDM scheme is given in Appendix E. We also provide a Mathematica code at https://arxiv.org/src/1812.03579/anc/ Noncoh\_IC\_rates.nb for calculating the rate points.

Table III COMPARISON OF RATES (BITS PER USER) ACHIEVABLE WITH DIFFERENT SCHEMES FOR T = 5 , α = 1

| SNR  dB  Rates for different schemes  2 symbol training  TDM  6  0.47  0.50  7  0.54  0.57  8  0.61  0.66  9  0.69  0.75  10  0.77  0.84   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## B. Coding Scheme and Analysis of the Rate Region

We describe the coding scheme starting with a general input distribution and then we evaluate the prelog region for Gaussian inputs.

Encoding: We consider a fixed distribution p ( U 1 ) p ( U 2 ) p ( X 1 | U 1 ) p ( X 2 | U 2 ) where U 1 , U 2 , X 1 , X 2 are vectors of length T . For transmitter 1, generate 2 NTR c 1 codewords U N 1 ( i ) with i ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 1 } according to ∏ N l =1 p ( U 1( l ) ) . For each U N 1 ( i ) , generate 2 NTR p 1 codewords X N 1 ( i, j ) , with j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 1 } , according to ∏ N l =1 p ( X 1( l ) ∣ ∣ U 1( l ) ) . Similarly for transmitter 2, generate 2 NTR c 2 codewords U N 2 ( i ) , with i ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 2 } , according to ∏ N l =1 p ( U 2( l ) ) . For each U N 2 ( j ) , generate 2 NTR p 2 codewords X N 2 ( i, j ) , with j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 2 } , according to ∏ N l =1 p ( X 2( l ) ∣ ∣ U 2( l ) ) .

Transmitter 1 has uniformly random messages w c 1 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 1 } , w p 1 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 1 } to transmit and transmitter 2 has uniformly random messages w c 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 2 } , w p 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 2 } to transmit. Transmitter 1 sends the symbols X N 1 ( w c 1 , w p 1 ) and transmitter 2 sends the symbols X N 1 ( w c 2 , w p 2 ) .

Decoding: For decoding, receiver 1 finds a triplet ( ˆ i, ˆ j, ˆ k ) requiring ˆ i, ˆ j to be unique with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly receiver 2 finds a triplet ( ˆ i, ˆ j, ˆ k ) requiring ˆ i, ˆ j to be unique with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( N ) ϵ indicates the set of jointly typical sequences.

Error Analysis: We give the sketch of analysis for the error probability at receiver 1 assuming ( i, j, k ) = (1 , 1 , 1) . Let E ijk be the event { ( X N 1 ( i, j ) , U N 1 ( i ) , U N 2 ( k ) , Y N 1 ) ∈ A ( N ) ϵ } for a given i, j, k . By asymptotic equipartition property (AEP), the probability of Pr ( ⋃ k E 11 k ) approaches unity. The error probability at receiver 1 is then captured by the following:

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

The details of the simplification in the last step can be followed, for example from [23, Ch 6]. Requiring the average error probability to vanish at receiver 1 and receiver 2, we get the following equations as a sufficient condition:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

After Fourier-Motzkin elimination, the following equations are obtained for achievability, with R 1 = R c 1 + R p 1 , R 2 = R c 2 + R p 2 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For power splitting, we adapt the idea of the simplified Han-Kobayashi scheme where the power allocation is such that the private signal is seen below the noise level at the other receiver. Similar to [7], [22], we choose U k as a vector of length T with i.i.d. CN (0 , λ c ) elements and X p k as a vector of length T with i.i.d. CN (0 , λ p ) elements for k ∈ { 1 , 2 } . The random variables are chosen independent of each other so that the set { U 1 , U 2 , X p 1 , X p 2 } is mutually independent. We use X 1 = U 1 + X p 1 , X 2 = U 2 + X p 2 , λ c + λ p = P and λ p = min(1 / INR , P ) . For prelog characterization, we can assume P · INR = SNR · SNR α -1 = SNR α &gt; 1 . Hence, we have λ p = 1 / INR . The prelog results in Table I can be obtained by evaluating the rate region (11) for our choice of input distribution.

Preliminaries for prelog evaluation: We give some preliminary results that can be used in obtaining prelog region from our achievability region.

Fact 1. For an exponentially distributed random variable ξ with mean µ ξ and with given constants a ≥ 0 , b &gt; 0 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where γ is Euler's constant.

Proof:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now simplify the region (11) by considering the terms in it one by one.

Claim 1. The term h ( Y 1 | U 2 , X 1 ) is upper bounded at high SNR as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: The outline of the proof is as follows: with y 1 ,i as the components of Y 1 , we expand h ( Y 1 | U 2 , X 1 ) = ∑ i h ( y 1 ,i ∣ ∣ ∣ U 2 , X 1 , { y 1 ,j } i j =1 ) . The first term h ( y 1 , 1 ∣ ∣ U 2 , X 1 ) gives rise to the term log ( SNR + SNR α ) with uncertainty from both incoming channels.

Let us consider the term h ( y 1 , 2 ∣ ∣ U 2 , X 1 , y 1 , 1 ) . In y 1 , 2 , the contribution to uncertainty is from the channels as well as from the symbols. When conditioned on U 2 , X 1 , the contribution of uncertainty from these symbols can be removed. The uncertainty from X p 2 in y 1 , 2 can be neglected in prelog calculation due to the power allocation strategy that we use. The term y 1 , 1 is a linear combination of the symbols as well as the channels. Using this single linear combination given in the conditioning, the uncertainty from one of the channels can be removed. Thus h ( y 1 , 2 ∣ ∣ U 2 , X 1 , y 1 , 1 ) gives rise to log (min ( P × 1 , P × INR )) = log (min ( SNR , SNR α )) , with either the uncertainty from the direct channel removed or the uncertainty from the interfering channel removed.

In terms h ( y 1 ,i ∣ ∣ ∣ U 2 , X 1 , { y 1 ,j } i j =1 ) with i ≥ 3 , we can follow the same procedure as stated in the above paragraph. However with { y 1 ,j } i j =1 available in the conditioning, we have more than a single linear combination of the channels available. Using these, the contribution from both channels can be removed, and hence h ( y 1 ,i ∣ ∣ ∣ U 2 , X 1 , { y 1 ,j } i j =1 ) do not contribute to the prelog. The detailed proof is in Appendix B.

Claim 2. The term h ( Y 1 | U 1 , U 2 ) is lower bounded at high SNR as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: We expand h ( Y 1 | U 1 , U 2 ) = ∑ i h ( y 1 ,i ∣ ∣ ∣ U 1 , U 2 , { y 1 ,j } i j =1 ) . One way to lower bound h ( y 1 ,i ∣ ∣ ∣ U 1 , U 2 , { y 1 ,j } i j =1 ) is to condition on the channel strengths and reduce the term to that for a coherent channel. Another way to lower bound h ( y 1 ,i ∣ ∣ ∣ U 1 , U 2 , { y 1 ,j } i j =1 ) is to give all the transmit signals in the conditioning and reduce the entropy to that of a (conditionally) joint Gaussian distribution. These two techniques help us prove the claim. See Appendix A for more details.

Bounding mutual information terms: In the following four claims, we obtain the lower bounds for four mutual information terms in the achievability region (11). We need to bound only four terms and the other terms can be bounded by using symmetry of the setup.

Claim 3. The term I ( X 1 ; Y 1 | U 2 ) is lower bounded at high SNR as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( i ) is due to the fact that conditioning reduces entropy and Markovity ( g 11 x 1 ,i + g 21 x 2 ,i + z 1 ,i ) -( u 2 ,i , g 21 , g 11 ) -( { g 11 x 1 ,j + g 21 x 2 ,j + z 1 ,j } i -1 j =1 , U 2 ) . The step ( ii ) is using the property of Gaussians for the terms h ( g 11 x 1 , 1 + g 21 x 2 , 1 + z 1 , 1 | x 1 , 1 , x 2 , 1 , U 2 ) , h ( g 11 x 1 ,i + g 21 x 2 ,i + z 1 ,i | u 2 ,i , g 21 , g 11 ) = h ( g 11 x 1 ,i + g 21 x p 2 ,i + z 1 ,i | g 21 , g 11 ) and using Fact 1. Using (16) and Claim 1 completes the proof.

Claim 4. The term I ( X 2 , U 1 ; Y 2 ) is lower bounded at high SNR as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Claim 1 for h ( Y 1 | X 1 , U 2 ) and using symmetry we get,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining the last two equations completes the proof.

Claim 5. The term I ( X 1 ; Y 1 | U 1 , U 2 ) is lower bounded at high SNR as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: This follows by using

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from Claim 2 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from Claim 1.

Claim 6. The term I ( X 1 , U 2 ; Y 1 | U 1 ) is lower bounded at high SNR as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( i ) is due to the fact that conditioning reduces entropy and Markovity ( g 11 x 1 ,i + g 21 x 2 ,i + z 1 ,i ) -( u 1 ,i , g 21 , g 11 ) -( { g 11 x 1 ,j + g 21 x 2 ,j + z 1 ,j } i -1 j =1 , U 1 ) . In step ( ii ) we removed the contribution of g 11 u 1 ,i from the second term and used the structure x 1 ,i = u 1 ,i + x 1 p ,i , where u 1 ,i , x 1 p ,i are independent Gaussian random variables and x 1 p ,i has variance 1 / INR = SNR 1 -α . We also used Fact 1 together with the fact that the channels are Gaussian distributed.

We also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last step is using Claim 1 for h ( Y 1 | X 1 , U 2 ) . Using (22) and (21) completes the proof.

We collect the results from Claim 3, Claim 4, Claim 5 and Claim 6 in the second column of Table IV. In the third column of Table IV, we obtain the prelog for the lower bounds.

Table IV LOWER BOUNDS AT HIGH SNR FOR THE TERMS IN THE ACHIEVABILITY REGION AND THEIR PRELOG

| Term  Lower bound at high SNR  Prelog of lower bound  α &lt;  1  /  2  1  /  2  &lt; α &lt;  1  α &gt;  1  I  (  X  1  ;  Y  1  &#124;  U  2  )  (  T  -  1) log (  SNR  )  -  log (min (  SNR  ,  SNR  α  ))  (  T  -  1)  -  α  (  T  -  1)  -  α  (  T  -  2)  I  (  X  2  ,  U  1  ;  Y  2  )  (  T  -  1) log (  SNR  +  SNR  α  )  -  log (min (  SNR  ,  SNR  α  ))  (  T  -  1)  -  α  (  T  -  1)  -  α  (  T  -  1)  α  -  1  I  (  X  1  ;  Y  1  &#124;  U  1  ,  U  2  )  log  (  SNR  1  -  α  +min(  SNR  ,  SNR  α  )  )  +(  T  -  2) log  (  1 +  SNR  1  -  α  )  -  log (min (  SNR  ,  SNR  α  ))  (  T  -  1) (1  -  α  )  -  α  (  T  -  2) (1  -  α  )  0  I  (  X  1  ,  U  2  ;  Y  1  &#124;  U  1  )  (  T  -  1) log  (  SNR  1  -  α  +  SNR  α  )  -  log (min (  SNR  ,  SNR  α  ))  (  T  -  1) (1  -  α  )  -  α  (  T  -  2)  α  (  T  -  1)  α  -  1   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Using the prelog of the lower bounds from Table IV in (11), using symmetry of the terms and using only the active inequalities, it can be verified that the prelog region in Table I is achievable.

## IV. NONCOHERENT IC WITH FEEDBACK

In this section, we provide our results for the noncoherent rate-splitting scheme for the noncoherent IC with feedback and compare the achievable prelog with a standard training-based scheme. We also compare the performance with the TIN and TDM schemes.

Theorem 3. For a noncoherent IC with feedback, the prelog region given in Table V is achievable:

Table V ACHIEVABLE PRELOG REGION FOR DIFFERENT REGIMES OF α .

| α &lt;  1  /  2  1  /  2  ≤  α  ≤  1  α &gt;  1  d  1  ≤  (1  -  1  /T  )  -  2  α/T  d  2  ≤  (1  -  1  /T  )  -  2  α/T  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  2 (1  -  1  /T  )  -  α  (1 + 1  /T  )  d  1  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  d  2  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  (2  -  3  /T  )  -  α  (1  -  1  /T  )  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  (1  -  1  /T  )  α  -  1  /T   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Proof: This is obtained using the block Markov scheme of [14, Lemma 1] for the noncoherent case. We use a rate-splitting scheme based on the average interference-to-noise ratio and noncoherent decoding at the receivers. We use the block Markov scheme from [14, Lemma 1] with a total size of blocks B .

In block b , the message for User 1 is split into two parts, a common message w ( b ) c 1 at rate R c 1 and a private message w ( b ) p 1 at rate R p 1 . The transmitted vector symbols at Transmitter 1 are of the form X 1 = U 1 + X p 1 where U 1 , X p 1 are independent Gaussian vectors of length T . The power of each element of X p 1 is 1 / INR and the power of each element of U 1 is P -1 / INR . The Transmitter 1 is able to decode w ( b -1) c 2 using feedback. The messages w ( b -1) c 2 , w ( b -1) c 1 and w ( b ) c 1 are mapped into U 1 in b th block. The private message w ( b ) p 1 is mapped into X p 1 .

For User 2, in block b , we have a common message w ( b ) c 2 at rate R c 2 and a private message w ( b ) p 2 at rate R p 2 . The transmitted vector symbols at Transmitter 2 are of the form X 2 = U 2 + X p 2 where U 2 , X p 2 are independent Gaussian vectors of length T . The power of each element of X p 2 is 1 / INR and the power of each element of U 2 is P -1 / INR . The Transmitter 2 is able to decode w ( b -1) c 1 using feedback. The messages w ( b -1) c 1 , w ( b -1) c 2 and w ( b ) c 2 are mapped into U 2 in b th block. The private message w ( b ) p 2 is mapped into X p 2 .

The messages w ( b ) c 1 , w ( b ) p 1 , w ( b ) c 2 , w ( b ) p 2 with b = 0 , B are set to be fixed and known to all transmitters and receivers. After B blocks, the receivers perform noncoherent backward decoding. Receiver 1 uses the symbols received in block b and decodes w ( b -1) c 1 , w ( b -1) c 2 , w ( b ) p 2 assuming w ( b ) c 1 , w ( b ) c 2 are decoded from the symbols received in block b +1 . Receiver 2 uses the symbols received in block b and decodes w ( b -1) c 1 , w ( b -1) c 2 , w ( b ) p 1 assuming w ( b ) c 1 , w ( b ) c 2 are decoded from the symbols received in block b +1 . The details of the coding scheme and its analysis are in Section IV-B.

We now obtain the prelog of a standard training-based scheme for the noncoherent IC with feedback.

Theorem 4. A standard training-based scheme for the noncoherent IC with feedback can achieve the prelog region described in Table VI.

Table VI ACHIEVABLE PRELOG REGION FOR DIFFERENT REGIMES OF α .

| α  ≤  1  α &gt;  1  d  1  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  d  2  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  ) (2  -  α  )  d  1  +  d  2  ≤  (1  -  2  /T  )  α   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Proof: For training, in every coherence period of T symbols, the first transmitter can send a known symbol while the second transmitter remains turned off; with this both receivers can estimate the channels from the first transmitter. Next the second transmitter can send a known symbol while the first transmitter remains turned off; with this both receivers can estimate the channels from the second transmitter. The rest of the symbols can be used to transmit data using a block Markov scheme similar to that described in Theorem 3. The detailed analysis for obtaining the prelog is given in Appendix D.

Figure 9. Prelog region for α &lt; 1 / 2 , T ≥ 2 . The solid line gives the prelog region achievable for a noncoherent scheme and the dotted line gives the prelog region for the scheme that uses 2 symbols for training.

<!-- image -->

Remark 2 . The capacity region of the coherent FF-IC with feedback is known within a constant gap from [22] and hence its gDoF region is known. The prelog region from the above theorem is the same as the gDoF region for the coherent case with a multiplication factor of (1 -2 /T ) . Hence the prelog obtained in Theorem 4 is the best among any scheme that uses two symbols for training in every coherence period of T symbols.

## A. Discussion

In Figure 9 and Figure 10, the prelog region achievable using our noncoherent scheme is compared with the prelog region achievable using the aforementioned training-based scheme. It can be observed that our noncoherent scheme outperforms the standard training-based scheme.

In Figure 11, we give the achievable symmetric prelog with coherence time T = 3 for our noncoherent rate-splitting scheme and the aforementioned training-based scheme for the feedback case. We give similar plots in Figure 12 for coherence time T = 5 . We also include the prelog of the nonfeedback schemes from Section III in the figures. We had noticed in Section I that with feedback, the performance of noncoherent rate-splitting schemes is in general better than the TIN scheme. There are a few exceptions: when T = 2 and α &lt; 1 , it can be calculated from Table V and (71) that the TIN scheme outperforms our noncoherent strategy with feedback. With T = 3 and α ≤ . 5 , our noncoherent rate-splitting strategy in the presence of feedback has same prelog as the TIN scheme.

Figure 10. Prelog region for 1 / 2 &lt; α , T ≥ 2 . The solid line is prelog achievable for a noncoherent scheme and the dotted line is the prelog for a scheme that uses 2 symbols for training.

<!-- image -->

The noncoherent rate-splitting scheme attempts to decode part of the interfering message at the transmitter, and use it in subsequent transmissions. The rate that can be decoded at the transmitter using the feedback increases with T . For very weak interference level, the noncoherent ratesplitting scheme has a disadvantage as we explained in the discussion in Section I together with Figures 3 and 4. The advantage gained by decoding at the transmitter outweighs this disadvantage when T ≥ 3 .

The TDM scheme outperforms other schemes for a region of α close to 1 . This behavior can be explained similar to what we did in Section III-A. When α = 1 , the noncoherent ratesplitting scheme gives a prelog of (1 / 2) (1 -2 /T ) and the TDM scheme gives a prelog of (1 / 2) (1 -1 /T ) . Hence for α = 1 , the noncoherent scheme effectively behaves as a TDM scheme that uses two symbols to train, but the TDM scheme can actually be implemented with only one training symbol.

## B. Coding Scheme and Analysis of the Rate Region

We describe the coding scheme starting with a general input distribution and then we evaluate the prelog region for Gaussian inputs.

<!-- image -->

,

Figure 11. Symmetric achievable prelog for coherence time T = 3 : feedback and nonfeedback cases.

,

Figure 12. Symmetric achievable prelog for coherence time T = 5 : feedback and nonfeedback cases.

<!-- image -->

Encoding: Fix a joint distribution p ( U 1 ) p ( U 2 ) p ( X 1 | U 1 ) p ( X 2 | U 2 ) where U 1 , U 2 , X 1 , X 2 are vectors of length T . Generate 2 NT (2 R c 1 + R c 2 ) codewords U N 1 ( i, j, k ) with i, k ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 1 } , j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 2 } according to ∏ N l =1 p ( U 1( l ) ) . For each codeword U N 1 ( i, j, k ) , generate 2 NTR p 1 codewords X N 1 ( i, j, k, l ) with l ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 1 } according to ∏ N l =1 p ( X 1( l ) ∣ ∣ U 1( l ) ) .

Similarly generate 2 NT (2 R c 2 + R c 1 ) codewords U N 2 ( j, i, r ) with j, r ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 2 } , i ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 1 } . For each codeword U N 2 ( j, i, r ) , generate 2 NTR p 2 codewords X N 2 ( j, i, r, s ) with s ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 2 } according to ∏ N s =1 p ( X 2( s ) ∣ ∣ U 2( s ) ) .

At block b , transmitter 1 has uniformly random messages w ( b ) c 1 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 1 } , w ( b ) p 1 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 1 } to transmit and transmitter 2 has uniformly random messages w ( b ) c 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 2 } , w ( b ) p 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 2 } to transmit. Using the symbols Y N, ( b -1) 1 obtained through feedback, transmitter 1 tries to noncoherently decode ˆ w ( b -1) 2 c = ˆ k by finding unique ˆ k such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( N ) ϵ indicates the set of jointly typical sequences. Transmitter 1 already knows w ( b -2) c 1 , w ( b -1) c 1 , w ( b -1) p 1 . Also w ( b -2) c 2 is assumed to be correctly decoded in the previous block at transmitter 1 and w ( b -2) c 1 is assumed to be correctly decoded in the previous block at transmitter 2.

The current noncoherent decoding at transmitter 1 is performed with vanishing error probability if

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Based on ˆ w ( b -1) 2 c , transmitter 1 then sends X N 1 ( w ( b -1) c 1 , ˆ w ( b -1) 2 c , w ( b ) c 1 , w ( b ) p 1 ) . Similarly transmitter 2 decodes ˆ w ( b -1) 1 c and sends X N 2 ( w ( b -1) c 2 , ˆ w ( b -1) 1 c , w ( b ) c 2 , w ( b ) p 2 ) . The messages w ( b ) c 1 , w ( b ) p 1 , w ( b ) c 2 , w ( b ) p 2 for b = 0 , B can be set to be fixed and known to all transmitters and receivers.

Decoding: After receiving B blocks, each receiver performs backward decoding. At receiver 1, block b is decoded assuming block b +1 is correctly decoded. From block b +1 , w ( b ) c 2 , w ( b ) 1 c is assumed to be available at receiver 1 after successful decoding. Now using the symbols from block b , receiver 1 finds unique triplet ( ˆ i, ˆ j, ˆ l ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly receiver 2 finds unique triplet ( ˆ j, ˆ i, ˆ s ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Error analysis: We give the sketch of error analysis at receiver 1 assuming ( w ( b -1) c 1 , w ( b -1) c 2 , w ( b ) p 1 ) = (1 , 1 , 1) was sent through block b -1 and block b . We assume that there was no backward decoding error, i.e. , ( w ( b ) c 1 , w ( b ) c 2 ) was correctly decoded. Let E ijl be the event {( U N 1 ( ˆ i, ˆ j, w ( b ) c 1 ) , X N 1 ( ˆ i, ˆ j, w ( b ) c 1 , ˆ k ) , U N 2 ( ˆ j, ˆ i, w ( b ) c 2 ) , Y N, ( b ) 1 ) ∈ A ( N ) ϵ } for given i, j, l . By AEP, the probability of E 111 approaches unity. The error probability is thus captured by the following equation using standard analysis similar to that in [14, Appendix B].

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

̸

Combining (23) and (24), and considering similar analysis for user 2, we get the following equations for achievability:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

After performing Fourier-Motzkin elimination similar to that in [14, Appendix B], we obtain the following achievability region with R 1 = R c 1 + R p 1 , R 2 = R c 2 + R p 2 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We choose U k as a vector of length T with i.i.d. CN (0 , λ c ) elements and X p k as a vector of length T with i.i.d. CN (0 , λ p ) elements for k ∈ { 1 , 2 } . The random variables are chosen independent of each other so that the set { U 1 , U 2 , X p 1 , X p 2 } is mutually independent. We use X 1 = U 1 + X p 1 , X 2 = U 2 + X p 2 where λ c + λ p = P and λ p = min(1 / INR , P ) similar to [14], [22]. For prelog characterization, we can assume P · INR = SNR · SNR α -1 = SNR α &gt; 1 . Hence, we have λ p = 1 / INR .

The prelog results in Table V can be obtained by evaluating the rate region (26) for our choice of input distribution. Note that the joint distribution of ( X 1 , Y 1 , U 1 , X 2 , Y 2 , U 2 ) in its single letter form is the same as that for the nonfeedback case in Section III-B, hence we can carry over the inequalities for the single letter mutual information terms from Section III-B. We will use Claim 4 and Claim 5 from Section III-B to bound I ( X 2 , U 1 ; Y 2 ) and I ( X 1 ; Y 1 | U 1 , U 2 ) respectively. We bound the term I ( U 2 ; Y 1 | X 1 ) with the following claim.

Claim 7. The term I ( U 2 ; Y 1 | X 1 ) is lower bounded at high SNR as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof: We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( i ) is due to the fact that conditioning reduces entropy and Markovity ( g 11 x 1 ,i + g 21 x 2 ,i + z 1 ,i ) -( X 1 , g 21 , g 11 ) -( { g 11 x 1 ,j + g 21 x 2 ,j + z 1 ,j } i -1 j =1 , X 1 ) and ( ii ) is using the property of Gaussians for the terms h ( g 11 x 1 , 1 + g 21 x 2 , 1 + z 1 , 1 | x 2 , 1 , X 1 ) , h ( g 11 x 1 ,i + g 21 x 2 ,i + z 1 ,i | X 1 , g 21 , g 11 ) and using Fact 1. Using (30) and h ( Y 1 | U 2 , X 1 ) . ≤ log ( SNR + SNR α ) + log (min ( SNR , SNR α )) from Claim 1 completes the proof.

Using Claim 4, Claim 5 and Claim 7, we have the lower bounds for the terms in the achievability region in the second column of Table VII. In the third column of Table VII, we obtain the prelog for the lower bounds.

Table VII LOWER BOUNDS AT HIGH SNR FOR THE TERMS IN THE ACHIEVABILITY REGION AND THEIR PRELOG

| Term  Lower bound at high SNR  Prelog of lower bound  α &lt;  1  /  2  1  /  2  &lt; α &lt;  1  α &gt;  1  I  (  X  2  ,  U  1  ;  Y  2  )  (  T  -  1) log (  SNR  +  SNR  α  )  -  log (min (  SNR  ,  SNR  α  ))  (  T  -  1)  -  α  (  T  -  1)  -  α  (  T  -  1)  α  -  1  I  (  X  1  ;  Y  1  &#124;  U  1  ,  U  2  )  log  (  SNR  1  -  α  +min(  SNR  ,  SNR  α  )  )  +(  T  -  2) log  (  1 +  SNR  1  -  α  )  -  log (min (  SNR  ,  SNR  α  ))  (  T  -  1) (1  -  α  )  -  α  (  T  -  2) (1  -  α  )  0  I  (  U  2  ;  Y  1  &#124;  X  1  )  (  T  -  1) log (  SNR  α  )  -  log (min (  SNR  ,  SNR  α  ))  (  T  -  2)  α  (  T  -  2)  α  (  T  -  1)  α  -  1   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Using the prelog of the lower bounds from Table VII in (26), using symmetry of the terms and using only the active inequalities, it can be verified that the prelog region in Table V is achievable.

## V. CONCLUSIONS AND REMARKS

We studied the 2-user noncoherent IC with different achievability strategies. We observed that a standard training-based scheme is suboptimal in terms of prelog. Depending on the level of interference, a noncoherent scheme or a TIN scheme or a TDM scheme can give superior performance than the standard training-based scheme. Thus, the result for single user noncoherent channels that training-based schemes are DoF optimal does not extend to the gDoF of the noncoherent IC. Our current results are on inner bounds, outer bounds are still open.

## REFERENCES

- [1] T. L. Marzetta and B. M. Hochwald, 'Capacity of a mobile multiple-antenna communication link in Rayleigh flat fading,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 139-157, Jan 1999.
- [2] I. C. Abou-Faycal, M. D. Trott, and S. Shamai, 'The capacity of discrete-time memoryless Rayleigh-fading channels,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 1290-1301, May 2001.
- [3] L. Zheng and D. N. C. Tse, 'Communication on the Grassmann manifold: a geometric approach to the noncoherent multiple-antenna channel,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 359-383, Feb 2002.
- [4] T. Koch and G. Kramer, 'On noncoherent fading relay channels at high signal-to-noise ratio,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2221-2241, April 2013.
- [5] J. Sebastian and S. N. Diggavi, 'Generalized degrees of freedom of noncoherent diamond networks,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 5228-5260, Aug 2020.
- [6] A. Vahid, C. Suh, and S. Avestimehr, 'Interference channels with rate-limited feedback,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 2788-2812, May 2012.
- [7] R. H. Etkin, D. N. C. Tse, and H. Wang, 'Gaussian interference channel capacity to within one bit,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5534-5562, Nov 2008.
- [8] X. Shang, G. Kramer, and B. Chen, 'A new outer bound and the noisy-interference sum-rate capacity for Gaussian interference channels,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 689-699, Feb 2009.
- [9] S. A. Jafar and S. Vishwanath, 'Generalized degrees of freedom of the symmetric Gaussian k -user interference channel,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3297-3303, July 2010.
- [10] S. Karmakar and M. K. Varanasi, 'The generalized degrees of freedom region of the MIMO interference channel and its achievability,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 7188-7203, Dec 2012.
- [11] J. Sebastian and S. N. Diggavi, 'Generalized degrees freedom of noncoherent MIMO channels with asymmetric link strengths,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 66, no. 7, pp. 4431-4448, Jul 2020.
- [12] G. Taricco and M. Elia, 'Capacity of fading channel with no side information,' Electronics Letters , vol. 33, no. 16, pp. 1368-1370, Jul 1997.

- [13] A. Lapidoth and S. M. Moser, 'Capacity bounds via duality with applications to multiple-antenna systems on flat-fading channels,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 2426-2467, Oct 2003.
- [14] C. Suh and D. N. C. Tse, 'Feedback capacity of the Gaussian interference channel to within 2 bits,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 2667-2685, May 2011.
- [15] R. H. Gohary and H. Yanikomeroglu, 'Grassmannian signalling achieves tight bounds on the ergodic high-SNR capacity of the noncoherent MIMO full-duplex relay channel,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 2480-2494, May 2014.
- [16] J. Sebastian, A. Sengupta, and S. N. Diggavi, 'On capacity of noncoherent MIMO with asymmetric link strengths,' in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory , June 2017, pp. 541-545.
- [17] A. Ozgur and S. N. Diggavi, 'Approximately achieving Gaussian relay network capacity with lattice codes,' in 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory , June 2010, pp. 669-673.
- [18] --, 'Approximately achieving Gaussian relay network capacity with lattice-based QMF codes,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 8275-8294, Dec 2013.
- [19] A. S. Avestimehr, S. N. Diggavi, and D. N. C. Tse, 'Wireless network information flow: A deterministic approach,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 1872-1905, April 2011.
- [20] T. S. Han and K. Kobayashi, 'A new achievable rate region for the interference channel,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 49-60, Jan 1981.
- [21] H.-F. Chong, M. Motani, H. K. Garg, and H. E. Gamal, 'On the Han-Kobayashi region for the interference channel,' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 3188-3194, Jun 2008.
- [22] J. Sebastian, C. Karakus, and S. Diggavi, 'Approximate capacity of fast fading interference channels with no instantaneous CSIT,' IEEE Transactions on Communications , vol. 66, no. 12, pp. 6015-6027, Dec 2018.
- [23] A. Gamal and Y. Kim, Network Information Theory . Cambridge University Press, 2011. [Online]. Available: http://books.google.com/books?id=l31D4DU7jykC
- [24] P. S. Bullen, Handbook of Means and their Inequalities . Springer Science &amp; Business Media, 2013, vol. 560.
- [25] B. Hassibi and B. M. Hochwald, 'How much training is needed in multiple-antenna wireless links?' IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 951-963, Apr 2003.

## APPENDIX A

## PROOF OF CLAIM 2

In this appendix, we prove that

- h ( Y 1 | U 1 , U 2 ) . ≥ log ( SNR + SNR α ) + log ( SNR 1 -α +min( SNR , SNR α ) ) +( T -2) log ( 1 + SNR 1 -α ) . We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( i ) is due to the fact that conditioning reduces entropy and Markovity ( g 11 x 1 ,i + g 21 x 2 ,i + z 1 ,i ) -( u 1 ,i , u 2 ,i , g 21 , g 11 ) -( { g 11 x 1 ,j + g 21 x 2 ,j + z 1 ,j } i -1 j =1 , U 1 , U 2 ) and ( ii ) is using the property of Gaussians and using Fact 1. In ( ii ) for the last term, we use

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

( i ) is by removing g 11 u 1 ,i + g 21 u 2 ,i that is available in the conditioning and because the private message parts x p 1 ,i , x p 2 ,i are independent of the common message parts u 1 ,i , u 2 ,i . The step ( ii ) is using Fact 1. Now,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( i ) is using the property of Gaussian random variables, ( ii ) is using Fact 1 on page 17 and Tower property of expectation for E [ log ( | x 1 , 1 x 2 , 2 -x 1 , 2 x 2 , 1 | 2 )] , ( iii ) is using our system setting with P = SNR · INR = SNR α -1 . Also

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( i ) is using the fact that conditioning reduces entropy, ( ii ) is due to the Markov chain ( g 11 x 1 , 2 + g 21 x 2 , 2 + z 1 , 2 ) -( U 1 , U 2 , g 21 , g 11 ) -( g 11 x 1 , 1 + g 21 x 2 , 1 + z 1 , 1 , U 1 , U 2 ) , ( iii ) is following similar steps as for (32). Now combining (39), (38), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, substituting the above equation in (31), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## APPENDIX B

## PROOF OF CLAIM 1

In this appendix, we prove that h ( Y 1 | U 2 , X 1 ) . ≤ log ( SNR + SNR α )+log (min ( SNR , SNR α )) . We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Considering the second term in the previous expression,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( i ) is by subtracting x 1 , 2 ( g 11 x 1 , 1 + g 21 x 2 , 1 + z 1 , 1 ) which is available from the conditioning and then using the fact that conditioning reduces entropy, ( ii ) is by using the property of Gaussian random variables for i.i.d. g 21 , x 1 , 1 , x 2 , 2 , x 2 , 1 , x 1 , 2 , z 1 , 2 , z 1 , 1 and Fact 1 from page 17 for E [ log ( | x 1 , 1 | 2 )] . Note that | x 1 , 1 | 2 is exponentially distributed with mean P = SNR . We can also use

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( i ) is by subtracting x 1 , 2 ( g 11 x 1 , 1 + g 21 x 2 , 1 + z 1 , 1 ) which is available from the conditioning and then using the fact that conditioning reduces entropy, ( ii ) is by using properties of i.i.d. Gaussian random variables to evaluate the second moments and Fact 1 for E [ log ( | u 2 , 1 | 2 )] .

Using (44) and (47) in (42), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now for i ≥ 3 , we will show that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and will complete our proof. For (48), similar to the elimination done in (43), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the entropy expression. And in the conditioning, the term

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and U 2 , X 1 are available. Hence, by elimination we can get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

in the entropy expression. Using elimination and using the fact that conditioning reduces entropy, we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( i ) is using properties of i.i.d. Gaussian random variables to evaluate the second moments and Fact 1. Let ξ be expanded into a sum of product form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ξ i is in a simple product form. Now due to triangle inequality and generalized mean inequality [24, Ch. 3], we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, for example, consider the term E [ | x 1 , 1 u 2 , 2 g 21 x 1 , 1 x p 2 ,i | 2 ] in the last equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Each of E [ | ξ i | 2 ] will be bounded by a constant since g 21 always appears coupled with x p 2 ,i . Hence, the power scaling E [ | g 21 | 2 ] = INR gets canceled with the scaling E [ | x p 2 ,i | 2 ] = 1 / INR .

Hence we have Hence, by analyzing each of E [ | ξ i | 2 ] together with maximum entropy results, it can be shown that, h ( ξ ) . ≤ log ( P 3 ) . By substituting h ( ξ ) . ≤ log ( P 3 ) in (51), (48) is proved and it completes our proof for the main result.

## APPENDIX C

## TRAINING-BASED RATE-SPLITTING SCHEME FOR THE NONCOHERENT IC WITHOUT FEEDBACK

Encoding: We consider a fixed distribution p ( U 1 ) p ( U 2 ) p ( X 1 | U 1 ) p ( X 2 | U 2 ) where U 1 , U 2 , X 1 , X 2 are vectors of length T -2 . For transmitter 1, generate 2 NTR c 1 codewords U N 1 ( i ) with i ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 1 } according to ∏ N l =1 p ( U 1( l ) ) . For each U N 1 ( i ) , generate 2 NTR p 1 codewords X N 1 ( i, j ) , with j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 1 } , according to ∏ N l =1 p ( X 1( l ) ∣ ∣ U 1( l ) ) . Similarly for transmitter 2, generate 2 NTR c 2 codewords U N 2 ( i ) , with i ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 2 } , according to ∏ N l =1 p ( U 2( l ) ) . For each U N 2 ( j ) , generate 2 NTR p 2 codewords X N 2 ( i, j ) , with j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 2 } , according to ∏ N l =1 p ( X 2( l ) ∣ ∣ U 2( l ) ) .

Transmitter 1 has uniformly random messages w c 1 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 1 } , w p 1 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 1 } to transmit and transmitter 2 has uniformly random messages w c 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 2 } , w p 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 2 } to transmit. Transmitter 1 selects X N 1 ( w c 1 , w p 1 ) and transmits ˜ X N 1 ( w c 1 , w p 1 ) created from it as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where each of X 1 ( k ) is a vector of length T -2 . Effectively Transmitter 1 is sending a pilot symbol with √ P value at the beginning of every T symbols. Similarly Transmitter 2 selects the symbols X N 2 ( w c 1 , w p 1 ) and transmits the symbols ˜ X N 2 ( w c 2 , w p 2 ) created from it with pilot symbols added at the beginning as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

At receiver 1, using pilot symbols, in k th set of T symbols, we get y 11 , train ( k ) = √ P g 11 ( k ) + z 11 ( k ) , y 12 , train ( k ) = √ P g 21 ( k ) + z 21 ( k ) , and the minimum mean squared error (MMSE) estimates can be obtained as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and similar estimates ˆ g 22 , ˆ g 12 are obtained at receiver 2. We call ˆ g 1 = [ˆ g 11 , ˆ g 21 ] and ˆ g 2 = [ˆ g 22 , ˆ g 12 ] . We use the notation Y N 1 , Y N 2 to indicate received symbols containing data and not training symbols:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Decoding: For decoding, receiver 1 finds a triplet ( ˆ i, ˆ j, ˆ k ) requiring ˆ i, ˆ j to be unique with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly receiver 2 finds a triplet ( ˆ i, ˆ j, ˆ k ) requiring ˆ i, ˆ j to be unique with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( N ) ϵ indicates the set of jointly typical sequences. Similar to the analysis in Section III, we can obtain the following rate region:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now similar to that in [7], we choose U k as a vector of length T -2 with i.i.d. CN (0 , λ c ) elements and X p k as a vector of length T -2 with i.i.d. CN (0 , λ p ) elements for k ∈ { 1 , 2 } . The random variables are chosen independent of each other so that the set { U 1 , U 2 , X p 1 , X p 2 }

is mutually independent. We use X 1 = U 1 + X p 1 , X 2 = U 2 + X p 2 where λ c + λ p = P and λ p = min(1 / INR , P ) .

We analyze the terms in the rate region in the following subsections.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in step ( i )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In step ( ii ) , ˆ Z 1 = Z 1 + ˜ g 11 X 1 + ˜ g 21 X 2 . In step ( iii ) , we used the worst case noise result from [25, (A7)] with ˆ Z worst being a Gaussian random variable with same covariance as ˆ g 21 X p 2 + ˆ Z 1 . Note that X 1 and ˆ g 21 X p 2 + ˆ Z 1 are uncorrelated even though they are dependent. Hence, the result from [25] can be applied. We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The components of ˆ g 21 X p 2 + ˆ Z 1 are identically distributed and are uncorrelated (although they are dependent through the common random variables g 11 , z 11 , g 21 , z 21 ). Each of the components have variance given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In step ( i ) , we used the facts that x p 2 , 1 has power λ = 1 / INR ; the power settings and independency of x 1 , 1 , x 2 , 1 , z 1 , 1 ; ˆ g 21 and ( g 21 -ˆ g 21 ) are uncorrelated due to the orthogonality property of MMSE estimate. Using the above simplifications in (60), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Following similar analysis as for the previous term, by replacing ˆ g 21 X p 2 + ˆ Z 1 with the worst case noise, we get:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in the last step, we used the worst case noise result.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in the last step, we again used the worst case noise result.

## E. Simplified Rate Region

We collect the results from the previous four subsections in the following table with r ′ 1 = log ( λ E [∣ ∣ ˆ g 21 ∣ ∣ 2 ] + N ) and subsequently obtain an achievable rate region.

Table VIII LOWER BOUNDS FOR THE TERMS IN THE ACHIEVABILITY REGION

| Term  Lower bound  I  (  X  1  ;  Y  1  ,  ˆ  g  1  ∣  ∣  ∣  U  2  )  (  T  -  2)  (  E  [  log  (  P  &#124;  ˆ  g  11  &#124;  2  +  λ  E  [∣  ∣  ˆ  g  21  ∣  ∣  2  ]  +  N  ) ]  -  r  ′  1  )  I  (  X  1  ,  U  2  ;  Y  1  ,  ˆ  g  1  )  (  T  -  2)  (  E  [  log  (  P  &#124;  ˆ  g  11  &#124;  2  +(  P  -  λ  )  &#124;  ˆ  g  21  &#124;  2  +  λ  E  [∣  ∣  ˆ  g  21  ∣  ∣  2  ]  +  N  ) ]  -  r  ′  1  )  I  (  X  1  ;  Y  1  ,  ˆ  g  1  ∣  ∣  ∣  U  1  ,  U  2  )  (  T  -  2)  (  E  [  log  (  N  +  λ  &#124;  ˆ  g  11  &#124;  2  +  λ  E  [∣  ∣  ˆ  g  21  ∣  ∣  2  ]) ]  -  r  ′  1  )  I  (  X  1  ,  U  2  ;  Y  1  ,  ˆ  g  1  ∣  ∣  ∣  U  1  )  (  T  -  2)  (  E  [  log  (  λ  &#124;  ˆ  g  11  &#124;  2  +(  P  -  λ  )  &#124;  ˆ  g  21  &#124;  2  +  λ  E  [∣  ∣  ˆ  g  21  ∣  ∣  2  ]  +  N  ) ]  -  r  ′  1  )   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Using the lower bounds from Table VIII in (59) and using symmetry of the terms, we obtain that the following rate region is achievable with r ′ 1 = log ( λ E [∣ ∣ ˆ g 21 ∣ ∣ 2 ] + N ) , r ′ 2 = log ( λ E [∣ ∣ ˆ g 12 ∣ ∣ 2 ] + N ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Fact 1, the above rate region yields the following prelog region

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that log ( E [∣ ∣ ˆ g ij ∣ ∣ 2 ] ) . = log ( E [∣ ∣ g ij ∣ ∣ 2 ] ) for i, j ∈ { 1 , 2 } and log ( N ) . = 0 . The region (66) can be simplified to obtain the region described in Table II of Theorem 2.

## APPENDIX D

TRAINING-BASED RATE-SPLITTING SCHEME FOR THE NONCOHERENT IC WITH FEEDBACK

We use a block Markov scheme similar to that in Theorem 3 and [14, Lemma 1], but we include training symbols in the scheme described here.

Encoding: Fix a joint distribution p ( U 1 ) p ( U 2 ) p ( X 1 | U 1 ) p ( X 2 | U 2 ) where U 1 , U 2 , X 1 , X 2 are vectors of length T -2 . Generate 2 NT (2 R c 1 + R c 2 ) codewords U N 1 ( i, j, k ) with i, k ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 1 } , j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 2 } according to ∏ N l =1 p ( U 1( l ) ) . For each codeword U N 1 ( i, j, k ) , generate 2 NTR p 1 codewords X N 1 ( i, j, k, l ) with l ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 1 } according to ∏ N l =1 p ( X 1( l ) ∣ ∣ U 1( l ) ) .

Similarly generate 2 NT (2 R c 2 + R c 1 ) codewords U N 2 ( i, j, r ) with i, r ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 2 } , j ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 1 } . For each codeword U N 2 ( i, j, r ) , generate 2 NTR p 2 codewords X N 2 ( i, j, r, s ) with s ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 2 } according to ∏ N s =1 p ( X 2( s ) ∣ ∣ U 2( s ) ) .

At block 1, transmitter 1 has uniformly random messages w (1) c 1 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 1 } , w (1) p 1 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 1 } to transmit and transmitter 2 has uniformly random messages w (1) c 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR c 2 } , w (1) p 2 ∈ { 1 , . . . , 2 NTR p 2 } to transmit. Transmitter 1 obtains X N 1 ( 1 , 1 , w (1) c 1 , w (1) p 1 ) and transmits ˜ X N 1 created from it with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where each of X 1 ( k ) is a vector of length T -2 . Effectively transmitter 1 is sending a pilot symbol with √ P value at the beginning of every T symbols. Similarly transmitter 2 obtains X N 2 ( 1 , 1 , w b c 2 , w b p 2 ) and transmits the symbols ˜ X N 2 created from it with pilot symbols added at the beginning with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

At receiver 1, using pilot symbols, in k th set of T symbols we get y 11 , train ( k ) = √ P g 11 ( k ) + z 11 ( k ) , y 12 , train ( k ) = √ P g 21 ( k ) + z 21 ( k ) , and the MMSE estimates ˆ g 11 , ˆ g 21 can be obtained at receiver 1. Similarly ˆ g 22 , ˆ g 12 can be obtained at receiver 2. The details of MMSE estimation is same as that in Appendix C. We call ˆ g 1 = [ˆ g 11 , ˆ g 21 ] and ˆ g 2 = [ˆ g 22 , ˆ g 12 ] . We use the notation Y N 1 , Y N 2 to indicate received symbols containing data and not training symbol:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

At block b &gt; 1 , transmitter 1 has uniformly random messages w ( b ) c 1 ∈ [ 1 , 2 NTR c 1 ] , w ( b ) p 1 ∈ [ 1 , 2 NTR p 1 ] to transmit and transmitter 2 has uniformly random messages w ( b ) c 2 ∈ [ 1 , 2 NTR c 2 ] , w ( b ) p 2 ∈ [ 1 , 2 NTR p 2 ] to transmit. Transmitter 1 obtains the feedback Y N, ( b -1) 1 , ˆ g 1 N, ( b -1) from receiver 1. Transmitter 1 tries to decode ˆ w ( b -1) 2 c = ˆ k from transmitter 2 by finding unique ˆ k such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A ( N ) ϵ indicates the set of jointly typical sequences. Transmitter 1 already knows w ( b -2) c 1 , w ( b -1) c 1 , w ( b -1) p 1 . Also w ( b -2) c 2 is assumed to be correctly decoded in the previous block at transmitter 1 and w ( b -2) c 1 is assumed to be correctly decoded in the previous block at transmitter 2. Based on ˆ w ( b -1) 2 c , transmitter 1 obtains X N 1 ( w ( b -1) c 1 , ˆ w ( b -1) 2 c , w ( b ) c 1 , w ( b ) p 1 ) and transmits ˜ X N 1 created from it as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where each of X 1 ( k ) is a vector of length T -2 . Similarly transmitter 2 decodes ˆ w ( b -1) 1 c , obtains X N 2 ( w ( b -1) c 2 , ˆ w ( b -1) 1 c , w ( b ) c 2 , w ( b ) p 2 ) and transmits the symbols ˜ X N 2 created from it with pilot symbols added at the beginning as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The messages transmitted at b = B can be set to be fixed and known to the receivers to facilitate decoding.

Decoding: After receiving B blocks, each receiver performs backward decoding. At receiver 1, block b is decoded assuming block b + 1 is correctly decoded. It finds unique triplet ( ˆ i, ˆ j, ˆ l ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly receiver 2 finds unique triplet ( ˆ j, ˆ i, ˆ s ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We obtain the following rate region similar to that in Theorem 3:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We choose U k as a vector of length T -2 with i.i.d. CN (0 , λ c ) elements and X p k as a vector of length T -2 with i.i.d. CN (0 , λ p ) elements for k ∈ { 1 , 2 } . The random variables are chosen independent of each other so that the set { U 1 , U 2 , X p 1 , X p 2 } is mutually independent. We use X 1 = U 1 + X p 1 , X 2 = U 2 + X p 2 where λ c + λ p = P and λ p = min(1 / INR , P ) . The random variables in the single-letter form in (69) has the same distribution as that in (59). Hence, we can use the lower bounds for the terms in (59) from Table VIII directly to the terms in (69). The term I ( U 2 ; Y 1 , ˆ g 1 ∣ ∣ ∣ X 1 ) is not available in Table VIII, and hence we analyze it further in the following subsection.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last step is by replacing ˆ g 21 X p 2 + ˆ Z 1 with the worst noise and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

similar to that in Appendix C-A.

## B. Simplified Rate Region

Using the result from the previous subsection and the results from Table VIII in 69, we obtain that the following rate region is achievable:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r ′ 1 = log ( λ E [∣ ∣ ˆ g 21 ∣ ∣ 2 ] + N ) ] , r ′ 2 = log ( λ E [∣ ∣ ˆ g 12 ∣ ∣ 2 ] + N ) ] . Using Fact 1, the above rate region yields the following prelog region

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that log ( E [∣ ∣ ˆ g ij ∣ ∣ 2 ] ) . = log ( E [∣ ∣ g ij ∣ ∣ 2 ] ) for i, j ∈ { 1 , 2 } and log ( N ) . = 0 .

The region (71) can be simplified to obtain the region described in Table VI of Theorem 4.

## APPENDIX E

## NUMERICAL CALCULATIONS FOR THE TDM SCHEME

Here we provide the calculations required for numerically evaluating the achievable rates for the TDM scheme given in Table III. We operate the first transmitter-receiver pair during half of the time, while the second pair one remains OFF. During the other half of the time, the second transmitter-receiver pair operates and the first pair remains OFF. Here, we just have point-topoint channels and we use one symbol for training each point-to-point channel. Note that in the calculations below, the channels contain the power scaling; the transmit symbols and noise are of unit power. For receiver 1, we receive y 11 , train = √ P g 11 + z 11 during training and we have the MMSE estimate for the channel as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The total noise at receiver 1 including MMSE is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The terms for receiver 2 are similar. Using symmetry of the statistics, the achievable rates are calculated as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->