## THE SCATTERING OF FRACTIONAL SCHR ¨ ODINGER OPERATORS WITH SHORT RANGE POTENTIALS

RUI ZHANG, TIANXIAO HUANG * AND QUAN ZHENG

A bstract . For any positive real number s , we study the scattering theory in a unified way for the fractional Schr¨ odinger operator H = H 0 + V , where H 0 = ( -∆ ) s 2 and the realvalued potential V satisfies short range condition. We prove the existence and asymptotic completeness of the wave operators W ± = s -lim t →±∞ e itH e -itH 0 , the discreteness and finite multiplicity of the non-zero pure point spectrum σ pp \ { 0 } of H , and the finite decay property of eigenfunctions. The short range condition is sharp with respect to the allowed decay rate of V , and the decay threshold for the existence and non-existence of the wave operators is faster than | x | -1 at the infinity in some sense. Our approach is inspired by the theory of limiting absorption principle for simply characteristic operators established by S. Agmon and L. H¨ ormander in the 1970s.

## 1. I ntroduction

Let s be any positive real number, and H 0 = ( -∆ ) s 2 be defined through the Fourier symbol | ξ | s which is self-adjoint in L 2 ( R n ), with domain H s and absolutely continuous spectrum. We consider the fractional Schr¨ odinger operator H = H 0 + V , where V is a real-valued multiplication operator which will be called a short range potential . To formulate our results, we first introduce the subspace B of L 2 ( R n ) defined by

where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

C ∞ c and F -1 C ∞ c are both dense in the Banach space B where F -1 denotes the inverse Fourier transform. The dual space of B is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

  where the duality is given by the pairing 〈 v , u 〉 = ∫ R n v ¯ udx . We note that the embedding S ֒ → B holds where S is the space of Schwartz functions, thus B ∗ ֒ → S ′ where S ′

2010 Mathematics Subject Classification. 35J10, 58J50.

Key words and phrases. fractional Schr¨ odinger operator, short range potential, asymptotic completeness, limiting absorption principle.

denotes the temperate distributions. Also note that B is not reflexive and S is not dense in B ∗ , see [8, p. 228]. When s &gt; 0, we define B ∗ s to be the space of f ∈ S ′ such that ( I -∆ ) s 2 f ∈ L 2 loc and

We have B ∗ s ֒ → B ∗ (see Corollary 2.2) and thus elements of B ∗ s are L 2 loc functions.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 1.1. Suppose s &gt; 0 and V ∈ L 2 loc ( R n ) is real-valued. We call V a short range potential, if the map f ↦→ V f is compact from B ∗ s to B.

Note that B ֒ → L 2 ֒ → B ∗ , a short range potential V also defines a compact multiplication operator from H s to L 2 , making the operator sum H = H 0 + V self-adjoint with domain H s . The current work concerns some classical aspects in scattering theory. Our first main result is the existence of wave operators.

Theorem 1.2. The wave operators W ± defined by the strong L 2 limits

exist and are isometric. Therefore, the following intertwining property holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let H ac and H sing respectively denote the absolutely continuous and singular continuous subspaces of L 2 ( R n ) with respect to H . Our second main result is the following.

Theorem 1.3. W ± are asymptotically complete, that is,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consequently, the scattering operator S = W ∗ + W -is unitary.

Let σ pp denote the pure point spectrum of H , and J τ = ( I -∆ ) τ 2 for τ ∈ R . Our third main result regards the eigen properties of H .

Theorem 1.4. σ pp \{ 0 } is discrete in R \{ 0 } . For λ ∈ σ pp \{ 0 } , the associated eigenspace is finite dimensional, and each eigenfunction u satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for any ǫ &gt; 0 and s ′ ≤ s, where 〈·〉 = (1 + | · | 2 ) 1 2 .

In the well known Schr¨ odinger case s = 2, i.e. H 0 = -∆ , the term short range physically means that V decays fast enough to ensure a quantum scattering system to have locality in a large scale, for example, in regard to Theorem 1.3, that e itH asymptotically behaves as the superposition of bound states ∈ H pp and a scattering state ∈ H ac is what experiments have indicated. Researchers have found over the years that for V to be a short range potential, the threshold of its decay rate at the infinity is the Coulomb type decay | x | -1 . For examples, the classical work [3] of Dollard's shows that the wave operators do not exist if V ( x ) = | x | -1 ; the physical background of Schr¨ odinger operators indicates that the embedded eigenvalues of H = -∆+ V should not occur when V has short range, but Neumann-Wigner [16] shows that this may not be true if V ( x ) = O ( | x | -1 ); closely relatedly, Kiselev [12] has shown in dimension n = 1 for the half-line Schr¨ odinger operators with Dirichlet boundary condition that such decay rate is sharp for the absence of singular spectrum. On the other hand for short range conditions on V , besides ReedSimon [19, 20] and the fruitful references therein for such developed topics, we only mention a few papers which are more relevant to our work. Among early e ff orts, the peak of studying short range condition has been widely accepted to be the work [1] of S. Agmon's, where it was proved that the compactness of the map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

indicates the existence and asymptotic completeness of the wave operators, mainly by establishing the so-called limiting absorption principle :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where λ 0 &gt; 0, σ &gt; 1 2 and L 2 ,σ = { f ∈ L 2 ; (1 + | · | ) σ f ∈ L 2 } . In an abstract point of view, since the spectral measure dE λ of H is crucial to understanding the dynamics of e itH , the importance of studying the resolvent of H near the real axis comes from the formal fact that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, | V ( x ) | ≤ C (1 + | x | ) -1 -ǫ verifies Agmon's condition, and such assumption is closely related to condition σ &gt; 1 2 in the limiting absorption principle (1.8). Notice that a special case of (1.8) is H = H 0 where the singularity of (1.9) lies in the sphere {| ξ | 2 = λ } , in Agmon-H¨ ormander [2], such idea was pushed to a more critical situation where L 2 ,σ → L 2 , -σ ( σ &gt; 1 2 ) is replaced by B → B ∗ by observing the sharp L 2 type Fourier restriction property F : B → L 2 ( S n -1 ), while the short range scattering theory was correspondingly established in the Chapter XIV of H¨ ormander [8]. More recently Ionescu-Schlag [9], inspired by the sharp L p Fourier restriction property (i.e. SteinTomas restriction theorem) F : L 2 n + 2 n + 3 ( R n ) → L 2 ( S n -1 ) ( n &gt; 1), as well as by an earlier e ff ort Goldberg-Schlag [5] in three dimensions, extended such ideas and established the limiting absorption principle in more appropriate interpolation spaces, resulting in a remarkable enlargement of the perturbation class for -∆ including first order perturbations.

In fact, the technicalities in Agmon [1] had already worked for principal type differential operators. Moreover, Agmon-H¨ ormander [2] and H¨ ormander [8] had actually developed the short range scattering theory for the so-called simply characteristic operators, that is P ( D ) defined by a real polynomial P satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P ( α ) ( ξ ) = ∂ α P ( ξ ). A rough understanding of such condition is that, if we localize the Fourier symbol ( P ( ξ ) -λ ) -1 in a unit ball centered at any η ∈ R n , then (1.10) ensures that such localization has some uniform property moduli the strength of the translated P , i.e. the left hand side of (1.10) with P ( α ) ( ξ ) replaced by P ( α ) ( η ), while the restriction property F : B → L 2 ( M λ ) still holds where M λ = { P ( ξ ) = λ } . Notice that the translation of P ( ξ ) -λ generates a set of moduli polynomials that is precompact under the topology defined by strength, the localized resolvent estimates for P can thus be pieced up to gain the resolvent estimate. The short range condition for a di ff erential operator V ( x , D ) is defined by the compactness of the map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It turns out that the allowed decay for each coe ffi cient of V ( x , D ) is also slightly faster than | x | -1 at the infinity (see [8, p. 246]), however, the decay rate is only indicated by some integrability, which is in some sense better than the form of (1.7) where an ǫ -decay appears. In particular, such theory applies to P ( D ) = ( -∆ ) m where m is any positive integer, and we note that in this case the B ∗ P norm in (1.11) is equivalent to the B ∗ 2 m norm that we define in (1.2). (see Remark 4.2.)

It is then natural to ask for the short range scattering theory of ( -∆ ) s 2 when s &gt; 0 is not an even number, and such study has already drawn some authors' attention, while understanding the dynamics of fractional Schr¨ odinger equations is of physical importance, see Laskin [14, 15]. Just to mention a few with respect to the research interests of the current paper, Giere [4] considered functions of -∆ and obtained asymptotic completeness based on semigroup di ff erence method, which applies to ( -∆ ) s 2 in the case 0 &lt; s &lt; 2 perturbed by potentials decaying at the rate (1 + | x | ) -1 -ǫ in dimension n &gt; 2 + 2 ǫ -s . Kitada [13] considered s ≥ 1 and obtained through eigenfunction expansion method that the asymptotic completeness for short range potentials verifying | V ( x ) | ≤ C (1 + | x | ) -1 -ǫ . ( [13] also obtained result for long range potentials.) There are also works specifically for √ -∆ and relevant pseudo di ff erential operators, see e.g. [21-23].

However, at the level of results, the above works in the fractional case still contain an ǫ -decay assumption of V , unlike Agmon-H¨ ormander [2], H¨ ormander [8] and IonescuSchlag [9] which have avoided such extra decay by considering better function spaces. Also, the range of order s is limited in these works.

The purpose of our work is to carry Agmon and H¨ ormander's approach to all fractional case s &gt; 0 for ( -∆ ) s 2 , and obtain a sharper short range condition that is comparable to the case of ( -∆ ) m . Atypical short range potential class by our Definition 1.1 is the collection of real-valued V ∈ L p loc satisfying (see Proposition 2.6)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where where B (1) is the unit ball with center 0. In particular, a real-valued V satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

verifies condition (1.12), for example ǫ j = 1 / j 1 -ǫ for any 0 &lt; ǫ &lt; 1. Moreover, the decay assumption (1.13) is sharp for the existence of wave operators by the following proposition (see Section 3):

Proposition 1.5. Suppose J 0 ∈ N + and there is a sequence { ǫ j } j &gt; J 0 with ǫ j ∈ [ -1 , + ∞ )

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

such that

If V ∈ L ∞ is real-valued and satisfies

or satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for some κ 2 ≥ κ 1 &gt; 0 , then the wave operators (1.3) do not exist for all s &gt; 0 .

A typical example for Proposition 1.5 is taking ǫ j = 1 / j in a subsequence. We also mention that recently, Ishida-Wada [10, Theorem 1.6] has shown that the wave operators do not exist if V ( x ) = κ 〈 x 〉 -γ for all κ ∈ R , γ ∈ (0 , 1] and s &gt; 0. Now the decay assumption (1.13) and Proposition 1.5 give a sharper decay threshold for V with respect to the existence and non-existence of the wave operators, and somehow surprisingly, such threshold decays faster than | x | -1 at the infinity.

The framework of the proofs in this paper mainly follows that of H¨ ormander [8, Chapter XIV] established for simply characteristic operators. However, when s is not an even integer, there are two main new di ffi culties.

First, the symbol | ξ | s of H 0 = ( -∆ ) s 2 is not a polynomial. Notice that AgmonH¨ ormander's theory for polynomial symbols P highly relies on the fact that P ( D ) is local, and on the simple characteristic condition (1.10) as well as the polynomial strength topology mentioned above, we have to find essential substitutions for such properties or concepts when considering H 0, and there will be two main kinds of arguments relevant. In the analysis of detailed characterization for V to be short range in Section 2, we are indebted to the well known kernel estimate of the Bessel potential operator ( I -∆ ) -s 2 to substitute the locality property by some exponential decay tail estimate (see (2.7)), which will serve as an acceptable error in the boundedness and compactness discussions. In establishing the boundedness for boundary values ( H 0 -λ ± i 0) -1 of the free resolvent (i.e. limiting absorption principle in the free case) in Section 4 and Section 5, in order to piece up localized resolvent estimates, we use 'ellipticity' of | ξ | s as already indicated in (1.2), rather than the strength in (1.10), to investigate compactness in some continuous type function spaces instead of under the polynomial strength topology which does not make sense anymore.

The second di ffi culty is the limited smoothness of the symbol | ξ | s at 0. Such a fact will be much relevant in Section 5 to the study of weighted version of the free resolvent estimates, which shall be used to prove the eigen properties of H = H 0 + V . As an interesting result, the eigenfunctions of H can only be shown to have finite decay as (1.6) indicates. On the other hand, however, for any simply characteristic operator P ( D ), every eigenfunction u of P ( D ) + V ( x , D ) with short range perturbation satisfies the rapid decay (see [8, Corollary 14.5.6])

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for all r &gt; 0 and α ∈ N n 0 , which is way more stronger than (1.6). The Littlewood-Paley theory for inhomogeneous Lipschitz functions shall be used to treat the finite smoothness issue, due to which the reason for (1.6) to hold is (see Section 6)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where u in priori is only assumed to be an eigenfunction in B ∗ s , and (1.18) really lies in a clutch for us to show the genuine L 2 eigen properties of H .

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we give equivalent conditions for a multiplication operator V to be bounded and compact from B ∗ s to B . In Section 3, we give the proof of Theorem 1.2 where potential V is not necessarily required to be of short range (see Remark 3.1), and we also prove Proposition 1.5. In Section 4, we study the behavior of the free resolvent R 0( z ) = ( H 0 -z ) -1 near the real axis except 0 from above and below, whose boundary values R 0( λ ± i 0) shall be realized as bounded operators from B to B ∗ s . In Section 5, we study the weighted estimates for R 0( λ ± i 0) acting on functions whose Fourier transform vanish on the sphere {| ξ | s = λ } , which will be used to study the eigen properties of H , and the Littlewood-Paley theory is used to handle the non-smoothness of | ξ | s . In Section 6, we study a set Λ ⊂ R \ { 0 } , which will be shown discrete and a subset of the non-zero pure point spectrum σ pp \ { 0 } of H , while the associated eigenfunctions in a special form are proved to have finite regularity and finite decay. In Section 7, we construct distorted Fourier transforms to prove Theorem 1.3, where the discreteness of Λ proved in Section 6 is crucial for the construction, and we will see after the proof of Theorem 1.3 that actually Λ = σ pp \{ 0 } holds. In Section 8, we prove Theorem 1.4 by applying the Fredholm theory in an appropriate space to claim that all eigenfunctions have the special form considered in Section 6.

The notations that we shall frequently use are the following. Let F f ( ξ ) = ˆ f ( ξ ) = ∫ R n e -i ξ · x f ( x ) dx denote the Fourier transform of f . We use χ j to denote the characteristic function of Xj defined in (1.1). Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we use ˜ χ j to denote the characteristic function of the interior of ˜ Xj . For any τ ∈ R , let 〈·〉 τ 2 = (1 + | · | 2 ) τ 2 and J τ = ( I -∆ ) τ 2 = F -1 ( 〈·〉 τ ) ∗ acting on S ′ , thus ‖ v ‖ B ∗ s = ‖ Jsv ‖ B ∗ if s &gt; 0 as mentioned before. We use

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to denote the duality pairing whenever f ∈ B ∗ , g ∈ B or f , g ∈ L 2 . Let R + , N + be the positive real numbers and positive integers, C + = { z ∈ C ; Im z ≥ 0 } and similarly define C -. We also use B ( r ) to denote an open ball with radius r and center 0.

## 2. M ultiplication O perators from B ∗ s to B

In this section, we explore the equivalent conditions for V to define a bounded and a compact multiplication operator respectively from B ∗ s to B , by analyzing its local behavior on each annulus Xj , and the main results are Theorem 2.3 and Theorem 2.5. First recall that when s &gt; 0, the kernel Gs = F -1 ( 〈·〉 -s ) of the Bessel potential operator J -s satisfies (see e.g. [6]) for some a , C &gt; 0 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 Lemma2.1. Suppose s &gt; 0 , V ∈ L 2 loc defines a bounded multiplication operator from B ∗ s to B, and denoted by T j , k = χ jVJ -s χ k. Then there exist C , c &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. If k -j ≥ 2, x ∈ Xj and y ∈ Xk , then we have x -y ∈ ˜ Xk , thus by (2.1) that

Therefore if f ∈ L 1 ( Xk ), then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ Take φ ∈ C ∞ c with φ ( x ) ≡ 1 when | x | &lt; 1, and set φ j ( · ) = φ ( · Rj ), we have φ j ≡ 1 on Xj , and by (2.3) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(2.2) then holds when k -j ≥ 2, and the other case is parallel. □

Corollary 2.2. If s &gt; 0 , then J -s is bounded in B ∗ . Consequently, we have B ∗ s ′ ֒ → B ∗ s if s ′ &gt; s ≥ 0 .

Proof. The fact that that J -s maps B ∗ to L 2 loc follows from the proof. First notice that (2.2) is still true if V = χ j , because ‖ V φ j ‖ L 2 ≤ CR n 2 k holds in (2.4) obviously. Now it su ffi ces to consider the proof of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (2.2),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is easy to deduce

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus (2.5) holds.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now characterize the boundedness of multiplication operators from B ∗ s to B .

Theorem 2.3. Let s &gt; 0 , V ∈ L 2 loc . Then V defines a bounded multiplication operator from B ∗ s to B, if and only if there exist c 1 , c 2 &gt; 0 and Mj ≥ 0 such that for j ≥ 1 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

We first have

‖ Tj ˜ χ j f ‖ L 2 ( Xj ) ≤ R -1 2 j ‖ VJ -s ˜ χ j f ‖ B ≤ R -1 2 j ‖ V ‖ B ∗ s → B ‖ ˜ χ j f ‖ B ∗ ≤ CR -1 j ‖ f ‖ L 2 ( ˜ Xj ) .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 2.4. Note that in (2.7) , f ∈ B ∗ implies J -s f ∈ L 2 loc by Corollary 2.2, and the right hand side is obviously finite.

Proof of Theorem 2.3. Let Tj = χ jVJ -s for notation convention.

For the necessity, we first show the existence of c 1 , c 2 and Mj for (2.7). Write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Lemma 2.1, we deduce

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus c 1 , c 2 , Mj exist. Now we fix c 1 = c 2 and c 2 = c 4 above, and let Mj be the least possible number for (2.7) to hold. Take f j ∈ B ∗ such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

 Take F = ∑ j ≥ 1 R 1 2 3 j ˜ χ 3 j f 3 j , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Consider a part of the left hand side of (2.10),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we have used (2.9) in the last inequality. Now by Lemma 2.1 and (2.9), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also have by (2.9) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining (2.11), (2.12) and (2.13), we know that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly consider F = ∑ j ≥ 0 R 1 2 3 j + l ˜ χ 3 j + l f 3 j + l , l = 1 , 2, we obtain (2.8).

For the su ffi ciency, if u ∈ B ∗ s , we set f = Jsu ∈ B ∗ , then by (2.7),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Further, by Cauchy-Schwarz inequality it is easy to see that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then by (2.8), we know from (2.14) and (2.15) that V defines a bounded multiplication operator from B ∗ s to B . □

Next, we give a characterization of the compactness for multiplication operators from B ∗ s to B .

Theorem 2.5. Suppose s &gt; 0 , and V defines a bounded multiplication operator from B ∗ s to B. Then the operator V is compact, if and only if for any compact K ⊂ R n , the set

is precompact in L 2 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. The necessity is obvious. For the su ffi ciency, let { ul } l ≥ 1 ⊂ B ∗ s and ‖ ul ‖ B ∗ s ≤ 1 for all l . Take φ ∈ C ∞ c ( B (1)) with φ ≡ 1 in B ( 2 3 ), and set φ k ( · ) = φ ( · Rk ), then we may write for any k that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

First by (2.7), (2.15) and that fact that supp (1 -φ k ) ⊂ ∪ j ≥ kXj ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we then know by (2.8) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the second term on the right hand side of (2.17), notice that j ≤ k implies ˜ Xj ∩ supp (1 -φ k + 2) = ∅ , we then use (2.7) again to obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and thus

For the last term VUk , l on the right hand side of (2.17) where Uk , l = φ k J -s φ k + 2 Jsul , we have supp Uk , l ⊂ B ( Rk ), and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we have used the facts that φ k ∈ C ∞ c and ‖ Js φ k J -s ‖ L 2 → L 2 ≤ Ck . By the assumption on (2.16), { VUk , l } l ≥ 1 has an L 2 convergent subsequence for any fixed k . We may just assume { VUk , l } l ≥ 1 is L 2 convergent for every k by taking the diagonal, and since VUk , l is supported in B ( Rk ) for all l , { VUk , l } l ≥ 1 is also B convergent for every k . Now { Vul } l ≥ 1 is a Cauchy sequence in B by the uniform smallness (2.19) and (2.20), which completes the proof. □

Now we can verify the su ffi cient condition (1.12) mentioned in the Introduction.

Proposition 2.6. Suppose s &gt; 0 and V ∈ L p loc satisfies (1.12) . Then V defines a compact multiplication operator from B ∗ s to B.

Proof. Let Mj = sup y ∈ Xj ‖ V ( · + y ) ‖ L p ( B (1)) . We first prove the boundedness of V in the view of Theorem 2.3, by showing the existence of C , c 1 , c 2 &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In the sequel, we always assume k , k ′ ∈ Z n / √ n , and take ϕ k to be the characteristic function of Qk = { x ∈ R n ; sup 1 ≤ i ≤ n | xi -ki | ≤ 1 2 √ n } . Write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the first right hand side term of (2.22), denoted by q = 2 p p -2 , ( q = ∞ if p = 2,) we have by H¨ older's inequality that

Notice that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

.

∥ ∥ If | k -k ′ | ≥ 2, x ∈ Qk and y ∈ Qk ′ , then | x -y | ≥ 1 and Gs ( x -y ) ≤ Ce -a | k -k ′ | holds by (2.1), thus

)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If | k -k ′ | &lt; 2, notice that

the Sobolev embedding J -s ∈ B ( L 2 , L q ) shows that the last inequality of (2.23) is still true. Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds for the inclusion l 1 ∗ l 2 ⊂ l 2 is bilinearly continuous.

For the second right hand side term of (2.22),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in the second line we have used (2.2) as explained in the proof of Corollary 2.2, and in the last line we have used the facts p ≥ 2 and that Xj can be covered by O ( R n 2 j ) many unit balls.

Now (2.21) is checked by (2.24) and (2.25), thus V is bounded from B ∗ s to B . For the compactness, it su ffi ces to check Theorem 2.5. For any compact K ⊂ R n , consider

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Of course { ul } l ≥ 1 is bounded in L 2 , thus by Kolmogorov-Riesz theorem (see e.g. [17]), we may assume { ul } l ≥ 1 is L 2 convergent up to subsequence. For any N &gt; 0, let V = VN + V ′ N , where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

{ VNul } l ≥ 1 is also L 2 convergent for any fixed N . We assume K ⊂ X 1 ∪ · · · ∪ XJ , then an argument similar to the boundedness part above shows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for V ∈ L p loc is assumed. Now clearly { Vul } l ≥ 1 is an L 2 Cauchy sequence, which completes the proof. □

We end this section by a compact mapping property which will be used in Section 6.

Lemma 2.7. Let V define a compact multiplication operator from B ∗ s to B, { uj } j ≥ 1 be a bounded sequence in B ∗ s , and u j → u in S ′ . Then u ∈ B ∗ s and Vuj → Vu in B.

Proof. We may just assume ‖ Jsu j ‖ B ∗ ≤ 1 for all j . For any k ≥ 1 and φ ∈ C ∞ c ( Xk ), we have 〈 Jsu j , φ 〉 → 〈 Jsu , φ 〉 since Js φ ∈ S , and consequently

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus u ∈ B ∗ s with ‖ u ‖ B ∗ s ≤ 1. For the second statement, we may assume u = 0. By (2.7) and ‖ Jsu j ‖ B ∗ ≤ 1, it is easy to see for any K &gt; 0 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also notice that Vuj → 0 in L 2 ( Xk ) for any fixed k , because if it does not hold, we can take a subsequence such that ‖ Vujl ‖ L 2 ( Xk ) ≥ ǫ for some ǫ &gt; 0, and that Vujl → g in B by the compactness of V . However for any φ ∈ C ∞ c ( Xk ), we have V φ ∈ L 2 ( Xk ) for V ∈ L 2 loc ; we also know that uj → 0 weakly in L 2 ( Xk ) by the assumption. Thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

i.e. g = 0 in Xk , which is a contradiction. Now in the view of (2.8), we know from (2.27) that ‖ Vuj ‖ B → 0, and the proof is complete. □

First notice that

for some r , R &gt; 0, we have

## 3. E xistence and N on -E xistence of W ave O perators

The following proof of Theorem 1.2 inherits the approach of [8, Theorem 14.4.6]. Also see [7].

Proof of Theorem 1.2. The existence, isometry and the intertwining property follow if we can show the existence in a dense subset of L 2 . By Cook's method (see e.g. [19, p. 20]), notice that F -1 C ∞ c ( R n \ { 0 } ) is a dense subset of H s , it su ffi ces to show for any u ∈ F -1 C ∞ c ( R n \ { 0 } ) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is because of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and integration by part using the facts that ξ ↦→ x · ξ -t | ξ | s | x | + | t | has uniformly bounded derivatives in supp ˆ u , and has gradient uniformly bounded from below there.

Now take ϕ ∈ C ∞ c such that ϕ ( x ) = 1 when r 2 &lt; | x | &lt; 2 R and ϕ ( x ) = 0 when | x | &lt; r 4 or | x | &gt; 4 R . Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For u 1 t , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We may take integer m ≥ s 2 , and use (3.2) together with Leibniz' formula to deduce

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For u 2 t , we have r | t | / 4 &lt; | x | &lt; 4 R | t | in supp u 2 t , then in the view of (2.7), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By taking integer m ≥ s 2 and using Leibniz' formula, we also know from ˆ u ∈ C ∞ c that

and therefore

Finally by (2.8),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have now proved (3.1), and the proof is complete.

□

Remark3.1. In the proof of Theorem 1.2, we never use the assumption that V is compact. In fact, if a real-valued V defines a bounded multiplication operator from B ∗ s to B, and H 0 + V with domain H s is essentially self-adjoint, then Theorem 1.2 holds for the closure H of H 0 + V by exactly the same proof. For example, notice that for any ǫ &gt; 0 , we have for some C ǫ &gt; 0 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If ‖ V ‖ B ∗ s → B &lt; 1 , it follows by the Kato-Rellich theorem (see Reed-Simon [18]) that H = H 0 + V is self-adjoint in L 2 with domain H s , and consequently the wave operators exist.

We next prove Proposition 1.5.

Proof of Proposition 1.5. Assume that W + = s -lim t → + ∞ e itH e -itH 0 exists. We first take u ∈ F -1 C ∞ c ( R n \ { 0 } ) with ‖ u ‖ L 2 = 1 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similar to (3.2), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We first claim that there exist C 1 , C 2 &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∣ ∣ Since V does not change sign, we deduce for j &gt; J 0 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in the last two steps we have used 5 4 Rj -1 &lt; | t | &lt; 4 5 Rj , (3.3) and the assumption ǫ j ≥ -1.

We next claim that there exist C 3 , C 4 &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∥ ∥ To show this, we split the norm into

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the first right hand side term, when Rj -1 &lt; | t | &lt; Rj and j &gt; J 0, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the second right hand side term of (3.6), we again use (3.3) to get

and then (3.5) is shown.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we take J 2 &gt; J 1 &gt; J 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where we again use that fact that V does not change sign. Using (3.4), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using (3.5) and (3.7), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining (3.8), (3.9) and (3.10), we get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and then sending J 2 to ∞ yields a contradiction to (1.14). Thus W + does not exist, and neither does W -by the same proof. □

## 4. F ree R esolvent E stimates : I

For z ∈ C \ R , let R 0( z ) = ( H 0 -z ) -1 denote the usual L 2 resolvent of H 0, which is also defined via the Fourier multiplier ( | ξ | s -z ) -1 . This section studies the behavior of R 0( z ) when Im z →± 0, and the main result is Theorem 4.7. Before getting start, we recall two gadgets that will be used in this and the next section. The first one is a Fourier multiplier theorem in B .

Lemma 4.1 ( [8, Corollary 14.1.5]) . Let r ∈ C 1 ( R n ) with | r | and |∇ r | bounded. Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r ( D ) u = F -1 ( r ˆ u ) .

Remark 4.2. As mentioned in the Introduction, now an easy duality discussion shows that, if m is a positive integer and P ( D ) = ( -∆ ) m , then ‖ f ‖ B ∗ 2 m ≈ ‖ ( I + ( -∆ ) m ) f ‖ B ∗ ≈ ‖ f ‖ B ∗ P where B ∗ P is defined by (1.11) .

The second one shall be used to piece up localized estimates of the free resolvent.

Lemma 4.3 ( [8, Theorem 14.1.7]) . Given φ ∈ C ∞ c , and set φ ( D -η ) u = F -1 ( φ ( · -η )ˆ u ) for η ∈ R n and u ∈ S ′ . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Moreover, if ‖ φ ‖ L 2 &gt; 0 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we start by a localized resolvent estimate for real valued functions.

Lemma 4.4 ( [8, Theorem 14.2.2]) . Let X ⊂ R n be bounded and open, φ ∈ C ∞ c ( X ) , C 1 , C 2 &gt; 0 , and given function j : X →{ 1 , · · · , n } . Consider all p ∈ C 2 ( X ; R ) such that

Then for f ∈ B, the maps

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

can be uniquely defined as a weak* continuous function, (i.e. C ± ∋ z ↦→ 〈 uz , v 〉 ∈ C are continuous for every v ∈ B,) satisfying

where C &gt; 0 is uniform in the above p.

Before proceeding, it is necessary to further clarify the definition of uz in (4.5). Recall the fact that if p ∈ C 2 is real-valued and 0 is not a critical value of p , (i.e. p = 0 ⇒∇ p nequal 0,) then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

exist as first order distributions. Thus by assumption (4.4), the maps (4.5) are well defined for f ∈ S when z ∈ C \ R , which in [8], through an argument of partition of unity, were shown continuous as S ′ -valued functions satisfying (4.6) and can be uniquely extended to C ± . Since S is dense in B , such extensions are also well defined for f ∈ B as B ∗ -valued weak* continuous functions satisfying (4.6).

Lemma4.5. Let X ⊂ R n be bounded and open, φ ∈ C ∞ c ( X ) , and Q 0 ∈ C ( X ; R ) . For some ǫ &gt; 0 , denoted by K 1 = { ξ ∈ X ; | Q 0( ξ ) | &lt; 4 ǫ } ∩ supp φ , we assume that Q 0 ∈ C 2 ( K 1) and ∇ Q 0 nequal 0 holds in K 1 . Then there exist δ 0 , C &gt; 0 , such that when Q ∈ C ( X ; R ) ∩ C 2 ( K 1) satisfies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where K 2 = { ξ ∈ X ; | Q 0( ξ ) | &gt; 3 ǫ } ∩ supp φ , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. By the assumption, we first note that 0 is not a critical value of Q 0 in supp φ . This will lead to the fact that 0 is not a critical value of Q -ζ in supp φ as long as | ζ | is small and (4.7) holds, as we will show in the following.

Take h ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) such that h ( s ) = 1 when | s | &lt; 3 ǫ and h ( s ) = 0 when s &gt; 4 ǫ , we may write φ = φ 1 + φ 2 where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Obviously supp φ 1 ⊂ K 1, and we may assume

Then for ξ ∈ K 1, there exists j ( ξ ) ∈ { 1 , · · · , n } such that | ∂ j ( ξ ) Q 0( ξ ) | ≥ C 1 √ n , thus when

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Lemma 4.4, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, when ξ ∈ supp φ 2 ⊂ K 2, we have | Q 0( ξ ) | ≥ 3 ǫ . Thus when | ζ | &lt; δ 0 ≤ ǫ and

we have | Q -ζ | ≥ ǫ in supp φ 2, and consequently

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which completes the proof. □

Lemma 4.6. Given z 0 ∈ R \ { 0 } and φ ∈ C ∞ c ( B (1)) . For η ∈ R n , we define

Then there exist δ 0 , C &gt; 0 such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. As in the proof of Lemma 4.5, we will show through the following details that when z 0 nequal 0 and | ζ | is small, 0 is not a critical value of Q -ζ in supp φ .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

First consider the set of functions A = { Q η ; | η | &gt; 2 } . Obviously A ⊂ C ∞ ( B (1)). Let A be the closure of A in C 2 ( B (1)) and suppose Q ∈ A . If Q = Q η for some η with | η | ≥ 2, we have

If Q = lim j →∞ Q η j in C 2 ( B (1)) for some η j →∞ , by the inequality

∣ we know for all j that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and obtain by sending j to ∞ that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which also holds in the previous case. Therefore Q satisfies the condition of Q 0 in Lemma 4.5. On the other hand, one checks by the Arzel` a-Ascoli theorem that A is compact in C 2 ( B (1)). Now we know (4.11) is true for | η | &gt; 2 if we employ a finite covering argument for A with respect to the C 2 topology by using Lemma 4.5.

Next consider B = { Q η ; | η | ≤ 2 } . If z 0 &gt; 0, we take ǫ = z 0 8 〈 η 〉 s , then | Q η ( ξ ) | &lt; 4 ǫ implies | ξ + η | s &gt; z 0 2 . Therefore Q η ∈ C 2 ( K 1) where K 1 is defined in Lemma 4.5 with Q 0 replaced by Q η , and

This implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is also true if z 0 &gt; 0 for Q η never vanishes. Now we can apply Lemma 4.5 with Q 0 replaced by Q η . For δ 0 obtained Lemma 4.5, by the boundedness of ξ and η , it is easy to see that there exists δ &gt; 0 such that | η ′ -η | &lt; δ implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus a finite covering argument for { η ∈ R n ; | η | ≤ 2 } shows that (4.11) is also true for B . Now the proof is complete. □

It is clear that if λ ∈ R \ { 0 } , λ is not a critical value of | ξ | s which is C ∞ near {| ξ | s = λ } , thus by Lemma 4.4, R 0( λ ± i 0) f is well defined at least when ˆ f ∈ C ∞ c , and now we are about to prove the main result of this section.

Theorem 4.7. Let K be a closed subset of C + or C -such that 0 nelement K and Re K is bounded. Suppose r ∈ C 1 ( R n ) with

Then

Moreover, the maps

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

can be uniquely extended for f ∈ B as B ∗ -valued weak* continuous functions. In particular, R 0( z ) maps B into B ∗ s .

Proof. Similar to the argument after Lemma 4.4, the maps in (4.14) are S ′ -valued continuous functions if ˆ f ∈ C ∞ c , thus the second statement comes from (4.13) and the fact that F -1 C ∞ c is dense in B .

For any z 0 ∈ R \{ 0 } , we first prove that (4.13) is true for z ∈ C ± with | z -z 0 | su ffi ciently small. Notice that | z -z 0 | &lt; ǫ implies ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ z -z 0 〈 η 〉 s ∣ ∣ ∣ ∣ &lt; ǫ for η ∈ R n , thus we take φ ∈ C ∞ c ( B (1)) with φ ≡ 1 in B ( 1 2 ), and apply Lemma 4.6 with ζ = z -z 0 〈 η 〉 s to have

for some ǫ &gt; 0. If we take φ 0 ∈ C ∞ c ( B ( 1 2 )) with ‖ φ 0 ‖ L 2 &gt; 0, and replace the above ˆ f with φ 0 r ( · + η ) ˆ f ( · + η ) where f ∈ F -1 C ∞ c , we have φ 0 r ( · + η ) ˆ f ( · + η ) ∈ F B by Lemma 4.1 with the assumption r ∈ C 1 , and then for η ∈ R n that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

∥ ∥ ∥ ∥ where in the second line we have used Lemma 4.1 with the assumption (4.12). One checks that

∣ ∣ ∣ we thus use Lemma 4.1 again to obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Squaring both sides of (4.15) and integrating on R n with respect to η , (4.13) when z ∈ C ± and | z -z 0 | &lt; ǫ is then a consequence of (4.2) and (4.3).

Now we can apply a finite covering to K ∩ R in a C + - or C --neighborhood, and obtain (4.13) when | Im z | &lt; M for some M &gt; 0. The rest when | Im z | ≥ M is a result of the trivial estimate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and embeddings B ֒ → L 2 ֒ → B ∗ . The proof of (4.13) is now complete. □

## 5. F ree R esolvent E stimates : II

The main result of this section is Theorem 5.5, and a use of Littlewood-Paley theory in Lemma 5.3 is crucial. We shall establish weighted versions of results in Section 4 for the free resolvents R 0( λ ± i 0) acting on f ∈ B with ˆ f = 0 on { p ( ξ ) = λ } , where such trace is actually well defined by the following lemma as mentioned in the Introduction.

Lemma 5.1 ( [8, Theorem 14.1.1]) . Let M ⊂ R n be a compact C 1 hypersurface. Then the map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

can be extended to a surjection from B to L 2 ( M , dS ) by continuity, where dS is the Euclidean surface measure in M.

First comes the weighted version of Lemma 4.4.

Lemma 5.2 ( [8, Theorem 14.2.4]) . Let N ∈ N + , X ⊂ R n be bounded and open, φ ∈ C ∞ c ( X ) , C 1 , C 2 &gt; 0 , and given function j : X →{ 1 , · · · , n } . Consider all p ∈ C 2 + N ( X ; R ) such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If λ ∈ R , f ∈ B and φ ˆ f = 0 on { ξ ∈ R n ; p ( ξ ) = λ } , then u λ = F -1 (( p -λ ± i 0) -1 φ ˆ f ) is independent of the sign, and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ µ ( · ) = µ ( | · | ) , µ is any C 1 non-decreasing function satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and C &gt; 0 is independent of p , λ, µ and f.

Before introducing the analogue of Lemma 4.5, we recall the Littlewood-Paley characterization of inhomogeneous Lipschitz space Λ γ ( R n ) where γ ∈ R + (see [6, Section

1.4]). Let Φ ∈ C ∞ c be non-negative, supported in { ξ ∈ R n ; 6 7 ≤ | ξ | ≤ 2 } , and equal to 1 on { ξ ∈ R n ; 1 ≤ | ξ | ≤ 12 7 } , satisfying

Also let

  We define ∆ j f = F -1 ( Φ (2 -j · ) ˆ f ) and ˜ ∆ f = F -1 ( ˜ Φ ˆ f ) for f ∈ S ′ . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Λ γ ( R n ) consists of all continuous functions f satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and here Dh is the di ff erence operator at length h .

Lemma 5.3. Let s &gt; 0 , N ∈ N + , X ⊂ R n be bounded and open, φ ∈ C ∞ c ( X ) , and Q 0 ∈ C ( X ; R ) . For some ǫ &gt; 0 , let K 1 , K 2 be defined in Lemma 4.5, and φ 2 be defined in (4.9) . We assume that Q 0 ∈ C 2 + N ( K 1) with ∇ Q 0 nequal 0 on K 1 , and φ 2 Q 0 ∈ Λ s. Then there exist δ 0 , C &gt; 0 , such that when Q ∈ C ( X ; R ) ∩ C 2 + N ( K 1) satisfies

and when λ ∈ ( -δ 0 , δ 0) , f ∈ B with φ ˆ f = 0 on { ξ ∈ R n ; Q ( ξ ) = λ } , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ µ ( · ) = µ ( | · | ) and µ is any C 1 non-decreasing function satisfying

We note that by Lemma 5.2,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is well defined, and of course we will show that this is true for Q if δ 0 is small by the same reason.

Proof of Lemma 5.3. As in the proof of Lemma 4.5, with φ = φ 1 + φ 2, we first use Lemma 5.2 instead of Lemma 4.4 to obtain for su ffi ciently small δ 0 that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, when | λ | &lt; δ 0 ≤ ǫ and ξ ∈ supp φ 2 ⊂ K 2, we have | Q ( ξ ) -λ | ≥ ǫ , and therefore

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we are left to show

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where u = F 1 (( Q λ ) 1 φ ˆ f ), by using (5.12).

We first have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If x ∈ Xj and y ∈ Xk , we have

and thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We shall use (5.7) and (5.12) to treat (5.15), before which we may assume without loss of generality that µ (0) = 1, then (5.11) implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

First, We also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now (5.14), (5.15), (5.16) and (5.17) imply (5.13), which completes the proof. □

Notice that the function | ξ | s locally belongs to Λ s for s &gt; 0, Lemma 5.3 is then applicable in the following lemma.

Lemma 5.4. Given s &gt; 0 , λ 0 ∈ R \ { 0 } and φ ∈ C ∞ c ( B (1)) . For η ∈ R n , we define

Then there exist δ 0 , C &gt; 0 such that when λ ∈ ( -δ 0 , δ 0) , η ∈ R n , and f ∈ B with φ ˆ f = 0 on { ξ ∈ R n ; Q η ( ξ ) = λ } , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ µ ( · ) = µ ( | · | ) and µ is any C 1 non-decreasing function satisfying

Proof. The proof is almost the same to that of Lemma 4.6, if we use Lemma 5.3 (with N = [ s + 1 2 ] + 1) instead of Lemma 4.5 to show that A is precompact under the C [ s + 1 2 ] + 1 topology; and ‖ φ Q η ‖ Λ s is bounded uniformly in { η ∈ R n ; | η | ≤ 2 } , if

for any fixed | η 0 | ≤ 2.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we prove the main result of this section.

Theorem 5.5. Let s &gt; 0 , I ⊂ R \ { 0 } be compact, and suppose r ∈ C [ s ] + 2 ( R n ) with

Then there exists CI &gt; 0 such that when λ ∈ I and when f ∈ B with ˆ f = 0 on { ξ ∈ R n ; | ξ | s = λ } , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ µ ( · ) = µ ( | · | ) and µ is any C 1 non-decreasing function satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. As in the proof of Theorem 4.7, we use Lemma 5.4 instead of Lemma 4.6 to obtain for all η ∈ R n that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the rest, we use analogues of Lemma 4.1 and Lemma 4.3 associated with the weight ˜ µ , which requires the smoothness index [ s ] + 2 of r , to complete the proof. We refer to Theorem 14.1.7 and Corollary 14.1.8 in [8] for such analogues. □

Remark 5.6. When s = 2 m where m ∈ N + , the function | ξ | s is smooth and thus locally belongs to Λ N for any N &gt; 0 . In such case, s + 1 2 in the right hand side of (5.20) and of (5.23) can be replaced by any positive number. This could finally result in (1.17) that we mentioned earlier, but we neglect such discussion.

## 6. D iscreteness of P artial E igenvalues

This section is devoted to studying a special part Λ of σ pp, whose discreteness determines the proof of asymptotic completeness of W ± in the next section, and the main result is Proposition 6.5. We will end this section by showing

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

However, we will show at the end of Section 7 that they are actually equal.

For λ ∈ R \{ 0 } , the strategy to study the equation ( H -λ ) u = 0 in L 2 is to first consider a wider sense of solutions:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that when s is not an even number, ( -∆ ) s 2 does not act on all temperate distributions for the non-smoothness of its Fourier symbol, thus we actually interpret equation (6.2) in the sense that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and f = -Vu , where ˆ φǫ is a smooth Fourier cuto ff function avoiding an ǫ -ball centered at 0. In order to easier verify such limit, we are interested in the following definition.

Definition 6.1. Let s &gt; 0 and V be a short range potential. We define Λ to be the set of λ ∈ R \ { 0 } such that the equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

has a non-trivial solution f ∈ B.

Remark 6.2. If λ ∈ Λ , 0 nequal f ∈ B solves (6.4) , and set u = R 0( λ + i 0) f ∈ B ∗ s by Theorem 4.7, we have f = -Vu and that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, (6.3) even holds in the weak* topology of B ∗ by dominated convergence.

Wewill first focus on the study of (6.5) rather than (6.3). Let p ( ξ ) = | ξ | s and λ ∈ R \{ 0 } . Recall that the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds in S ′ if ˆ f ∈ C ∞ c , for λ is not a critical point of p , which is smooth near supp δ ( p -λ ). (6.6) also holds when f ∈ B while both sides are in B ∗ s by Theorem 4.7, and on the right hand side the fact that δ ( p -λ ) ˆ f can be interpreted as the L 2 trace on the surface comes from Lemma 5.1 and an obvious duality discussion. We first introduce a lemma for the inhomogeneous equation.

Lemma 6.3. Suppose λ ∈ R \ { 0 } , and u ∈ B ∗ satisfies (( -∆ ) s 2 -λ ) u = f ∈ B in the sense of (6.3) . Then F ( u -R 0( λ ± i 0) f ) are supported in { ξ ∈ R n ; | ξ | s = λ } as L 2 densities. Moreover, if Im 〈 u , f 〉 = 0 , then each of u = R 0( λ + i 0) f and u = R 0( λ -i 0) f implies each other.

Proof. See [8, Theorem 14.3.8]. We note that the reference is for di ff erential operators, but its proof works well here under Theorem 4.7 and the comment after (6.6). □

Remark 6.4. If λ ∈ Λ and f ∈ B solves (6.4) , since V is real-valued, Lemma 6.3 and Remark 6.2 then imply that f also solves

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The main properties of Λ are indicated in the following.

Proposition 6.5. Suppose λ ∈ R \ { 0 } , and V is a short range potential. Consider u ∈ B ∗ s solving

Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(i) The space of solutions to (6.8) is finite dimensional.

(ii) There exists C &gt; 0 independent of u such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C remains bounded if λ stays in a bounded set. Consequently,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(iii) The set of λ ∈ R \{ 0 } such that (6.8) has a non-trivial B ∗ s solution is discrete in R \{ 0 } .

for any ǫ &gt; 0 and s ′ ≤ s, where C ǫ remains bounded if λ stays in a bounded set. Thus u ∈ H s and ( H -λ ) u = 0 holds.

Proof. (i) is obvious since R 0( λ + i 0) V is compact in B ∗ s .

For (ii), let f = -Vu ∈ B . Since V is real-valued, by Lemma 6.3 we have u = R 0( λ + i 0) f = R 0( λ -i 0) f , and thus that ˆ f = 0 on { ξ ∈ R n ; | ξ | s = λ } in the view of

(6.6). Set µǫ ( t ) = (1 + t ) s + 1 2 (1 + ǫ t ) -s -1 2 for ǫ ∈ (0 , 1), one checks that µǫ is an increasing function satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we apply Theorem 5.5 with r ( D ) = Js and such weight function µǫ to the above f to obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˜ µǫ ( · ) = µǫ ( | · | ), and C &gt; 0 remains bounded if λ stays in a bounded set. We note that µǫ is a bounded function, thus the left hand side of (6.12) is finite, which makes absorption discussion reasonable. By (2.7),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Notice that (6.11) and µǫ (0) = 1 imply µǫ ( Rj ) ≤ 2 s + 1 2 µǫ ( Rj -1) ≤ CR s + 1 2 j , we first have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We also have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining (6.11)-(6.15), we obtain for any integer J that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By (2.8), we can fixed large J such that the second summation of (6.16) is absorbed into the left hand side. We note that such choice of J only depends on Mj and λ , and the choice is uniform if λ stays in a bounded set. We therefore obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Sending ǫ to 0 proves (6.9), for (1 + | · | ) s + 1 2 is equivalent to 〈·〉 s + 1 2 . It is easy to see that

(6.10) is then proved, if we observe from (2.1) that 〈·〉 s -ǫ J -( s -s ′ ) 〈·〉 -( s -ǫ ) is L 2 bounded, for its integral kernel is dominated by the convolution kernel of a Bessel potential operator near the diagonal, and decays exponentially away from the diagonal. By Remark 6.2, the proof of (ii) is complete.

For (iii), suppose we have R \ { 0 } ∋ λ j → λ ∈ R \ { 0 } where λ j 's are distinct, and uj ∈ B ∗ s with ‖ uj ‖ B ∗ s = 1 satisfying

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since (6.10) implies sup j ‖ uj ‖ L 2 ≤ C ‖ V ‖ B ∗ s → B ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the Kolmogorov-Riesz theorem (see e.g. [17]) indicates that we can assume uj → u in L 2 up to subsequence. On the other hand, (6.17) and the fact that uj ∈ Dom( H ) = H s imply Huj = λ juj , and since H is closed, we also have Hu = λ u . We must have u = 0 for it is orthogonal to a bounded sequence of orthogonal eigenfunctions. Now Lemma 2.7 implies ‖ Vuj ‖ B → 0, we thus conclude by (4.13) and the assumption λ ∈ R \ { 0 } that

which is a contradiction. The proof of (iii) is complete.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

□

Remark 6.6. Now (6.1) apparently holds for Λ is a part of the set of λ that Proposition 6.5 considers, which turn out to be genuine eigenvalues of H.

## 7. A symptotic C ompleteness of W ±

Let { E λ } be the spectral family of H , and

The goal of this section is to prove Theorem 1.3, and the proof is in principle given in the Section 14.6 of H¨ ormander [8]. The plan is to consider the distorted Fourier transforms formally given by F ± = F ( W ± ) ∗ , and show that F ± are both scaled isometries from E c L 2 to L 2 . However, unlike many authors who defined the distorted Fourier transforms by constructing generalized eigenfunction expansion, H¨ ormander [8] considers F ± constructed on lower dimensional hypersurfaces using spectral calculus. In particular, such construction is tricky when considering the trace property Lemma 5.1 in a parameterized way. We shall supplement some details for such construction, especially in the proofs of Lemma 7.2 and Theorem 7.4. We note that such purpose is based on the discreteness of Λ proved in Proposition 6.5.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If z ∈ C \ R , let R ( z ) = ( H -z ) -1 denote the L 2 resolvent of H . Westart by checking its boundary behavior when Im z →± 0 using the claims for R 0( z ) that we have established.

Lemma 7.1. If z ∈ C ± \ ˜ Λ and V is a short range potential, then ( I + VR 0( z )) -1 exists and is continuous in B. Moreover, the maps

are continuous if f ∈ B.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. When Im z nequal 0, for u ∈ B we have R 0( z ) u ∈ H s , and it is easy to deduce that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where I + VR 0( z ) can be interpreted as an operator in B . Thus I + VR 0( z ) has kernel { 0 } , which is also true when z ∈ C ± \ ˜ Λ by Definition 6.1 and Remark 6.4. By Fredholm theory (see [8, Lemma 14.5.3]), ( I + VR 0( z )) -1 is bounded in B and strongly continuous in z ∈ C ± \ ˜ Λ , where the proof needs the facts that C ± \{ 0 } ∋ z ↦→ VR 0( z ) f ∈ B is continuous when f ∈ B (see Theorem 4.7 and Lemma 2.7), and { VR 0( z ) f ; ‖ f ‖ B ≤ 1 , z ∈ K } is precompact in B if K is bounded, which obviously holds. □

If we let u = ( I + VR 0( z )) -1 f in (7.3), Lemma 7.1 shows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is well defined for z ∈ C ± \ ˜ Λ , and the maps C ± \ ˜ Λ ∋ z ↦→ R ( z ) f ∈ B ∗ are weak* continuous. In particular

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let M λ = { ξ ∈ R n ; | ξ | s = λ } . (Note that M λ = ∅ if λ &lt; 0.) The spectral theory (see [8, p. 255-256]) implies that

and we write f λ ± i 0 = ( I + VR 0( λ ± i 0)) -1 f for later convenience.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that d ξ = d λ dS / ( s λ s -1 s ) where ξ ∈ R n , the above repeated integral is formally the integration of ˆ f | ξ | s ± i 0( ξ ) in R n . However by Lemma 5.1, the L 2 trace ˆ f λ ± i 0( ξ ) is only defined for almost every ξ ∈ M λ with respect to the surface measure by extension. We therefore need to choose the value of ˆ f | ξ | s ± i 0( ξ ) well on each M λ even just to make it measurable in R n .

Lemma 7.2. If f ∈ B, then there exist measurable functions F ± f which are uniquely defined almost everywhere in R n with respect to the Lebesgue measure, such that for every λ ∈ R \ ˜ Λ we have F ± f ( ξ ) = ˆ f λ ± i 0( ξ ) holds for almost every ξ ∈ M λ with respect to the surface measure.

Proof. By Proposition 6.5, first notice that ∪ λ ∈ ˜ Λ M λ has measure 0, the uniqueness follows. The discreteness of Λ guarantees the existence of partition of unity

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ψ k ∈ C ∞ c ( R ) and the above summation is locally finite.

We first claim that for every λ ∈ R \ ˜ Λ and j &gt; 0, there exists g j λ ∈ F -1 C ∞ c such that ˆ g j λ is continuous in λ and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For such purpose, we first fix k , and choose a partition of unity φ k , 1 , · · · , φ k , K such that ∑ K l = 1 φ k , l = 1 in supp ψ k where the summation is locally twice. By Lemma 7.1, if the partition is su ffi ciently fine, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Take λ k , l ∈ supp φ k , l , and since F -1 C ∞ c is dense in B , we can find g j k , l ∈ F -1 C ∞ c such that

Set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we have ˆ g j k ,λ ∈ C ∞ c continuous in λ when λ ∈ supp ψ k , and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

holds by (7.5) and (7.6). Now let g j λ = ∑ ∞ k = 1 ψ k ( λ ) g j k ,λ , then g j λ has the desired properties.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By Lemma 5.1, if λ ∈ R \ ˜ Λ , we have

where C ( λ ) is locally bounded by (4.13). Thus for any compact K ⊂ R n \ ∪ λ ∈ ˜ Λ M λ and k &gt; 0, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that ˆ g j | ξ | s ( ξ ) has almost everywhere convergence in R n up to subsequence, and we denote the almost everywhere limit to be F ± f ( ξ ). We note that (7.8) implies ˆ g j | ξ | s ( ξ ) → F ± f ( ξ ) in L 2 loc ( R n \ ∪ λ ∈ ˜ Λ M λ ) at the rate 2 -j .

By Fubini's theorem,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

exists for almost every λ ∈ R \ ˜ Λ , and it follows from (7.7) that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we know from (7.8) for any compact I ⊂ R \ ˜ Λ that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies up to subsequence that, hj ( λ ) → 0 for almost every λ ∈ R \ ˜ Λ , and thus h ( λ ) = 0 for almost every λ . Therefore, we can modify F ± f on a collection of M λ which form a set of measure 0 in R n , and the proof is complete. □

F ± f are called the distorted Fourier transforms of f ∈ B . From (7.4), we know that F ± has an extension supported onto E c L 2 .

Theorem 7.3. If f ∈ B, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus the maps f ↦→ F ± f can be extended for f ∈ L 2 satisfying (7.9) , which vanish on E d L 2 and restrict to isometries E c L 2 → L 2 ( d ξ/ (2 π ) n ) . Moreover, we have the intertwining property

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. (7.9) follows from (7.4) and Lemma 7.2. For (7.10), we first consider f ∈ F -1 C ∞ c ( R n \{ 0 } ). For any λ ∈ R \ ˜ Λ , we have ( H 0 -λ ) f ∈ S and thus R 0( λ ± i 0)( H 0 -λ ) f = f by weak* continuity of R 0 and dominated convergence. It follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies

and this just means

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since F -1 C ∞ c ( R n \{ 0 } ) is dense in H s and H is closed, (7.11) holds when f ∈ H s , which in the meanwhile shows that F ± f ∈ Dom( | · | s ). Now we can di ff erentiate e -it |·| s F ± e itH f in t when f ∈ H s , and show that the derivative is 0, therefore (7.10) holds for H s is dense in L 2 . □

Theorem 7.4. F ± W ± = F holds in L 2 .

Proof. We just show for the minus sign. If f ∈ F -1 C ∞ c ( R n \ { 0 } ), since e -itH 0 f ⊂ F -1 C ∞ c ( R n \ { 0 } ) is infinitely di ff erentiable in L 2 , and we can di ff erentiate e itH e -itH 0 f to get

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Since F -is L 2 continuous, we can use the intertwining property (7.10) and the fact that the integral in (7.12) is absolutely convergent in L 2 by (3.1), to deduce

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now we take any φ ∈ C ∞ c ( R n \ ∪ λ ∈ ˜ Λ M λ ), and assume that supp φ ⊂ I × S n -1 where compact I ⊂ R + \ ˜ Λ . Note that λ ≥ c &gt; 0 if λ ∈ I . We have Since λ ∈ R \ ˜ Λ , by Lemma 7.2 and Lemma 5.1 we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C ′′ ( λ ) is locally bounded. Indeed, the fact that C ( λ ) is locally bounded rather comes from the proof of Lemma 5.1 in our specific case (see [2, remark of Theorem 2.1]); and we have used the local boundedness of ‖ ( I + VR 0( λ -i 0)) -1 ‖ B → B in λ , which is due to Lemma 7.1 and the Banach-Steinhaus theorem. Now we can use the Fubini's theorem to exchange integrations and obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the last line also comes from (7.14), and F -( e ǫ t + it λ iVe -itH 0 f ) ∣ ∣ ∣ M λ denotes the L 2 trace on M λ . For fixed λ , the second estimate of (7.14) implies that ∫ 0 -∞ e ǫ t + it λ iVe -itH f dt is absolutely convergent in B ; further, the map u ↦→ F -u | M λ is continuous from B to L 2 ( M λ ). We thus conclude that

Therefore,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Also notice that V is continuous from H s to L 2 , and that ∫ 0 -∞ e ǫ t + it λ Js ( e -itH 0 f ) dt is absolutely convergent in L 2 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Combining this and (7.13),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for ( I + VR 0( λ -i 0)) -1 ( I + VR 0( λ -i ǫ )) f is continuous both in ǫ and in λ by Lemma 2.7 and Lemma 7.1. Finally, since F -1 C ∞ c ( R n \ { 0 } ) and C ∞ c ( R n \ ∪ λ ∈ ˜ Λ M λ ) are both dense in L 2 , the proof is complete. □

We are ready to prove Theorem 1.3 now.

Proof of Theorem 1.3. Since H 0 is absolutely continuous, a general fact (see e.g. [11, p. 531]) is that Ran W ± ⊂ H ac . Now Theorem 7.3 and Theorem 7.4 indicate that E c L 2 = Ran W ± , therefore E c L 2 ⊂ H ac also holds. On the other hand, by (iii) of Proposition 6.5, we know that ˜ Λ is countable and thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the pure point subspace of L 2 with respect to H , which implies E c L 2 ⊃ H ac ⊕ H sing. We then must have (1.5). □

By the proof of Theorem 1.3, it follows that E d L 2 = H pp, which combining with Remark 6.6 implies

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 8. D ecay and R egularity of E igenfunctions

In this section, we will prove through Fredholm theory that actually every eigenfunction u of H associated with λ ∈ Λ = σ pp \ { 0 } has the form suggested by Remark 6.2, which thus proves the other part of Theorem 1.4. As indicated in Section 6, we shall study the equation (6.2), and the main result is Proposition 8.2. For λ ∈ R \ { 0 } , recall that M λ = { ξ ∈ R n ; | ξ | s = λ } .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 8.1. Let λ ∈ R \ { 0 } , V be a short range potential, and u ∈ B ∗ s satisfies (( -∆ ) s 2 -λ ) u = -Vu (in the sense of (6.3) ). Then

Proof. By Lemma 6.3, we can write

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In particular, this implies that u - ∈ B ∗ . Then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For the first term on the right hand side above, by the weak* continuity of C + ∋ z ↦→ R 0( z ) Vu ∈ B ∗ and the fact that f ∈ B , we have

The second term on the right hand side of (8.3) is 0, since ˆ f has trace 0 on M λ , and we can use Lemma 5.1 and (8.2) by taking S ∋ f j → f in B . □

The main result of the section is the following.

Proposition 8.2. Suppose λ ∈ R \ { 0 } , V is a short range potential, and A λ nequal { 0 } where

If u ∈ B ∗ s satisfies (( -∆ ) s 2 -λ ) u = -Vu (in the sense of (6.3) ), then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. We first note that A λ is a well defined closed subspace of B which can be seen by Theorem 4.7 and Lemma 5.1. The assumption A λ nequal { 0 } guarantees the non-trivial inclusion B ∗ ⊂ A ∗ λ , where A ∗ λ is the B -norm dual space of A λ . Consider operator T = I + VR 0( λ + i 0) on A λ . Obviously VR 0( λ + i 0) is well defined and compact in A λ with the B topology, thus by Fredholm theory,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where

and here 〈· , ·〉 denotes the duality pairing between A ∗ λ and A λ . Let f 1 , · · · , f r ∈ A λ be a basis of Ker( T ), and set

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now one checks that in the sense of (6.3),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which implies that u 1 , · · · , ur are linearly independent. When f ∈ A λ , 〈 uj , T f 〉 is then equal to the B ∗ -B pairing (1.19) in the sense of isometry, which is 0 by Lemma 8 . 1, and we know from (8.6) and (8.7) that ⊥ Ran( T ) = span { u 1 , · · · , ur } . We also have u ∈ ⊥ Ran( T ) for the same reason, thus u is a linear combination of u 1 , · · · , ur and must satisfy the first equality of (8.5), where the second equality follows by the last statement of Lemma 6.3. □

Finally, we are ready to illustrate the proof of Theorem 1.4.

Proof of Theorem 1.4. Wefirst claim that if λ ∈ R \{ 0 } and A λ = { 0 } , then I + VR 0( λ + i 0) is invertible in B . Otherwise, take 0 nequal f ∈ B such that f + VR 0( λ + i 0) f = 0, it is easy to see by Remark 6.2, Lemma 6.3 and (6.6) that f ∈ A λ , which is a contradiction.

Therefore, if λ ∈ Λ then A λ nequal { 0 } holds by definition, and if u ∈ H s satisfies Hu = λ u , we know from (8.5) that Proposition 6.5 is applicable, (1.6) thus follows. The discreteness of σ pp \ { 0 } is implied by (7.16) and Proposition 6.5. The proof is complete. □

## A cknowledgements

Tianxiao Huang is supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Sun Yat-sen University No. 19lgpy249), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (No. 2020M672929), and the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (No. 2020A1515111048). Tianxiao Huang thanks Ze Li, Kuijie Li, Mingjuan Chen and Minjie Shan for some useful discussion. Quan Zheng is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11801188). The authors also thank Shanlin Huang for pointing out some research on the non-existence of wave operators.

## R eferences

- [1] S. Agmon, Spectral properties of Schr¨ odinger operators and scattering theory, Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa Cl. Sci. 2 (1975), 151-218. 3
- [2] S. Agmon and L. H¨ ormander, Asymptotic properties of solutions of di ff erential equations with simple characteristics, J. Analyse Math. 30 (1976), 1-38. 3, 4, 34
- [3] J.D. Dollard, Quantum-mechanical scattering theory for short-range and Coulomb interactions, Rocky Mountain J. Math. 1 (1971), 5-88. 2
- [4] E. Giere, Asymptotic completeness for functions of the Laplacian perturbed by potentials and obstacles, Math. Nachr. 263 / 264 (2004), 133-153. 4
- [5] M. Goldberg and W. Schlag, A limiting absorption principle for the three-dimensional Schr¨ odinger equation with L p potentials, Int. Math. Res. Not. 2004 (2004), 4049-4071. 3
- [6] L. Grafakos, Modern Fourier Analysis, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, third ed., vol. 250, New York: Springer, 2014. 7, 23
- [7] L. H¨ ormander, The existence of wave operators in scattering theory, Math. Z. 146 (1976), 69-91. 15
- [8] L. H¨ ormander, The Analysis of Linear Partial Di ff erential Operators II, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg
9. New York, 1985. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 15, 19, 20, 23, 27, 28, 30, 31
- [9] A. D. Ionescu and W. Schlag, Agmon-Kato-Kuroda theorems for a large class of perturbations, Duke Math. J. 131 (2006), 397-440. 3, 4
- [10] A. Ishida and K. Wada, Threshold between short and long-range potentials for non-local Schr¨ odinger operators, Math. Phys. Anal. Geom. 23 (2020), no. 3, Paper No. 32, 11 pp. 5
- [11] T. Kato, Perturbation Theory for Linear Operators, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg New York, 1980. 35
- [12] A. Kiselev, Imbedded singular continuous spectrum for Schr¨ odinger operators, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 18 (2005), 571-603. 3
- [13] H. Kitada, Scattering theory for the fractional power of negative Laplacian, J. Abstr. Di ff er. Equ. Appl. 1 (2010), 1-26. 4
- [14] N. Laskin, Fractional quantum mechanics and L´ evy path integrals, Phys. Lett. A 268 (2000), 298305. 4

- [15] N. Laskin, Fractional Schr¨ odinger equation, Phys. Rev. E 66 (2002), 056108. 4
- [16] J. von Neumann and E. Wigner, ¨ Uber merkw¨ urdige diskrete Eigenwerte, Phys. Z. 30 (1929), 465467. 3
- [17] R. L. Pego, Compactness in L 2 and the Fourier transform, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 95 (1985), 252254. 13, 30
- [18] M. Reed and B. Simon, Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics II: Fourier Analysis, SelfAdjointness, Academic Press, New York-London, 1975. 16
- [19] M. Reed and B. Simon, Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics III: Scattering Theory, Academic Press, New York-London, 1979. 3, 15
- [20] M. Reed and B. Simon, Methods of Modern Mathematical Physics IV: Analysis of Operators, Academic Press, New York-London, 1978. 3
- [21] M. Schechter, Scattering theory for pseudodi ff erential operators, Quart. J. Math. Oxford Ser. (2) 27 (1976), 111-121. 4
- [22] T. Umeda, Radiation conditions and resolvent estimates for relativistic Schr¨ odinger operators, Ann. Inst. H. Poincar´ e Phys. Th´ eor. 63 (1995), 277-296. 4
- [23] D. Wei, Completeness of the generalized eigenfunctions for relativistic Schr¨ odinger operators I, Osaka J. Math. 44 (2007), 851-881. 4

R ui Z hang , S chool of M athematics and S tatistics , H uazhong U niversity of S cience and T echnology , W uhan , H ubei 430074, PR C hina

Email address : lrzhang@hust.edu.cn

T ianxiao H uang ( corresponding author ), S chool of M athematics (Z huhai ), S un Y at -sen U niversity , Z huhai , G uangdong 519082, C hina

Email address : htx5@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Q uan Z heng , S chool of M athematics and S tatistics , H uazhong U niversity of S cience and T echnology , W uhan , H ubei 430074, PR C hina

Email address :

qzheng@hust.edu.cn