## Trees and Turtles: Modular Abstractions for State Machine Replication Protocols

Natalie Neamtu Microsoft Corporation Redmond, WA, USA nan55@cornell.edu

## Abstract

Wepresent two abstractions for designing modular state machine replication (SMR) protocols: trees and turtles . A tree captures the set of possible state machine histories, while a turtle represents a subprotocol that tries to find agreement in this tree. We showcase the applicability of these abstractions by constructing crash-tolerant SMR protocols out of abstract tree turtles and providing examples of tree turtle implementations. Tree turtles can also be extended to be made Byzantine fault-tolerant (BFT). The modularity of tree turtles allows a generic approach for adding a leader for liveness. We expect that these abstractions will simplify reasoning and formal verification of SMR protocols as well as facilitate innovation in protocol designs.

## 1 Introduction

State machine replication (SMR) is a widely-used paradigm in distributed and decentralized services, wherein a set of processors provides an abstraction of a single state machine with an ever-growing history [12]. In the face of possible processor failures and unbounded communication delays, the challenge lies in ensuring that nodes always agree on the history while allowing updates to be made in as timely a manner as possible.

Traditional SMR protocols are usually constructed around the notion of an unbounded sequence of slots. The goal of such a protocol is to fill the slots with values. A typical protocol consists of an unbounded series of rounds where the contents of at most one slot may be decided in a round. Some protocols are only able to fill a single slot (i.e., [1, 5]), thus an unbounded number of instances of the protocol must be used to implement SMR. Higher throughput is achieved by running multiple instances in parallel, either independently [4, 9] or in a pipelined fashion [8, 14], or by putting a batch of values in each slot.

We present here two abstractions that break this slot-byslot paradigm: trees and turtles . Referring to a sequence of values as a chain , the set of such chains forms a tree under the is-a-prefix-of relation. As was proposed in [10], we generalize the slot-based scheme for constructing SMR protocols to allow entire chains to be decided at once, extending the state machine history down a path through the tree. We then generalize the notion of a round to an abstract subprotocol which can be used to decide one chain. We refer to

Haobin Ni Cornell University Ithaca, NY, USA

haobin@cs.cornell.edu Robbert van Renesse Cornell University Ithaca, NY, USA rvr@cs.cornell.edu

such protocols as turtles because they are stacked in infinitum to construct an SMR protocol. Taken together, the result is protocols called tree turtles .

Using chains requires our subprotocols to form a consensus out of a set with richer algebraic structures than the traditional set of singlar values. In this case, the algebraic structure we use is the meet-semilattice formed by the ancestor relation between the nodes of the tree as the partial order and the lowest common ancestor of a set of nodes as the meet operator. This structure is utilized in the tree turtle protocols and their proofs of correctness that we present in this paper.

Weexpectthat our abstractions can lead to various advantages over traditional SMR approaches. Proposing chains allows processors to specify preferred orderings of values in the state machine history. Reasoning about SMR protocols is made simpler with tree turtles because the neverterminating execution is factored out; this can lead to more reusable proofs in both an informal an formal setting. Tree turtles themselves have simple proofs when compared to existing SMR protocols. The modularity of tree turtles also enables the design of heterogeneous protocols that dynamically adapt to their workloads or operating conditions.

For liveness, we show how to compose our turtle abstraction with a leader which attempts to eliminate contention between processors. Different from traditional approaches, our protocol does not require a non-faulty leader to make progress under favorable conditions. We also demonstrate that tree turtles can be made Byzantine fault-tolerant (BFT) by adding an abstraction called evidence which allows protocols to use additional techniques for restricting Byzantine behavior (such as digital signatures).

## 2 Trees and Turtles

Put simply, the goal of SMR is to allow a set of processors agree on an ever-growing sequence of values in a fault-tolerant manner. Rather than focusing on the individual values in a sequence, we will consider how an agreement can be formed on an entire sequence, or a chain , at once. Doing so utilizes the tree structure present in sets of chains.

Consider a processor u1D45D that believes the state machine history is represented by a chain u1D450 . If another processor u1D45D ′ believes the state machine is represented by a different chain u1D450 ′ , then u1D45D and u1D45D ′ should be able to agree on a common history. Beyond the simplest case where u1D450 = u1D450 ′ , consider whether one chain is a prefix of the other. If this is the case, the processor who proposed the shorter chain could later 'catch up" by extending its chain to the longer chain, without needing to modify the earlier state machine history.

Figure 1. Illustrating the tree structure formed by trees and the is-a-prefix-of relation. Chain u1D462 is the longest common prefix of chains u1D450 1 and u1D450 2 . Chain u1D451 is the longest common prefix of chains u1D450 1 , u1D450 2 , and u1D450 3 .

<!-- image -->

If u1D45D and u1D45D ′ attempt to establish agreement on an extension of the state machine history by proposing chains u1D450 and u1D450 ′ to each other, then we could consider that u1D45D and u1D45D ′ agree on the longest common prefix of u1D450 and u1D450 ′ . This is the (possibly empty) longest identical subsequence that can be found starting from the beginning of each chain. The longest common prefix can readily be generalized to any number of chains; Figure 1 depicts a tree formed by three chains where the longest common prefixes are ancestor nodes.

Trees 1 , then, can be viewed as fundamental to state machine replication: processors continually propose new chains to each other in order to keep extending the longest agreedupon path through the tree. Table 1 summarizes the notation which we will use for chains in this paper.

Table 1. Summary of notation for chains.

| ⊥  the empty chain  u1D450  ⪯  u1D450  ′  u1D450  is a  prefix  of  u1D450  ′  (or,  u1D450  ′  is an  extension  of  u1D450  )  u1D450  ≃  u1D450  ′  u1D450  ⪯  u1D450  ′  or  u1D450  ′ ⪯  u1D450  (we say that  u1D450  and  u1D450  ′  agree  )  u1D450  ⊓  u1D450  ′  the longest common prefix of  u1D450  and  u1D450  ′   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Nowwewillturn our attention to the structure of an SMR protocol. To perform SMR, processors alternate between proposing new extensions to the longest agreed-upon chain, collecting proposals from other processors, and deciding what the new longest agreed-upon chain is. This process repeats forever to ensure that the longest agreed-upon chain is evergrowing.

Thus, we may extract a natural building block from this structure: a subprotocol in which processors propose and subsequently decide on a single chain. While many subprotocol implementations are possible, we establish a common specification for the properties they should have. Once we have one (or many) such subprotocols, constructing a SMR protocol is simple: we stack these subprotocols on top of each other in an unending sequence. Owing to this infinite repetition, and inspired by the saying 'turtles all the way down,' we refer to our building blocks of SMR protocols as turtles . Since our protocols combine the ideas of trees and turtles, we will call them tree turtles (Figure 2).

1 In addition to being like trees in a loose conceptual sense, chains, taken with the partial order ⪯ , satisfy the set-theoretic definition of a tree. This is because for each chain u1D450 , the set of its prefixes { u1D450 ′ | u1D450 ′ ⪯ u1D450 } is totally ordered by ⪯ . As mentioned in the introduction, it is possible to generalize trees even further to a semilattice.

Figure 2. Tree turtle protocols are stacked to implement a state machine replication protocol.

<!-- image -->

Tree turtles reduce the problem of solving SMR into making a single proposal and decision. The specification for tree turtles requires them to always terminate (Section 5), while SMR requires that the protocol goes on forever (Section 4). The tree turtle implementations are encapsulated from the correctness of the SMR protocol proved in Section 6 making those proofs reusable across implementations. This also readily demonstrates the potential of heterogeneous SMR protocols composed from multiple types of tree turtles.

## 3 System Model

We will denote the set of processors participating in a protocol as P . Processors can communicate with all other processors by sending messages over a network.

Failures. Each processor u1D45D can either be correct or faulty. Faulty processors may fail by crashing, at which point they maystopexecuting indefinitely. Which processors are faulty is not known a priori .

Network. The network is assumed to be reliable in the following sense: if a processor u1D45D sends a message to a correct processor u1D45E , then u1D45E eventually receives that message. We also assume that the network doesn't forge or garble messages, meaning that if a processor u1D45E receives a message from a processor u1D45D , then u1D45D actually sent that message.

Asynchrony. We assume that there are no upper bounds on the difference between processor speeds or network latency. This means that processors are not able to distinguish between faulty processors and correct processors that are simply slow or whose messages have yet to be delivered.

Quorums. A processor can never expect to receive a message from all other processors due to the possibility that somehavecrashed.Toaddress this, a processor instead waits for a quorum which is a subset of the processors in P . A quorum system Q is a set of quorums ( Q ⊆ 2 P ) which satisfies the following:

- Weassume that any quorum system Q contains a special quorum, which we will denote u1D444 ∗ , that consists entirely of correct processors.
- We say that a quorum system satisfies u1D458 -intersection if any set of u1D458 quorums have at least one processor in common [7].

Appendix A shows how u1D458 -intersecting quorum systems can be implemented using threshold quorums if |P| &gt; u1D458 · u1D453 , where u1D453 is the maximum number of faulty processors.

## 4 State Machine Replication Specification

Below we give the requirements for a SMR protocol, in which processors in P alternate proposing and deciding chains.

Definition 4.1 (State Machine Replication Specification) .

- SMR-Agreement : if a processor u1D45D decides chain u1D451 and a processor u1D45D ′ decides chain u1D451 ′ , then u1D451 ≃ u1D451 ′ (even if u1D45D = u1D45D ′ ).
- SMR-Validity : if a processor decides chain u1D451 , then some processor proposed a chain u1D450 such that u1D451 ⪯ u1D450 .
- SMR-Relay : if a correct processor decides chain u1D451 , then eventually all correct processors decide u1D451 or an extension of u1D451 .
- SMR-Monotonicity : if a processor decides chain u1D451 and later another chain u1D451 ′ , then u1D451 ⪯ u1D451 ′ .
- SMR-Progress : if a correct processor proposes a chain that it has not decided before, then that processor eventually decides a chain it has not decided before.

Note that it is impossible for a protocol to satisfy all properties if the system is asynchronous [6]. For our tree turtle protocols in Section 7, we will focus on the first four properties. We will return to SMR-Progress in Section 8 when we introduce synchrony assumptions.

## 5 Tree Turtle Specification

Atree turtle is a fault-tolerant protocol executed by the processors in P . Processors construct an input and produce an output for each tree turtle. An input to a tree turtle is a chain u1D450 , which we will denote in brackets 〈 u1D450 〉 . An output of a tree turtle is a pair of chains 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 . Since tree turtles are subprotocols, we do not assume here that all processors-including non-crashed ones-will execute a given tree turtle. We show in Section 6 that in our construction, all correct processors will in fact execute each tree turtle.

A tree turtle must satisfy the following properties:

Definition 5.1 (Tree Turtle Specification) .

- Turtle-Termination : if each correct processor constructs an input, then eventually each correct processor produces an output.
- Turtle-Agreement : for any two outputs 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 and 〈 u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ 〉 , u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ and u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D462 .
- Turtle-Unanimity : for any chain u1D464 , if u1D464 ⪯ u1D450 for all inputs 〈 u1D450 〉 , then u1D464 ⪯ u1D451 for all outputs 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 .
- Turtle-Validity : if some processor produces an output 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 , then some processor must have produced an input 〈 u1D450 〉 such that u1D462 ⪯ u1D450 .

Turtle-Agreement ensures agreement between any two outputs of a turtle: note that if both u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 and u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D462 , then either u1D451 ⪯ u1D451 ′ or u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D451 . Further, the case where 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 = 〈 u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ 〉 implies that u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 for each output. Turtle-Unanimity ensures that if there is an agreement in the inputs (i.e., proposals) to a turtle, then that agreement is reflected in the outputs. Turtle-Validity means that each output of a turtle be a prefix of an input to that turtle. Unlike SMR protocols, we are able to guarantee the liveness properties for tree turtle protocols (Turtle-Termination).

## 6 Tree Turtles All The Way Down

Tree turtle protocols can be composed with each other to implement a protocol satisfying SMR-Agreement, SMR-Validity, SMR-Relay, and SMR-Monotonicity.

The construction works as follows. All processors in P are configured with instructions to execute the same unbounded sequence of tree turtles numbered 1 , 2 , 3 , . . . , and so on. For convenience, we will extend the tree turtle inputs and outputs 〈 u1D456 , u1D450 〉 and 〈 u1D456 , u1D451 , u1D462 〉 to now include the tree turtle number u1D456 . We assume that each processor is initialized with the tuple 〈 0 , ⊥ , ⊥〉 as the output for the non-existent tree turtle 0. Then the processors begin executing the tree turtles in succession. If a processor produces tree turtle output 〈 u1D456 , u1D451 , u1D462 〉 , that processor decides the chain u1D451 . It then proposes a new chain u1D450 , selecting u1D450 such that u1D462 ⪯ u1D450 , and constructs an input 〈 u1D456 + 1 , u1D450 〉 for the next tree turtle u1D456 + 1 .

By choice of u1D462 ⪯ u1D450 , this construction ensures the following:

Lemma 6.1. If a processor produces the output 〈 u1D456 , u1D451 , u1D462 〉 for tree turtle u1D456 , then for all inputs to subsequent tree turtles 〈 u1D457 , u1D450 〉 where u1D456 &lt; u1D457 , it must be that u1D451 ⪯ u1D450 .

Proof. Suppose 〈 u1D457 , u1D450 〉 is an input to tree turtle u1D457 made by a processor u1D45D . Proceed by induction on u1D457 -u1D456 . If u1D457 = u1D456 + 1 , then by the above construction, u1D45D must have produced 〈 u1D456 , u1D451 , u1D462 〉 as the output of tree turtle u1D456 for some chain u1D462 ⪯ u1D450 . By TurtleAgreement, we also know that u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 which implies u1D451 ⪯ u1D450 . In the inductive case, we again know that u1D45D must have produced an output 〈 u1D457 -1 , u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ 〉 with u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D462 ′ ⪯ u1D450 in the previous tree turtle. The inductive hypothesis gives us that u1D451 ⪯ u1D450 ′ for all inputs to tree turtle u1D457 -1 〈 u1D457 -1 , u1D450 ′ 〉 . Thus, the condition for Turtle-Unanimity is satisfied for tree turtle u1D457 -1 , and so it must be that u1D451 ⪯ u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D450 . □

Further, we can use an inductive argument to see that each correct processor will eventually complete each tree turtle.

Lemma 6.2. Every correct processor eventually produces an output for each tree turtle.

Proof. Trivially, each non-crashed processor constructs an input to tree turtle 1. Thus, Turtle-Termination ensures that the base case of the induction is satisfied. In the inductive case, each non-crashed processor will use its output of tree turtle u1D456 to construct an input to tree turtle u1D456 + 1 , and so an analogous argument applies. □

Now we proceed to the main proof:

Theorem 6.3. The composition of tree turtles implements a protocol satisfying SMR-Agreement, SMR-Validity, SMR-Relay, and SMR-Monotonicity.

SMR-Agreement. Suppose that two processors u1D45D and u1D45D ′ decide chains based on their outputs 〈 u1D456 , u1D451 , u1D462 〉 and 〈 u1D457 , u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ 〉 , respectively. First, suppose that u1D456 = u1D457 . By Turtle-Agreement, u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ , and we also know that u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D462 ′ . Then, since u1D451 and u1D451 ′ are prefixes of the same chain u1D462 ′ , it must be that either u1D451 ⪯ u1D451 ′ or u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D451 . Thus, the decided values agree. Now suppose that u1D456 &lt; u1D457 . By Lemma 6.1, we know that u1D451 ⪯ u1D450 for all inputs 〈 u1D457 , u1D450 〉 to tree turtle u1D457 . By Turtle-Unanimity, we have that u1D451 ⪯ u1D451 ′ .

SMR-Validity: Suppose that some processor u1D45D decides u1D451 . This means that u1D45D produces an output 〈 u1D456 , u1D451 , u1D462 〉 for some tree turtle u1D456 and chain u1D462 . By Turtle-Validity, there must exist an input 〈 u1D456 , u1D450 〉 to the same tree turtle such that u1D462 ⪯ u1D450 . So, u1D450 was proposed by some processors. And since we must have u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 , we know u1D451 ⪯ u1D450 .

SMR-Relay: If a correct processor decides u1D451 as a result of its output of tree turtle u1D456 , then by Lemma 6.1 and TurtleUnanimity, any processor that completes tree turtle u1D456 + 1 will decide u1D451 or an extension of u1D451 , and Lemma 6.2 gives us that all correct processors will do exactly as such.

SMR-Monotonicity: If a processor decides u1D451 as a result of its output of tree turtle u1D456 , then by Lemma 6.1 and TurtleUnanimity, any processor that completes tree turtle u1D456 + 1 will decide u1D451 or an extension of u1D451 . So by induction, any later decision will be monotonically extending u1D451 .

□

Theabove protocol does not guarantee SMR-Progress. However, the fact that the correct processors eventually complete each turtle (Lemma 6.2) can be used to make an auxiliary argument for SMR-Progress for a specific protocol (for instance, using a probabilistic termination argument).

## 7 Tree Turtle Implementations

Here we present two possible tree turtle implementations.

## 7.1 One-Step Tree Turtle

Our first tree turtle protocol uses only a single round of communication between processors, making it a one-step protocol [3]. It requires a quorum system satisfying 3 -intersection.

A processor u1D45D executing the One-Step Tree Turtle protocol proceeds as follows:

- 1a. u1D45D produces an input 〈 u1D450 〉 and broadcasts it to all processors, including itself;
- 1b. u1D45D waits to receive inputs 〈 u1D450 u1D460 〉 from all processors u1D460 in any quorum u1D444 u1D45D ;

1c. u1D45D produces 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 , where:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- .

That is, u1D451 is simply the longest common prefix of the received proposals. To compute u1D462 , u1D45D considers all quorums u1D444 . For each such quorum, u1D45D determines the longest common prefix on the proposals it received from the processors in u1D444 . We show below that these subchains agree with one another.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. All of the elements in u1D436 u1D45D are computed by taking the intersection of u1D444 u1D45D with another quorum. Let u1D444 , u1D444 ′ be any twoquorumsand u1D465 , u1D465 ′ elements of u1D436 u1D45D where u1D465 = bigsqcap u1D460 ∈ u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 u1D450 u1D460 , and u1D465 ′ = bigsqcap u1D460 ∈ u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 ′ u1D450 u1D460 . Since Q satisfies 3 -intersection, u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 ∩ u1D444 ′ is non-empty. Let u1D45F be some processor in this intersection. By the use of ⊓ , we have that u1D465 ⪯ u1D450 u1D45F and u1D465 ′ ⪯ u1D450 u1D45F . This means that either u1D465 ⪯ u1D465 ′ or u1D465 ′ ⪯ u1D465 . Thus, all elements of u1D436 u1D45D agree with each other. □

Since ⪯ is transitive, u1D436 u1D45D has a maximum element according to ⪯ , and so the computation of u1D462 is well-defined. Further, all elements of u1D436 u1D45D are extensions of u1D451 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. For any quorum u1D444 , we can observe that u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 ⊆ u1D444 u1D45D . The longest common prefix over a subset of inputs belonging to processors u1D444 u1D45D is at least as long as the longest common prefix over u1D444 u1D45D . Thus, u1D451 ⪯ u1D465 for any u1D465 ∈ u1D436 u1D45D . □

We now show that the protocol implements a tree turtle.

Theorem7.3. The One-Step Tree Turtle protocol satisfies the tree turtle specification (Definition 5.1).

Turtle-Termination: Suppose that all correct processors construct an input to the tree turtle. The only point in the protocol where a given correct processor u1D45D will wait is to receive messages from a quorum of processors at step 1b. Since there is assumed to be a quorum u1D444 ∗ that consists entirely of correct processors, and the network reliably delivers messages between correct processors, u1D45D will need to wait no longer than it takes for the messages from all processors in u1D444 ∗ to be delivered. Thus, u1D45D will be able to complete the turtle at step 1c.

Turtle-Agreement: Suppose that two processors u1D45D and u1D45D ′ produce 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 and 〈 u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ 〉 , respectively. For all processors u1D45F ∈ u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 u1D45D ′ , both u1D45D and u1D45D ′ received the proposal u1D450 u1D45F from u1D45F . Letting u1D465 = bigsqcap u1D45F ∈ u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 u1D45D ′ u1D450 u1D45F , we see that u1D465 is present in both u1D436 u1D45D and u1D436 u1D45D ′ . By Lemma 7.2, u1D451 ⪯ u1D465 , and by the maximality of u1D462 ′ over u1D436 u1D45D ′ , u1D465 ⪯ u1D462 ′ . So, u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ by transitivity. The same argument can be used to show that u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D462 .

Turtle-Unanimity: Suppose that there exists a common prefix u1D464 ⪯ u1D450 for all inputs 〈 u1D450 〉 to the turtle. Because of step 1b in the protocol, all of the u1D450 u1D460 values used to compute 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 came from inputs 〈 u1D450 u1D460 〉 . This means that u1D464 is a prefix of each u1D450 u1D460 , and so u1D464 must be a (not necessarily strict) prefix of the longest common prefix u1D451 = bigsqcap u1D460 ∈ u1D444 u1D45D u1D450 u1D460 of the proposals.

Turtle-Validity: Suppose that u1D45D produces an output 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 . We know that u1D462 = bigsqcap u1D460 ∈ u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 u1D450 u1D460 is a prefix of all proposals made by processors in u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 for some quorum u1D444 . So, taking any processor u1D45F in the intersection u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 , we know that u1D462 ⪯ u1D450 u1D45F , where 〈 u1D450 u1D45F 〉 was the input produced by u1D45F . □

## 7.2 Lower-Bound Tree Turtle

Nowwewillpresent asecond tree turtle protocol, the LowerBound Tree Turtle. This protocol meets the lower bound on the intersection properties of the quorum system needed to solve SMR: namely, 2-intersection in the crash failure case [2]. With these weaker assumptions about the quorum system, we can design a protocol that makes it safe for processors to output a chain based on messages from all processors in a quorum under the condition that the chains in all such messages agree. Satisfying this condition requires an additional round of communication.

A processor u1D45D executing the Lower-Bound Tree Turtle protocol proceeds as follows:

- 1a. u1D45D produces an input 〈 u1D450 〉 and broadcasts it to all processors, including itself;
- 1b. u1D45D waits to receive inputs 〈 u1D450 u1D460 〉 from all processors u1D460 in any quorum u1D444 1 u1D45D ;
- 1c. u1D45D computes u1D465 = bigsqcap u1D460 ∈ u1D444 1 u1D45D u1D450 u1D460 ;
- 2a. u1D45D broadcasts 〈 u1D465 〉 to all processors, including itself;
- 2b. u1D45D waits to receive messages 〈 u1D465 u1D460 〉 from all processors u1D460 in a quorum u1D444 2 u1D45D ;
- 2c. u1D45D produces 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 , where u1D451 = min u1D460 ∈ u1D444 2 u1D45D u1D465 u1D460 and u1D462 = max u1D460 ∈ u1D444 2 u1D45D u1D465 u1D460 .

First we show that all chains computed in step 1c agree:

Lemma 7.4. If processors u1D45D and u1D45D ′ compute u1D465 and u1D465 ′ in step 1c respectively, then u1D465 ≃ u1D465 ′ .

Proof. Since there must be some processor u1D45F in the intersection u1D444 1 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 1 u1D45D ′ , both u1D45D and u1D45D ′ received the same chain u1D450 u1D45F from u1D45F . Then, since both u1D465 and u1D465 ′ are prefixes of u1D450 u1D45F , u1D465 and u1D465 ′ must agree. □

Note that the preceding lemma shows that the rules to compute u1D451 and u1D462 are well-defined since all of the chains u1D465 u1D460 for u1D460 ∈ u1D444 2 u1D45D must agree. The next lemma is trivial and shows that a common prefix to all proposals is preserved in the chains computed at step 1c.

Lemma 7.5. If there exists a chain u1D464 such that u1D464 ⪯ u1D450 for all inputs 〈 u1D450 〉 , then for any processor u1D45D that computes u1D465 in step 1c, u1D464 ⪯ u1D465 .

WenowshowthattheLower-Boundprotocolimplements the specification of a tree turtle.

Theorem 7.6. The Lower-Bound Tree Turtle protocol satisfies the tree turtle specification (Definition 5.1).

Turtle-Agreement: Suppose that two processors u1D45D and u1D45D ′ produce 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 and 〈 u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ 〉 , respectively. There must be some processor u1D45F in the intersection u1D444 2 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 2 u1D45D ′ , and both u1D45D and u1D45D ′ received the same chain u1D465 u1D45F from u1D45F . By Lemma 7.4 and the minimality of u1D451 , it must be that u1D451 ⪯ u1D465 u1D45F . And by the maximality of u1D462 ′ , we have that u1D465 u1D45F ⪯ u1D462 ′ . Therefore, u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ . The same argument can be used to show that u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D462 .

Turtle-Unanimity: Suppose that there exists a chain u1D464 such that u1D464 ⪯ u1D450 for all inputs 〈 u1D450 〉 , and processor u1D45D produces output 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 . Lemma 7.5 shows that u1D464 will be a prefix of the minimum chain u1D451 received by u1D45D in step 2b. □

Turtle-Termination and Turtle-Validity are similar to the proof for One-Step Tree Turtle (Section 7.1).

## 7.3 Message Size

The protocol we discussed uses messages containing chains that represent the entire state machine history. As the size of this history grows, this quickly becomes impractical. However, it is not necessary for a processor to broadcast a chain in subsequent turtles once it has decided that chain following the construction in Section 6.

If processor u1D45D decides chain u1D451 as a result of its output of a tree turtle, then any other processor u1D45D ′ that outputs 〈 u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ 〉 from the same tree turtle will have u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ by TurtleAgreement.Thus, u1D45D ′ already knows the contents of the chain u1D451 , and u1D45D may omit that chain prefix in its proposals to subsequent turtles.

## 7.4 Heterogeneous Protocols

The simplest way to construct an SMR protocol using the proposed abstractions is to use a single tree turtle protocol, instantiated an unbounded number of times. There are other options, however.

Different tree turtle protocols may have different normal case or worst case performance properties. The Lower-Bound Tree Turtle, when combined with a leader as discussed in Section 8, has good normal case performance properties, but it relies on synchrony assumptions for liveness. A similar protocol, borrowing ideas from the Ben-Or protocol using randomness [1], can provide termination almost surely but has bad normal case performance. By alternating between the two protocols, we can achieve the best of both worlds.

## 8 Leaders as an Abstraction

Processors may make different proposals to a tree turtle, preventing them from being able to decide new chains. This issue of contention has been addressed previously in SMR protocols by using a leader which drives all processors to use the same proposals. In existing leader-based consensus protocols, the leader lies in the critical path of the protocol: without a functioning leader, no decisions may be made. We show that using tree turtles, leaders can be easily factored out so that their only role is to help the protocol towards making decisions.

Leaders can be introduced to an existing tree turtle protocol as follows:

- The leader ℓ for tree turtle u1D456 is processor with identifier u1D456 ( mod |P|) , meaning the role of leader rotates through all of the processors.
- The leader ℓ for tree turtle u1D456 broadcasts its input u1D450 ℓ to tree turtle u1D456 .
- All processors set a timer and wait for the leader's message. If a processor u1D45D receives u1D450 ℓ before the timer expires, then it uses u1D450 ℓ as its input to tree turtle u1D456 . Otherwise, it proceeds normally.
- The processors double the length of the timer in each tree turtle.

Under synchronous conditions, the leader is able to eliminate contention. The proof requires reasoning about quorums and messages, but these concepts generalize beyond the protocols presented in Section 7.

Lemma 8.1. Using the above construction and the protocols in Section 7, if there exists an upper bound Δ such that a message sent between two non-crashed processors is delivered and processed within Δ , then there will be an unbounded number of tree turtles where the leader's message is received by all non-crashed processors before their timers expire.

Proof. Consider any tree turtle u1D456 after the point in the execution where the timers have become larger than Δ · 2 | P | . In general, the leader for a tree turtle may not have started executing that tree turtle at the point when other processors begin waiting for its message. Applying Lemma 6.2, consider a processor u1D45D that has begun tree turtle u1D456 + 1 . In all of our protocols, u1D45D must wait to receive messages from a quorum before completing the protocol. Thus, must be a quorum u1D444 of processors who have begun tree turtle u1D456 . Since u1D444 ∩ u1D444 ∗

is non-empty, there must be a tree turtle in the next |P| instances whose leader is a correct processor in u1D444 . Let u1D457 be the first such instance and let ℓ be the leader for tree turtle u1D457 .

Since ℓ has already begun tree turtle u1D456 , it must catch up at most |P| tree turtles to reach u1D457 . Let u1D461 be the timer length for tree turtle u1D457 . Since all timer lengths are greater than 2 Δ , ℓ will have received messages from a quorum for every tree turtle up to u1D457 . A period of Δ is sufficient for other processors to receive ℓ 's input to tree turtle u1D457 . However, this does not include the timers that ℓ must set for tree turtles u1D456, . . . , u1D457 -1 . Since the timer lengths are doubled after each tree turtle, the total time required is Δ + ( u1D461 / 2 | P | + u1D461 / 2 | P |1 · · · + u1D461 / 2 ) = Δ + ( 1 -2 -|P| ) u1D461 . Since u1D461 &gt; Δ · 2 | P | , ℓ 's message will be received before the timers expire. Since there are a constant number of turtles in which failures happen, there will be an unbounded number of such turtles. □

Theorem 8.2. Using the above construction and the protocols in Section 7, if there exists an upper bound Δ such that a message sent between two non-crashed processors is delivered and processed within Δ , then SMR-Progress is satisfied for the composition of tree turtles (Section 6).

Proof. According to Lemma 8.1, there will be an unbounded numberoftree turtles where the leader's message is received before all timers expire. Turtle-Unanimity provides that the processors who complete the turtle will decide the leader's chain. It follows that correct processors will always eventually be able to decide a new chain.

□

## 9 Byzantine Fault Tolerance

In this section, we extend tree turtles to make them Byzantine fault-tolerant (BFT). We also modify the two protocols in Section 7 to turn them into BFT-tree turtles.

## 9.1 Modified System Model

Failures. The failure model will now provide that a faulty processor may not only crash but also behave arbitrarily: it can deviate from the protocol, send arbitrary or contradictory messages, and fail to send messages to some or all processors. Such a processor is referred to as Byzantine .

Digital signatures. BecauseByzantine processors can make up arbitrary data, our protocols will use cryptographic digital signatures. We use dsig u1D45D ( u1D45A ) to denote a digital signature of data object u1D45A created by processor u1D45D . We assume that no processors can forge the signatures of correct processors, so that if a processor u1D45E witnesses both u1D45A and dsig u1D45D ( u1D45A ) , then u1D45E knows that if u1D45D is correct, then u1D45D produced u1D45A .

## 9.2 BFT-Tree Turtles &amp; BFT-SMR

Designing BFT-tree turtles necessitates re-defining both SMR and tree turtles for the BFT setting. As before, processors executing an SMR protocol propose and decide chains. The BFT-SMR properties are only slight variations of their crashtolerant counterparts. Now, we only concern ourselves with the decisions made by correct processors.

Definition 9.1 (Byzantine Fault-Tolerant State Machine Replication Specification) .

- BFT-SMR-Agreement : if a correct processor u1D45D decides chain u1D451 and a correct processor u1D45D ′ decides chain u1D451 ′ , then u1D451 ≃ u1D451 ′ (even if u1D45D = u1D45D ′ ).
- BFT-SMR-Validity : if a correct processor decides chain u1D451 , then some processor proposed a chain u1D450 such that u1D451 ⪯ u1D450 .
- BFT-SMR-Relay : if a correct processor decides chain u1D451 , then eventually all correct processors decide u1D451 or an extension of u1D451 .
- BFT-SMR-Monotonicity : if a correct processor decides chain u1D451 and later another chain u1D451 ′ , then u1D451 ⪯ u1D451 ′ .
- BFT-SMR-Progress : if a correct processor proposes a chain that it has not decided before, then that processor eventually decides a chain it has not decided before.

To define BFT-tree turtles, however, we will take a different approach. Rather than only specifying the behavior of correct processors, we will instead strengthen tree turtle inputs and outputs by exclude some arbitrary behavior. We will call use the terms BFT-inputs and BFT-outputs , respectively, to distinguish them from the earlier definitions.

Toallow protocols to strengthen BFT-inputs and BFT-outputs, they will include an additional, abstract piece of data called evidence . The implementation of evidence is determined a specific protocol as needed to satisfy the specification for a BFT-tree turtle. While both of our protocols will use digital signatures in evidence, other common techniques for turning crash-tolerant SMR protocols into BFT protocols, such as requiring more quorum intersection, private network links, or using additional rounds of communication, may be used. In fact, a BFT-tree turtle protocol will only define the evidence needed for a BFT-output of the protocol since BFT-inputs are constructed externally from the protocolit will turn out from our composition of BFT-tree turtles into BFT-SMR that the evidence in a BFT-input will be defined by the previous tree turtle in the execution.

In a BFT-tree turtle, a processor constructs a BFT-input 〈 u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 consisting of a chain u1D450 and evidence u1D452 u1D450 , and produces a BFT-output 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 with a pair of chains u1D451 , u1D462 and evidence u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 .

Definition 9.2 (Byzantine Fault-Tolerant Tree Turtle Specification) .

- BFT-Turtle-Termination : if each correct processor constructs a BFT-input, then eventually each correct processor produces a BFT-output.
- BFT-Turtle-Agreement : for any two BFT-outputs 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 and 〈 u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ , u1D452 u1D451 ′ ,u1D462 ′ 〉 , u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ and u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D462 .
- BFT-Turtle-Unanimity : for any chain u1D464 , if u1D464 ⪯ u1D450 for all BFT-inputs 〈 u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 , then u1D464 ⪯ u1D462 for all BFT-outputs 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 .
- BFT-Turtle-Validity : if some processor produces a BFToutput 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 , then some processor must have produced a BFT-input 〈 u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 such that u1D462 ⪯ u1D450 .

Note that BFT-Turtle-Unanimity is weaker than its crashtolerant counterpart (Definition 5.1). This weaker property is easier to satisfy in the BFT case and is sufficient for implementing the safety properties of BFT-SMR, although it means that BFT-SMR-Monotonicity is no longer guaranteed.

Evidence is not intended to prevent all Byzantine behavior. Depending on the BFT-tree turtle protocol, faulty processors may be able to produce multiple BFT-inputs or BFToutputs or use arbitrary chains to produce a BFT-output the protocol. However, evidence allowes us to reason about BFTinputs and BFT-outputs made by correct and Byzantine processors alike to the extent allowed by the constraints defined by the protocol.

## 9.3 BFT-Tree Turtles Implement BFT-SMR

The composition of BFT-tree turtles is very similar to that of crash tolerant tree turtles (Section 6). As before, all of the processors in P will execute an unbounded sequence of tree turtles in succession. If a processor completes BFT-tree turtle u1D456 and produces a BFT-output 〈 u1D456 , u1D451 , u1D462, u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 , then that processor decides the chain u1D451 only if u1D451 is longer than its longest decided chain. This is to ensure BFT-SMR-Monotonicity is satisfied. The processor then selects a new chain u1D450 to propose satisfying u1D462 ⪯ u1D450 . It then constructs a BFT-input to the next BFT-tree turtle u1D456 + 1 as 〈 u1D456 + 1 , u1D450 , 〈 u1D456 , u1D451 , u1D462, u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉〉 , using its BFT-output from the previous tree turtle as the evidence in its BFT-input.

Lemma 9.3. If a processor produces BFT-output 〈 u1D456 , u1D451 , u1D462, u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 for BFT-tree turtle u1D456 , then for all BFT-inputs 〈 u1D457 , u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 to subsequent BFT-tree turtles u1D457 &gt; u1D456 , it must be that u1D451 ⪯ u1D450 .

Proof. Thebase case is analogous to that given for Lemma 6.1. In the inductive case, if a processor u1D45D constructs a BFT-input 〈 u1D457 , u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 to BFT-tree turtle u1D457 , then u1D45D must have produced a BFT-output 〈 u1D457 -1 , u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ , u1D452 u1D451 ′ ,u1D462 ′ 〉 in the previous tree turtle which satisfies u1D462 ′ ⪯ u1D450 . The inductive hypothesis gives us that u1D451 ⪯ u1D450 ′ for all BFT-inputs 〈 u1D457 -1 , u1D450 ′ , u1D452 u1D450 ′ 〉 to BFT-tree turtle u1D457 -1 . So the condition for BFT-Turtle-Unanimity is satisfied and this gives us that u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ ⪯ u1D450 . □

Lemma 9.4. Every correct processor eventually produces a BFT-output for each BFT-tree turtle.

Proof. The proof is the same as that given for Lemma 6.2, except that the reasoning applies to all correct processors rather than all non-crashed processors. □

Theorem9.5. The composition of BFT-tree turtles implements a protocol satisfying BFT-SMR-Agreement, BFT-SMR-Validity, and BFT-SMR-Monotonicity.

BFT-SMR-Agreement: Suppose that two correct processors u1D45D and u1D45D ′ decide chains based on their BFT-outputs 〈 u1D456 , u1D451 , u1D462, and 〈 u1D457 , u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ , u1D452 u1D451 ′ ,u1D462 ′ 〉 , respectively. First, suppose that u1D456 = u1D457 . By BFT-Turtle-Agreement, u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ and u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D462 ′ , and thus u1D451 ⪯ u1D451 ′ or u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D451 . Thus, the decided values agree. Now suppose that u1D456 &lt; u1D457 . By Lemma 6.1, we know that u1D451 ⪯ u1D450 for all BFT-inputs 〈 u1D457 , u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 to BFT-tree turtle u1D457 . By BFT-Turtle-Unanimity, we have again that u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ , so it follows that u1D451 and u1D451 ′ agree.

BFT-SMR-Validity: Suppose that a correct processor u1D45D decides the chain u1D451 . This means that u1D45D producesa BFT-output 〈 u1D456 , u1D451 , u1D462, u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 for some BFT-tree turtle u1D456 , chain u1D462 , and evidence u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 . By BFT-Turtle-Validity, there must exist a BFT-input 〈 u1D456 , u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 to the same tree turtle such that u1D462 ⪯ u1D450 . So, u1D450 was proposed by some processor. And since we must have u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 , we know u1D451 ⪯ u1D450 .

BFT-SMR-Monotonicity: If a correct processor decides u1D451 as a result of its BFT-output of BFT-tree turtle u1D456 , then by Lemma 6.1 and BFT-Turtle-Unanimity, an inductive argument shows that any BFT-output that the processor produces for a later BFT-tree turtle will have a chain u1D451 ′ such that u1D451 ⪯ u1D451 ′ or u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D451 . Since correct processors will only decide a new chain if it is an extension of its longest decided chain, it follows that the processor's decisions are extended monotonically.

□

## 9.4 BFT One-Step Tree Turtle

The One-Step Tree Turtle (Section 7.1) can be made into a BFT-tree turtle with the following modifications:

- The quorum system Q must satisfy 5-intersection instead of 3-intersection (meeting the lower bound for quorum intersection of BFT one-step protocols [13]);
- In step 1a., processor u1D45D broadcasts 〈〈 u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 , dsig u1D45D ( u1D450 )〉 , i.e., its BFT-input and a digital signature for u1D450 ;
- In step 1b., processor u1D45D must ensure that the received messages contain valid digital signatures and BFT-inputs 〈 u1D450 u1D460 , u1D452 u1D450 u1D460 〉 , and for any that do not, u1D45D discards the message;
- In step 1c., processor u1D45D constructs the evidence u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 as set of tuples {〈 u1D450 u1D460 , dsig u1D460 ( u1D450 u1D460 )〉 | u1D460 ∈ u1D444 u1D45D } and includes it in its BFT-output 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 ;
- ABFT-output 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 must contain evidence u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 = {〈 u1D450 u1D460 , dsig u1D460 ( u1D450 u1D460 )〉 | u1D460 ∈ u1D444 } for some quorum u1D444 such that the chains u1D450 u1D460 allow u1D451 and u1D462 to be recomputed according to the protocol at step 1c.

The proof of correctness for the BFT One-Step Tree Turtle follows analogous reasoning to that given for the crash tolerant version.

Lemma 9.6. All elements of u1D436 u1D45D agree.

Proof. All of the elements in u1D436 u1D45D are computed by taking the intersection of u1D444 u1D45D with two other quorums. Suppose u1D465 , u1D465 ′

u1D452

u1D451 , u1D462

〉 are elements of u1D436 u1D45D , where u1D465 = bigsqcap u1D460 ∈ u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 1 ∩ u1D444 2 u1D450 u1D460 , and u1D465 ′ = bigsqcap u1D460 ∈ u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 ′ 1 ∩ u1D444 ′ 2 u1D450 u1D460 , for some quorums u1D444 1 , u1D444 2 , u1D444 ′ 1 , u1D444 ′ 2 . Since the quorum system satisfies 5-intersection, u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 1 ∩ u1D444 2 ∩ u1D444 ′ 1 ∩ u1D444 ′ 2 is non-empty. Let u1D45F be some processor in this intersection. By the use of ⊓ , we have that u1D465 ⪯ u1D450 u1D45F and u1D465 ′ ⪯ u1D450 u1D45F , where u1D450 u1D45F is the chain from u1D45F used to complete the protocol. This means that either u1D465 ⪯ u1D465 ′ or u1D465 ′ ⪯ u1D465 . □

Lemma 9.7. For all u1D465 ∈ u1D436 u1D45D , u1D451 ⪯ u1D465 .

Proof. Observe that u1D444 u1D45D ∩ u1D444 1 ∩ u1D444 2 ⊆ u1D444 u1D45D . The longest common prefix over a subset of u1D444 u1D45D is at least as long as the longest common prefix over u1D444 u1D45D . Thus, u1D451 ⪯ u1D465 for any u1D465 ∈ u1D436 u1D45D . □

Theorem 9.8. The BFT One-Step Tree Turtle protocol satisfies the BFT-tree turtle specification (Definition 9.2).

BFT-Turtle-Termination: Suppose that all correct processors construct a BFT-input for the protocol. Consider any correct processor u1D45D . By construction of the protocol, u1D45D will wait to receive messages from a quorum of processors at step 1b. This is the only point in the protocol where u1D45D will wait. Since there is at least one quorum u1D444 ∗ that consists entirely of correct processors, and the network reliably delivers messages between correct processors, u1D45D will eventually receive messages from all processors in a quorum. Furthermore, all messages sent by processors in u1D444 ∗ will contain BFT-inputs and valid digital signatures, as correct processors do not send bad messages in step 1a. Thus, u1D45D will not discard any of these messages and will be able to complete the turtle at step 1c.

BFT-Turtle-Agreement: Suppose that two processors u1D45D and u1D45D ′ produce BFT-outputs 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 and 〈 u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ , u1D452 u1D451 ′ ,u1D462 ′ 〉 , respectively. Let u1D444 and u1D444 ′ be the quorums used to construct u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 and u1D452 u1D451 ′ ,u1D462 ′ , respectively. For all (correct) processors u1D45F ∈ u1D444 ∩ u1D444 ′ ∩ u1D444 ∗ , both u1D452 and u1D452 ′ must contain the same digitally signed chain which was sent by u1D45F : 〈 u1D450 u1D45F , dsig u1D45F ( u1D450 u1D45F )〉 . This is because correct processors do not send different messages to different processors at step 1a., so u1D45F must have sent the same message to both u1D45D and u1D45D ′ . Furthermore, the digital signatures of correct processors cannot be forged, so u1D45D and u1D45D ′ must have used the signature that u1D45F actually constructed in step 1a. Thus, if the chains in u1D452 are used in step 1c. to compute u1D465 = bigsqcap u1D460 ∈ u1D444 ∩ u1D444 ′ ∩ u1D444 ∗ u1D450 u1D460 and the chains in u1D452 ′ are used to compute u1D465 ′ = bigsqcap u1D460 ∈ u1D444 ∩ u1D444 ′ ∩ u1D444 ∗ u1D450 u1D460 , we would have that u1D465 = u1D465 ′ . Thus u1D45D would have u1D465 ∈ u1D436 u1D45D and u1D45D ′ would have u1D465 ∈ u1D436 u1D45D ′ . By Lemma 7.2, if u1D452 is used to compute u1D451 , we would have that u1D451 ⪯ u1D465 . And, if u1D452 ′ is used to compute u1D462 ′ , it must be that u1D465 ⪯ u1D462 ′ . Therefore u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ , and an analogous argument shows that u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ .

BFT-Turtle-Unanimity: Assume that u1D464 ⪯ u1D450 for all BFTinputs 〈 u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 to the protocol. For any BFT-output 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 , let u1D444 be the quorum used to construct u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 . Then for all u1D45F ∈ u1D444 ∩ u1D444 ∗ , the digitally signed chain 〈 u1D450 u1D45F , dsig u1D45F ( u1D450 u1D45F )〉 in u1D452

must have been produced by the correct processor u1D45F . Because of step 1a., correct processors only sign chains u1D450 u1D45F that are part of BFT-inputs 〈 u1D450 u1D45F , u1D452 u1D450 u1D45F 〉 , meaning that u1D464 ⪯ u1D450 u1D45F . Thus, taking any third quorum u1D444 ′ , if u1D452 is used to compute u1D465 = bigsqcap u1D460 ∈ u1D444 ∩ u1D444 ′ ∩ u1D444 ∗ u1D450 u1D460 , it follows that u1D464 ⪯ u1D465 . Therefore, by Lemma 9.6, it must be that u1D465 ⪯ u1D462 which implies u1D464 ⪯ u1D462 .

BFT-Turtle-Validity: If a processor produces a BFT-output 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 , then by quorum intersection it must be that u1D462 ⪯ u1D450 u1D45F for some correct processor u1D45F ∈ u1D444 ∗ , where 〈 u1D450 u1D45F , u1D452 u1D450 u1D45F 〉 is the BFT-input constructed by u1D45F .

□

## 9.5 BFT Lower-Bound Tree Turtle

TheLower-Bound Tree Turtle (Section 7.2) can be made into a BFT-tree turtle with the following modifications:

- The quorum system Q must satisfy 3-intersection;
- In step 1a., processor u1D45D broadcasts 〈〈 u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 , dsig u1D45D ( u1D450 )〉 , i.e., its BFT-input and a digital signature for u1D450 ;
- In step 1b., processor u1D45D must ensure that the received messages contain valid digital signatures and BFT-inputs 〈 u1D450 u1D460 , u1D452 u1D450 u1D460 〉 , and for any that do not, u1D45D discards the message;
- In step 2a., processor u1D45D broadcasts 〈 u1D465 , dsig u1D45D ( u1D465 ) , {〈 u1D450 u1D460 , dsig u1D460 ( u1D450 u1D460 )〉 | u1D460 ∈ u1D444 1 u1D45D }〉 , i.e., the computed chain u1D465 , a digital signature for u1D465 , and all of the chains and digital sigatures that it used to complete step 1c. of the protocol;
- In step 2b., processor u1D45D must ensure that the received messages contain valid digitally signed chains such that u1D465 u1D460 can be recomputed according to the protocol at step 1c., and for any that do not, u1D45D discards the message;
- In step 2c., processor u1D45D constructs the evidence u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 as set of tuples {〈 u1D465 u1D460 , dsig u1D460 ( u1D465 u1D460 )〉 | u1D460 ∈ u1D444 2 u1D45D } and includes it in its BFT-output 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 ;
- ABFT-output 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 must contain evidence u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 = {〈 u1D465 u1D460 , dsig u1D460 ( u1D450 u1D460 )〉 | u1D460 ∈ u1D444 } for some quorum u1D444 such that the chains u1D450 u1D460 allow u1D451 and u1D462 to be recomputed according to the protocol at step 2c. and all of the chains u1D465 u1D460 agree.

The BFT Lower-Bound Tree Turtle requires an extra condition on the digitally signed chains included in evidence for BFT-outputs which is not necessary for the BFT One-Step Tree Turtle. This ensures that the minimum and maximum of those chains is always well-defined. Further, this property is always satisfied by the evidence constructed by a correct processor executing the protocol due to the following:

Lemma 9.9. If processor u1D45D broadcasts a message u1D45A = 〈 u1D465 , dsig u1D45D ( u1D465 ) , {〈 u1D450 u1D460 , dsig u1D460 ( u1D450 u1D460 )〉 | u1D460 ∈ u1D444 }〉 and u1D45D ′ broadcasts a message u1D45A ′ = 〈 u1D465 ′ , dsig u1D45D ′ ( u1D465 ′ ) , {〈 u1D450 u1D460 , dsig u1D460 ( u1D450 u1D460 )〉 | u1D460 ∈ u1D444 ′ }〉 at step 2a. such that the digitally signed chains included in u1D45A and u1D45A ′ allow u1D465 and u1D465 ′ to be recomputed, respectively, according to the protocol at step 1c., then u1D465 and u1D465 ′ agree.

Proof. For any processor u1D45F in the intersection u1D444 ∩ u1D444 ′ ∩ u1D444 ∗ , both u1D45A and u1D45A ′ will contain the same digitally signed chain 〈 u1D450 u1D45F , dsig u1D45F ( u1D450 u1D45F )〉 from u1D45F . This is because correct processors only send a single message to all processors at step 1b. of the protocol. Thus both u1D465 and u1D465 ′ mustbeprefixes of u1D450 u1D45F and therefore agree with each other. □

Lemma 9.10. For any chain u1D464 such that u1D464 ⪯ u1D450 for all BFTinputs 〈 u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 , then if processor u1D45D that broadcasts a message u1D45A = 〈 u1D465 , dsig u1D45D ( u1D465 ) , {〈 u1D450 u1D460 , dsig u1D460 ( u1D450 u1D460 )〉 | u1D460 ∈ u1D444 }〉 at step 2a., such that the digitally signed chains included in u1D45A allow u1D465 to be recomputed according to the protocol at step 1c., then u1D464 and u1D465 agree. Further, if u1D45D is correct, then u1D464 ⪯ u1D465 .

Proof. Since u1D444 must contain at least one correct processor u1D45F due to quorum intersection, u1D45A contains a digitally signed chain 〈 u1D450 u1D45F , dsig u1D45F ( u1D450 u1D45F )〉 such that u1D464 ⪯ u1D450 u1D45F . This is because correct processors will only produce such a signature in step 1a. for chains u1D450 u1D45F that are part of BFT-inputs 〈 u1D450 u1D45F , u1D452 u1D450 u1D45F 〉 . Therefore u1D465 ⪯ u1D450 u1D45F and so u1D465 and u1D464 agree.

If u1D45D is correct, then u1D45D will only use messages containing BFT-inputs to compute u1D465 at step 1c. of the protocol. By assumption, u1D464 is a prefix of the chains contained in all such inputs. □

Theorem 9.11. The BFT Lower-Bound Tree Turtle protocol satisfies the BFT-tree turtle specification (Definition 9.2).

BFT-Turtle-Agreement: Suppose that two processors u1D45D and u1D45D ′ produce BFT-outputs 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 and 〈 u1D451 ′ , u1D462 ′ , u1D452 u1D451 ′ ,u1D462 ′ 〉 , respectively. Let u1D444 and u1D444 ′ be the quorums over which the evidence u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 and u1D452 u1D451 ′ ,u1D462 ′ are constructed, respectively. Then, there must be a correct processor u1D45F in the intersection u1D444 ∩ u1D444 ′ , and both u1D452 and u1D452 ′ must include the chain u1D465 u1D45F broadcast by u1D45F in step 2b. By the minimality of u1D451 , it must be that u1D451 ⪯ u1D465 u1D45F . And by the maximality of u1D462 ′ , we have that u1D465 u1D45F ⪯ u1D462 ′ . Therefore, u1D451 ⪯ u1D462 ′ , and an analogous argument shows u1D451 ′ ⪯ u1D462 .

BFT-Turtle-Unanimity: Suppose that u1D464 ⪯ u1D450 for all BFTinputs 〈 u1D450 , u1D452 u1D450 〉 , and that processor u1D45D produces BFT-output 〈 u1D451 , u1D462 , u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 〉 . Letting u1D444 be the quorum over which u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 is constructed, quorum intersection ensures that there is at least one correct processor u1D45F in u1D444 . By Lemma 7.5, if u1D45F broadcasts a message including the chain u1D465 u1D45F in step 2b, then u1D464 ⪯ u1D465 u1D45F . Further, u1D465 u1D45F must be equal to, or a prefix of, the maximum chain in u1D452 u1D451 , u1D462 . Thus, u1D464 ⪯ u1D465 u1D45F ⪯ u1D462 .

Turtle-Termination &amp; Turtle-Validity: the proofs are analogous to those given for Theorem 9.8.

□

## 10 Related Work

Abstracting the problem of achieving consensus on a single value to entire sequences was previously applied to Paxos in Generalized Paxos [10]. This work further generalizes chains to partial-orders of values in which non-interfering values commute. The HotStuff protocol [14] conceptualizes the state machine history as a tree, but it only extends the tree by a single node at a time. The same can be said of blockchain protocols.

The idea of heterogeneous SMR protocols is similar to protocols which have different 'modes'. Typically there is one mode which is considered the normal operation of the protocol and another designed for fast-tracking decisions under best-case conditions. One such example is Fast Paxos [11] which is able to skip a round of communication in periods without contention. These modes, however, are usually considered to be part of a single protocol instead of separate protocols satisfying a common specification.

- [4] M. Castro and B. Liskov. 1999. Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance. In Proc. of the 3rd Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI'99) . USENIX, New Orleans, LA.
- [5] C. Dwork, N. Lynch, and L. Stockmeyer. 1988. Consensus in the Presence of Partial Synchrony. J. ACM 35, 2 (April 1988), 288-323.
- [6] M.J. Fischer, N.A. Lynch, and M.S. Patterson. 1983. Impossibility of Distributed Consensus with one Faulty Process. In Proceedings of the 2nd Symposium on Principles of Database Systems (PODS'83) . ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD, Atlanta, GA.
- [7] F.P. Junqueira and K. Marzullo. 2005. Replication predicates for dependent-failure algorithms. In Proceedings of the 11th Euro-Par Conference (Lecture Notes on Computer Science, 3648) . Springer-Verlag, Monte de Caparica, Portugal, 617-632.
- [8] F.P. Junqueira, B.C. Reed, and M. Serafini. 2011. ZAB: Highperformance broadcast for primary-backup systems. In 2011 IEEE/IFIP 41st International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN) . 245-256. https://doi.org/10.1109/DSN.2011.5958223
- [9] L. Lamport. 1998. The Part-Time Parliament. Trans. on Computer Systems 16, 2 (1998), 133-169.

## 11 Conclusion &amp; Future Work

- [10] L. Lamport. 2005. Generalized consensus and Paxos. (2005).
- [11] L. Lamport. 2006. Fast Paxos. Distrib. Comput. 19, 2 (oct 2006), 79-103. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00446-006-0005-x

SMR protocols have been around for over thirty years. We revisit the structure of these protocols and propose new abstractionstrees and turtles -for the design of modular SMR protocols.

While this paper did not discuss the performance of tree turtle protocols, we believe that they have potential to be performant through their ability to drive long extensions to the state machine history in a few rounds of communication. Future work could include an empirical analysis of their performance. Further techniques for optimization can also be investigated such as pipelining chains from different rounds of the protocol simultaneously.

There is work in progress by the authors on building formally verified consensus and SMR protocols in both Dafny and Coq based on the presented abstractions due to their simplicity and efficiency. We also expect our abstractions to support different flavors of SMR, such as ordered consensus and heterogeneous consensus, by utilizing the additional structure of trees and the flexibility of the tree turtle composition. Further generalizations of trees and chains into more general algebriac structures are also possible.

## Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Pierre Sutra and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions.

## References

- [1] M. Ben-Or. 1983. Another advantage of free choice: Completely Asynchronous Agreement Protocols. In Proc. of the 2nd ACM Symp. on Principles of Distributed Computing . ACM SIGOPS-SIGACT, ACM Press, Montreal, Quebec, 27-30.
- [2] G. Bracha and S. Toueg. 1983. Resilient Consensus Protocols. In Proc. of the 2nd ACM Symp. on Principles of Distributed Computing . ACM SIGOPS-SIGACT, Montreal, Quebec, 12-26.
- [3] F.V. Brasileiro, F. Greve, A. Mostéfaoui, and M. Raynal. 2001. Consensus in One Communication Step. In PaCT '01: Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Parallel Computing Technologies . SpringerVerlag, London, UK, 42-50.
- [12] F.B. Schneider. 1990. Implementing fault-tolerant services using the state machine approach: A tutorial. Comput. Surveys 22, 4 (Dec. 1990), 299-319.
- [13] Y.J. Song and R. Van Renesse. 2008. Bosco: One-Step Byzantine Asynchronous Consensus. In Proc. of the 22nd International Symposium on DIStributed Computing (DISC'08) (Lecture Notes on Computer Science, 5218) . Springer-Verlag, Arcachon, France.
- [14] M. Yin, D. Malkhi, M.K. Reiter, G.G. Gueta, and I. Abraham. 2019. HotStuff: BFT Consensus with Linearity and Responsiveness. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (Toronto ON, Canada) (PODC '19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 347-356. https://doi.org/10.1145/3293611.3331591

## Appendix A: Threshold Quorum Systems

For completeness, we include how a u1D458 -intersecting quorum system can be implemented (based on [7]). A threshold quorum system constructs quorums from all subsets of P above a particular size. Let u1D45B = |P| be the number of processors. Let u1D453 be the maximum number of processors that may be faulty. We can construct a u1D458 -intersecting quorum system for u1D458 ≥ 1 such that u1D45B &gt; u1D458 · u1D453 as follows: the quorums are all subsets of P that have at least u1D45B -u1D453 processors. Then u1D444 ∗ is the quorum that contains the u1D45B -u1D453 correct processors. In a u1D458 -intersecting quorum system implemented with a threshold quorum system, increasing the value for u1D458 results in an increase in the number of correct processors that are assumed to exist in the system.