## Investor Emotions and Earnings Announcements

∗ Domonkos F. Vamossy † June 29, 2020

## Abstract

Armed with a decade of social media data, I explore the impact of investor emotions on earnings announcements. In particular, I test whether the emotional content of firmspecific messages posted on social media just prior to a firm's earnings announcement predicts its earnings and announcement returns. I find that investors are typically excited about firms that end up exceeding expectations, yet their enthusiasm results in lower announcement returns. Specifically, a standard deviation increase in excitement is associated with an 7.8 basis points lower announcement return, which translates into an approximately -5.8% annualized loss. My findings confirm that emotions and market dynamics are closely related and highlight the importance of considering investor emotions when assessing a firm's short-term value.

Keywords: deep learning; investor emotions; capital markets.

JEL Codes: G41; L82.

∗ I am extremely grateful to Stefania Albanesi, Lee Dokyun, Sera Linardi, and Dan Berkowitz for their continued guidance and support throughout this project. Special thanks to StockTwits for sharing their data. I would also like to thank Graham Beattie, Andy Koch, Mark Azic, Doug Hanley, and Mallory Avery for helpful comments and suggestions. This research was supported in part by the University of Pittsburgh Center for Research Computing through the resources provided. All errors are my own. Preliminary results, I welcome feedback.

† Department of Economics, University of Pittsburgh, d.vamossy@pitt.edu.

## 1 Introduction

Conventional wisdom often posits that changes to asset prices are the result of investor emotions. For instance, Galbraith (1994) describes stock market bubbles as 'speculative euphoria', while headlines such as ''Gut Feelings' Are Driving the Markets' or 'How Emotion Hurts Stock Returns' are common (e.g., Shiller (2020) and Wolfers (2015)). Alan Greenspan, as a chairman of the Federal Reserve, famously remarked that the U.S. stock market exhibited an 'irrational exuberance' when it experienced a rapid run-up in 1996. This observation portrayed a belief on his part that the increase had an origin in traders' positive emotions. In contrast, fear is cited as a force leading to sell-offs, price declines, and price variability. Market volatility indices, such as the CBOE's VIX, are often referenced as 'fear' indices.

In this paper I test whether firm-specific investor emotions predict a firm's earnings and announcement returns. Specifically, I explore the following research questions: (1) Do investor emotions foreshadow earnings surprises? and (2) Do investor emotions predict announcement returns? Only recently has academic literature begun exploring the role emotions play in capital markets. Due to data difficulties regarding the measurement of investor emotions, studies mainly relied on indirect proxies, or have been restricted to experimental evidence. By pairing a large, novel dataset with recent advances in text processing, I am able to overcome the data challenge inherent in studying investor emotions. I find that investors are typically excited about firms that end up exceeding analysts expectations, yet their enthusiasm results in lower announcement returns. 1

To get to my answer, I use data from StockTwits, a social networking platform for investors to share stock opinions. A critical feature of this data is that it contains firmspecific messages, so I am able to compute firm-specific emotions. I employ a broad sample of over 4 million messages that span the decade starting in 2010. My analysis focuses on earnings announcements because they are recurring, paramount corporate events that are followed closely by capital market participants.

The primary challenge to studying my research questions is finding a way to quantify investor emotions. I overcome this by using deep learning and a large, novel dataset of investor messages. 2 In particular, I construct emotion variables corresponding to seven emotional states: neutral, happy, sad, anger, disgust, surprise, fear. Emotion variables are generated by first quantifying the content of each message using textual analysis, and then averaging the textual analysis results across all messages by firm-quarter. My emotion variables, developed using StockTwits posts, are probabilistic measures, and hence the seven emotions sum up to 1. In addition to measuring the emotional content, I also distinguish between different types of messages by employing two classification schemes. 3 The first one isolates messages conveying information related to earnings, firm fundamentals or stock trading from general chat. The second separates messages conveying original information from those disseminating existing information.

1 Throughout the paper I use the word excited, enthusiastic and happy interchangeably.

2 For other applications of deep learning in economics see Albanesi and Vamossy (2019) and Meursault (2019). For reviews of machine learning applications in economics, see Mullainathan and Spiess (2017) and Athey and Imbens (2019).

Once the emotion variables are constructed, I then use a fixed effects model, exploiting within firm variation in investor emotions, to test whether emotions predict a firm's earnings and announcement returns. I use firm fixed effects to isolate within firm variation. For instance, if a firm tends to have positive earnings surprises, this might make investors always more excited before announcements, and by including fixed effects, I can rule out that my results are driven by this. I also control for year, month, and day-of-the-week fixed effects, to rule out that my results are only driven by factors which effect emotions and returns across all firms simultaneously. I take a number of steps to mitigate additional concerns regarding the estimation. To ensure that I am not picking up reactive emotions, I look at the impact of pre-announcement emotions on earnings announcements, so there is a clear temporal separation between my independent and dependent variables. I tackle misattribution - the concern that my emotion measures are not capturing emotions correctly - by training an additional emotion model and use emotion variables obtained by this model for robustness checks and by investigating the impacts of contemporaneous emotions and asset prices, and find that my algorithm classifies messages as happier when they are talking about assets that have gone up in value.

I document two main findings. First, that inter-firm investor emotions can predict the company's quarterly earnings. In particular, variation in how happy investors are is linked with marginally higher earnings surprises. Second, I find a negative relationship between the immediate stock price reaction to the quarterly earnings announcement and both within- and inter-firm variation in investor excitement. I show that this result is driven both by messages conveying original information and by those disseminating existing ones. When considering messages that convey information directly related to earnings, firm fundamentals, and/or stock trading relative to those messages which consist of other information, I find that the former has a slightly larger impact on announcement returns.

3 The emotions in this paper correspond to the seven emotional states specified in Breaban and Noussair (2018). I provide a detailed description of my classification schemes in the Appendix C.

I also confirm a behavioral finance theory, investigate heterogeneous impacts across firm and user types, and provide robustness checks. First, I provide support to theory from Shu (2010), positing a negative relationship between investor mood and expected returns. Second, I show that the predicted stock price reaction to earnings announcements by investor emotions is stronger for more volatile firms. This finding is in line with theory on investor sentiment, indicating that emotions and sentiment are closely related. Third, I find that it is investor emotions extracted from posts by retail investors and not institutions that best predict announcement returns. Last, to corroborate the negative relation between earnings announcement returns and investor enthusiasm, I use alternative emotion variables based on an emotion metadata compiled by other researchers. This finding remains significant with a comparable point estimate, confirming that it is indeed investor enthusiasm that drives my results.

This analysis contributes to the literature on behavioral finance in a variety of ways. First, I contribute to literature studying the connection between market behavior and emotional state. Existing research has shown that traders' moods can lead to price movements at the market level. Unlike my paper, a number of studies have leveraged indirect proxies to infer emotions. For instance, Kamstra, Kramer, and Levi (2003) observe that returns are relatively low in the darker seasons of fall and winter, an outcome they presume is the result of the effect that weather has on mood. 4 Studies relying on indirect proxies have severe limitations. For instance, Jacobsen and Marquering (2008) suggest that the findings reported in Kamstra, Kramer, and Levi (2003) may be explained by a number of other factors related to the season (they illustrate with ice cream consumption and airline travel), thus questioning their conclusion that changes in investors' moods associated with the Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD) directly influence stock market returns. On the other hand, research using direct emotion proxies has been limited to studying the relationship between investor emotions and daily stock returns, and aside from Li, Zhou, and Liu (2016), has not used firm-specific emotions. Bollen, Mao, and Zeng (2011) find that Twitter mood predicts subsequent stock market movements, while Gilbert and Karahalios (2010) find that the level of anxiety of posts on the blog site Live Journal predicts price declines. I add to this literature by showing that firm-specific investor emotions predict both firms' announcement returns and earnings surprises.

4 Similarly, Hirshleifer and Shumway (2003) find that good weather is correlated with higher stock returns, and appeal to a similar intuition to explain their results.

The relationship between market behavior and emotional state has also been studied in controlled laboratory experiments. These papers explored the role of emotions in generating bubbles in experimental asset markets. For instance, Breaban and Noussair (2018) measures emotions using traders' facial expressions and find that positive emotion is linked to higher prices and larger bubbles, while traders' fear before the market opens is associated with lower prices. Similarly, Andrade, Odean, and Lin (2016) document larger bubbles when induced investor enthusiasm is higher. I contribute to this literature by showing that emotions captured by investor messages on a social media platform behave similarly to emotions in the lab. Specifically, I find that stocks that enjoy high levels of investor enthusiasm leading up to the earnings announcement will experience smaller announcement returns.

Another contribution of this paper is to literature studying the role social media plays in capital markets. 5 , 6 These studies have investigated whether social media content can predict the overall movement of the stock market. For instance, Mao et al. (2012) find that the daily number of tweets that mention S&amp;P 500 stocks is significantly associated with the changes in that same index. This literature has also analyzed how Twitter and/or StockTwits activity influences investor response to earnings. Curtis, Richardson, and Schmardebeck (2014) find that high levels of activity correlate with greater sensitivity to earnings announcement returns and earnings surprises, while low levels of social media activity are associated with significant post-earnings-announcement drift. Cookson and Niessner (2020) show that even though it is unlikely that investor trades from those on StockTwits move the market, disagreement measured by these messages robustly forecast abnormal trading volume. I add to these papers by showing that emotions extracted from social media can help predict a firm's earnings and announcement returns.

5 The importance of social media is voiced in studies exploring how companies exploit this channel as a means for investor communication. For instance, Blankespoor, Miller, and White (2014) show that firms can reduce information asymmetry among investors by broadly disseminating their news, including press releases and other disclosures, to market participants using Twitter. Jung et al. (2018) find that roughly half of S&amp;P 1500 firms have created a corporate presence on either Facebook or Twitter.

6 Adding to the literature on StockTwits and Twitter is research that has examined investors' use of Internet search engines, financial websites, forums, and other social media platforms. This research has provided mixed evidence on whether this information helps predict future earnings and stock returns. Using Google search volume as a proxy for investors' demand for financial information, Da, Engelberg, and Gao (2011) find that increased Google searches predict higher stock prices in the near-term followed by a price reversal within a year. Drake, Roulstone, and Thornock (2012) show that the returns-earnings relation is smaller when Google search volume before earnings announcements is high. Antweiler and Frank (2004) and Das and Chen (2007) both find that the volume of posts on message boards, such as Yahoo! or Raging Bull, is associated with stock return volatility, but not stock returns. Chen et al. (2014) demonstrate that information in user-generated research reports on the Seeking Alpha investing portal helps predict earnings and long-window stock returns following the report posting date.

The closest connection to my paper is with Bartov, Faurel, and Mohanram (2018), who find that aggregate opinion from Twitter can help predict a firm's forthcoming quarterly earnings and announcement returns. I examine a different feature of the environment, and ask what features of opinion help predicting the company's earnings and the market response to earnings? To do so, I construct my emotion variables to leverage aspects of textual content ignored by traditional sentiment models by incorporating emojis and emoticons and create a multi-dimensional object. The low correlation between sentiment and emotions illustrates that they contain different information.

My final contribution is to research on the value of diversity 7 and the wisdom of crowds 8 hypotheses. First, in line with the value of diversity hypothesis, I find that the predictive power of emotions are diminished when considering only groups of (more) homogeneous users by segmenting them by sharing similar investment horizons, trading experience, trading approach, popularity and account types. Second, I add to wisdom of crowds literature by showing that investor messages are better predictors when surrounded by higher user engagement.

7 This hypothesis originates from Hong and Page (2004), who show that a diverse group of intelligent decision-makers reaches reliably better decisions than a less diverse group of individuals with superior skills and concludes that under certain conditions, 'diversity trumps ability'. Interestingly, traditional information intermediaries, such as financial analysts, tend to herd to the consensus viewpoint (Jegadeesh and Kim (2010)) and produce inefficient earnings forecasts (Abarbanell (1991)), perhaps because they belong to a rather small and homogeneous group (Welch (2000)). This is relevant to the research questions of this paper, because StockTwits has a diverse set of investors with widely different investment philosophies.

8 The wisdom of crowds refers to the phenomenon that aggregated information provided by many often results in better predictions than those made by any single group member, even when that member is an expert. Surowiecki (2004) presents numerous case studies and anecdotes to illustrate the principle. One such example comes from the work of Sir Francis Galton: after observing a weight-judging competition at a county fair in 1906, Galton found that the crowd accurately predicted the weight of an ox when their guesses were averaged. The average guess was closer to the ox's true weight than most the individual predictions, including estimates coming from cattle experts, butchers, and farmers. A similar outcome was witnessed in Berg et al. (2008), which revealed the remarkable ability of the Iowa Electronic Markets to predict highprofile elections, outperforming polls conducted by experts. Recent research that builds on the wisdom of crowds concept shows that the content of tweets can be used to predict: (1) earnings announcement returns (Bartov, Faurel, and Mohanram (2018)), and (2) future returns around Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings (Azar and Lo (2016)).

The question whether firm-specific emotions from social media help predict firms' earnings and announcement returns has been left unexplored thus far in the literature. This is the very question that I subdivide into two main points of examination in my paper. My first research question investigates whether stock specific investor emotions, obtained from individual messages written prior to the earnings announcement, predict the company's earnings surprise. This is the case, for instance, if investors are excited about firms that end up exceeding analysts expectations. If the opposite holds, i.e. investors are systematically enthusiastic about firms disappointing expectations, it would add to the list of behaviors retail investors exhibit that adversely affects their financial well-being (e.g., Barber and Odean (2013)). My second research question examines the relation between stock specific investor emotions, obtained from individual messages written prior to the earnings announcement, and the market response to earnings. To address this question, I control for the earnings surprise. This allows me to explore the nature of the StockTwits information that predicts stock returns. If the information conveyed by emotions is above and beyond earnings realizations, then the coefficient on emotions will continue to be significant even after controlling for the content of the report.

The two research questions outlined delineate different aspects on the role investor emotions play. The first one examines if investor emotions are informative. If there is an earnings surprise, not all information has been aggregated in earnings expectations. If the earnings surprise can be predicted by emotions, then emotions carry this missing information. The second one investigates whether investor emotions influence price dynamics. If investor enthusiasm contains information beyond earnings realizations, then the relationship between announcement returns and enthusiasm should be nonzero. These two research questions are important since they address whether and how investor emotions influence the way new information is incorporated into asset prices. I find that the value relevance of emotions for stock returns stems not only from predicting the earnings surprise, but also from other information relevant to stock valuation not accounted for by unobservable time-invariant stock characteristics, time patterns, or by control variables used in prior research. Results of this paper suggest that investor emotions are important determinants of stock returns.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a theoretical framework, Section 3 describes the data; Section 4 provides the empirical strategy; Section 5

presents my primary results; Section 6 confirms the results of theoretical work by Shu (2010), explores heterogeneous effects and conducts a sensitivity analysis. Section 7 concludes.

## 2 Theoretical Framework

The theoretical framework for this paper comes from Shu (2010). 9 Shu (2010) modifies the Lucas model (Lucas Jr (1978)), and shows how investor mood variations affect equilibrium asset prices and expected returns. Specifically, equity prices correlate positively with investor mood, with higher asset prices associated with better mood. In contrast, expected asset returns correlate negatively with investor mood. Given this, we expect to find positive contemporaneous relationships between investor enthusiasm and excess returns, while a negative relationship between pre-announcement investor enthusiasm and announcement returns. I provide a simple framework with a potential mechanism in Section A.

## 3 Data

## 3.1 Data Sources

## 3.1.1 StockTwits Data

My investor emotion dataset comes from StockTwits, which was founded in 2008 as a social networking platform for investors to share stock opinions. StockTwits looks similar to Twitter, where users post messages of up to 140 characters (280 characters since late 2019), and use 'cashtags' with the stock ticker symbol (e.g., $AMZN) to link ideas to a particular company. Although the app does not directly integrate with other social media platforms, participants can share content to their personal Twitter, LinkedIn, and Facebook accounts.

My original dataset spans the decade of 2010; starting from 1 January, 2010 until 31 December, 2019. In total, there are 117,354,459 messages by 416,249 unique users mentioning 9,742 tickers. For each message, I observe sentiment indicators as tagged by the user (bullish, bearish, or unclassified), sentiment score as computed by StockTwits, 'cashtags'

9 An alternative theory is provided by Duxbury et al. (2020), who present an emotion-based account of buy and sell preferences in asset markets. Specifically, they leverage psychological research (e.g., Loewenstein et al. (2001)) and propose that when the price of a single asset increases (decreases) above its purchase price, anticipatory hope increase (decreases).

that connect the message to particular stocks, like count, and a user identifier. The user identifier allows me to explore characteristics of the user, such as follower count. For most users, I also have information on self-reported investment philosophy that can vary along two dimensions: (1) Approach - technical, fundamental, momentum, value, growth, and global macro; or (2) Holding Period - day trader, swing trader, position trader, and long term investor. 10 Users of the platform also provide their experience level as either novice, intermediate, or professional. Leveraging textual analysis, I also distinguish between institutional and retail investor accounts. This user-specific information about the style, experience, type and investment model employed is useful to explore heterogeneity in investor emotions.

I restrict my sample to cover stocks traded on NASDAQ/NYSE, and remove messages that appear automated. 11 I focus on messages that can be directly linked to particular stocks, so I restrict attention to messages that only mention one ticker. Last, I require at least two users posting per stock for the duration over which I compute averages to discard noisy signals. I summarize my sample restrictions in Table 1.

Table 1: Itemized Sample Restrictions

| Messages  StockTwits Data 2010-2019  117,354,459  Keep  NASDAQ/NYSE Ticker  101,484,559  Single Ticker  74,648,778  Not Automated  68,305,130  IBES/CRSP Ticker  60,963,143  Final Announcement Sample  4,467,461   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

I restrict my sample to firms with posts from at least 2 users for the period between 10 trading days before the earnings announcement until 2 trading days before the announcement.

I plot the average word count per messages over time in Figure 1, displaying a relatively stable trend with a spike in late 2019. This spike is due the character limit extension from

10 I group technical with momentum and value with fundamental for my heterogeneity explorations. For investment horizon, I explore day traders and long term investors.

11 I define automated messages as messages posted over 1,000 times by the same user over the period 2010-2019.

140 characters to 280 characters. Given that the average post length peaks at 16, and since I use the first 30 words to extract the emotion from messages, this likely does not effect the estimation.

Figure 1: Time Series of Average Post Length

<!-- image -->

Notes: Similarly to Twitter, StockTwits introduced longer messages in late 2019 (280 characters).

Figure 2 portrays the number of messages over time in my data, indicating substantial growth in the early years in the data, which plateaus around 2016. I control for the growing nature of my sample and the changing nature of my posts by including time fixed effects in my analysis.

I also explore when investors post the messages. In particular, I examine whether they post messages concurrently with daily news so that it reflects hour by hour changes in beliefs, or in the evening after work, when they have more free time and then it is more of a reflective general analysis. In Panels (a) and (b) of Figure 3 I plot the distribution of messages by the day of the week and by the hour of the day respectively. We can clearly see that most posting activity on the platform happens when the markets are open (Monday-Friday and between 9am and 4pm). This behavior is consistent with investors updating their beliefs in real time as financial events unfold.

Figure 2: StockTwits Messages Over Time

<!-- image -->

Figure 3: Distribution of Messages

<!-- image -->

Panel (a) portrays the day-of-the-week, while Panel (b) depicts the hour-of-the-day distribution of messages.

Last, I plot the average message volume across firms surrounding earnings announcements in Figure 4. It indicates that social media activity increases a week before the earnings announcement and peaks on the earnings announcement day. Specifically, social media activity increases by a factor of 3 on the announcement day compared to from the week prior. This dramatic increase is in line with studies documenting abnormal attention surrounding earnings announcements (e.g., Lawrence et al. (2016)). In total, I analyze 81,886 firmearnings announcement observations spanning 4,467,461 messages.

Figure 4: Posts around Earnings Announcements

<!-- image -->

## 3.1.2 Pricing Data

Price and volume-related variables are obtained from CRSP, accounting information is obtained from Standard and Poor's COMPUSTAT, analyst and earnings announcement related information is obtained from I/B/E/S, and institutional ownership data is from Thomson Reuters Institutional Holdings (13F). I match this data with StockTwits, and compute days till earnings announcements based on Gabrovˇ sek et al. (2017). I illustrate this in Figure 5.

Figure 5: Event Windows for Firms Announcing Before vs. After the Market Opens

<!-- image -->

Notes: Panel (a) displays the estimation for firms reporting before the market opens, while Panel (b) portrays it for firms with announcements after the market closes.

## 3.2 Text Analysis

I now briefly describe the text analysis methodologies used in this paper. For an in depth discussion, see Appendix B, C, and D.

## 3.2.1 Messages as Indicators for Emotion

In order for my emotion measure to be useful, it must reveal the true state of investors. Thus, before using the data, I must rule out that users are trying to manipulate the stock market by posting fake opinions. For instance, if a user believes the stock price will go down and thus wants to sell the stock, she could post positive messages that might increase the price temporarily and thus would allow her to sell at a higher price. This would invalidate my measure, as I would capture her emotion as happy, even though her current emotional state might not be. This does not, though, seem to be an important concern in my data for a number of reasons. First, there is anecdotal evidence that users post on platforms to attract followers, gain internet fame, or find employment. In all those cases, it is incentive compatible for them to provide their honest opinion about the stock. Second, I also investigate the pricing impacts concerning S&amp;P 1500 firms, which have large market caps that make it unlikely that individual investors could move prices.

## 3.2.2 Measuring Emotion

The primary challenge underlying my research design is the estimation of emotion. To overcome this, I use textual analysis to quantify the emotion expressed in investor messages. I leverage a large set of emojis and emoticons along with emotionally charged words to generate a dataset of investor messages with corresponding emotions. I then use a standard bi-directional GRU model with word embeddings (see Chung et al. (2014)) to obtain a probabilistic assessment for each message in the data.

## 3.2.3 Measuring Information Content

To further explore the channels whereby emotions operate, I also compute the emotional state of messages separately as they relate to fundamental information ('fundamental') or whether they look like general social media chat ('chat'). I provide examples of messages and their predicted emotion probabilities for a set of 'fundamental' and 'chat' posts in Table D.3.

I also distinguish between messages by whether they provide original information ('original') or they disseminate existing ones ('dissemination'). A message is considered original if (1) it is not a retweet of another user's message and (2) it does not include a hyperlink.

## 3.2.4 Measuring Sentiment

StockTwits uses an unclassified supervised learning model to generate a sentiment score for messages, and reports this score and statistics of this on its platform. I found that a large fraction of messages receive a score of 0, meaning that the message is either unclassified or has no forward looking sentiment. To be consistent with prior research, I use a Naive Bayes model (Bartov, Faurel, and Mohanram (2018)). 12

## 3.3 Differences between Emotion and Sentiment

Since early investor sentiment studies, such as De Long et al. (1990), research has revealed that investor sentiment and emotion are closely related. Examples include optimism (pessimism) or hope about (fear of) the future. As Shiller (2003) suggested, excessive price volatility in asset markets may indicate that investors' decisions are influenced by such optimism or pessimism. Tetlock (2007) provides empirical support to De Long et al. (1990) by documenting that high media pessimism exerts downward pressure on prices through short-term spikes in trading volume. Still, there are three important distinctions between my emotion measure and sentiment.

First, the main difference is definition. Unlike emotion, investor sentiment is defined as 'a belief about future cash flows and investment risks that is not justified by the facts at hand' (Baker and Wurgler (2007)). Now, whether a model not trained specifically on social media data can extract this component is not within the scope of this paper. Nonetheless, to alleviate such concerns I also train a deep learning based sentiment model trained on messages pre-tagged by the author of the post as 'bullish' or 'bearish'.

The second is dimensionality. While investor sentiment is a one dimensional object, my investor emotion is a multi-dimensional construct. This allows me to pinpoint what features of messages seem to matter more. For instance, both fear and anger are likely classified as negative, yet an angry message is different from a fearful message (see Table D.3 for examples), and it is conceivable that firms with angry messages perform differently than firms with fearful messages.

Third, unlike my emotion model which incorporates emojis and emoticons, the sentiment model built on the Naive Bayes classifier assigns a score of 0.5 (i.e., neutral) for each of the emoticons and emojis included in my dictionaries, both in its original format (i.e., ':)') and its changed format (i.e., 'happyface'). For instance, the message 'I am :)' would be classified as happy with the emotion model, and neutral with the sentiment model. Therefore, the sentiment model measures the content of only words, ignoring potentially important infor- mation. This issue, however could be fixed by training a sentiment model that incorporates emojis and emoticons. If that would be the case, then the emotion model could be thought of as a higher dimensional sentiment measure.

12 I use the Naive Bayes classifier developed by https://textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/\_modules/ nltk/classify/naivebayes.html , and classify messages with a predicted probability just under 0.49 as negative, and just over 0.51 as positive, and hence, my neutral class contains messages with a sentiment between 0.49 and 0.51.

## 3.4 Descriptive Statistics

I first define the variables used in my analyses in Table 2.

Table 2: Variable Definitions

| Variable  Definition  Source  Analysts  Natural logarithm of 1 plus the number of analysts in the lat-  est I/B/E/S consensus analyst quarterly earnings per share  forecast prior to the quarter-end date.  I/B/E/S  Emotion  Each message is classified by a many-to-one deep learning  model into one of the seven categories (i.e., neutral, happy,  sad, anger, disgust, surprise, fear), so that the corresponding  probabilities sum up to 1.  For each emotions separately, we  then take the weighted average of these probabilities during  the nine trading-day window [  -  10  ,  -  2], where day 0 is the  quarterly earnings announcement date and the weights cor-  respond to the number of followers of the user 1+log(1 + #  of Followers).  StockTwits  Exret (%)  Buy-and-hold  abnormal  returns  measured  using  Carhart  (1997)'s four-factor model for the window specified multiplied  by 100.  Unless stated otherwise, we compute buy-and-hold  abnormal returns for firm i for event window [  t, t  +  n  ] as fol-  lows:  $$Exret i ; t,t + n = t + n ∏ k = t (1 + R ik ) - t + n ∏ k = t (1 + ER ik )$$  WRDS (U.S. Daily  Event Study)  Inst  Number of shares held by institutional investors scaled by  total shares outstanding as of the quarter-end date  Thomson  Reuters  Institutional Hold-  ings (13F)  Loss  Indicator variable equal to 1 if earnings before extraordinary  items (IBQ) is strictly negative in the prior quarter, and 0  otherwise  Compustat (Quar-  terly)   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2 - continued from previous page

| Variable  Definition  Source  MB  Ratio  of  market  value  to  book  value  of  equity  (CSHOQ  ∗  PRCCQ  /  CEQQ)  Compustat (Quar-  terly)  Sentiment  Twits classified as positive minus twits classified as negative  during the nine trading-day window [  -  10  ,  -  2], where day 0  is the quarterly earnings announcement date,  using an en-  hanced naive Bayes classifier. Each positive or negative mes-  sage is first weighted by the corresponding probability and by  the number of followers of the user 1+log(1 + # of Followers).  The measure is scaled by 1 plus the sum of the probability  levels.  StockTwits  Size  Natural  logarithm  of  market  value  of  equity  (log(CSHOQ  ∗  PRCCQ)).  Compustat (Quar-  terly)  SUE  Standardized unexpected earnings (suescore from I/B/E/S).  I/B/E/S  Volatility  Standard deviation of daily returns during the half-year until  10 trading days before the announcement.  CRSP   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

For the excess return calculation, see the event and estimation windows in Figure F.1. CSHOQ left in millions.

Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics for the analysis variables. I find a high fraction of neutral messages, with a mean of 72.7% and a median of 74.9%, mainly driven by firms with few posts (weighting firm-quarter observations by number of posts yields a mean of 51.86% for neutral). Looking at my Naive Bayes based sentiment variable, I observe a positive skewness, with a mean of 1.867, and a median of 1.773. This might suggest a 'good-news' bias in twits, following from investors being more likely to share their optimism on social media than pessimism. My earnings surprise variable: standardized unexpected earnings (SUE) have a mean and median of 1.052 and 0.707 respectively. This suggests that firms in my sample exceeded analysts expectations more than disappointed. My measure of abnormal returns around earnings announcements, has a slightly negative mean, -0.09%, and a median of -0.05%.

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics

| Observations  Mean  σ  σ  within  Median  10%  90%  Panel A: CRSP/IBES/Compustat/Thomson Reuters (13F)  EXRET  -  1  ,  1  81886  -0.088  8.447  8.128  -0.048  -9.783  9.493  EXRET  2  ,  4  81886  -0.04  3.982  3.811  -0.098  -4.37  4.311  EXRET  -  10  ,  -  2  81886  -0.152  6.252  5.996  -0.182  -7.042  6.66  SUE  81886  1.052  3.861  3.417  0.707  -2.315  4.95  Loss  80808  0.293  0.455  0.306  0  0  1  Analysts  81886  2.052  0.644  0.234  2.033  1.186  2.931  Institutional  81886  0.585  0.361  0.231  0.714  0  0.982  Size  80765  7.668  1.801  0.475  7.637  5.358  10.035  MB  80499  4.044  6.084  4.271  2.315  0.8  7.979  Volatility  81861  0.025  0.013  0.008  0.021  0.012  0.042  Panel B: StockTwits  # of Messages  -  10  ,  -  2  81886  54.557  413.773  300.613  9  3  62  # of Distinct Users  -  10  ,  -  2  81886  16.812  62.141  41.544  6  2  29  Sentiment  -  10  ,  -  2  81886  1.867  2.525  2.119  1.773  -1.26  5.209  Sentiment  -  1  ,  1  81077  2.03  2.416  1.795  2.005  -0.979  5.183  Anger  -  1  ,  1  81077  0.005  0.013  0.012  0  0  0.016  Anger  -  10  ,  -  2  81886  0.005  0.014  0.013  0  0  0.014  Disgust  -  1  ,  1  81077  0.006  0.016  0.014  0  0  0.019  Disgust  -  10  ,  -  2  81886  0.006  0.019  0.017  0  0  0.018  Fear  -  1  ,  1  81077  0.04  0.059  0.052  0.008  0  0.114  Fear  -  10  ,  -  2  81886  0.044  0.077  0.071  0.002  0  0.131  Happy  -  1  ,  1  81077  0.135  0.127  0.105  0.117  0  0.29  Happy  -  10  ,  -  2  81886  0.155  0.162  0.142  0.12  0  0.366  Neutral  -  1  ,  1  81077  0.749  0.19  0.14  0.771  0.489  0.997  Neutral  -  10  ,  -  2  81886  0.727  0.223  0.184  0.749  0.431  1  Sad  -  1  ,  1  81077  0.031  0.046  0.039  0.009  0  0.087  Sad  -  10  ,  -  2  81886  0.029  0.051  0.046  0.004  0  0.084  Surprise  -  1  ,  1  81077  0.029  0.047  0.042  0.007  0  0.084  Surprise  -  10  ,  -  2  81886  0.026  0.047  0.043  0.002  0  0.081   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Note: σ within denotes the within-firm (demeaned) standard deviations. Continuous variables winsorized at the 1% and 99% level. Emotion classifications based on StockTwits model.

Table 4: Correlation Matrix

| EXRET  -  1  ,  1  SUE  t  SUE  t  -  1  EXRET  -  10  ,  -  2  Loss  Anl  Inst  Size  MB  Sent  Happy  Sad  Anger  Disgust  Surprise  Fear  EXRET  -  1  ,  1  1.00  SUE  t  0.26  ∗∗∗  1.00  SUE  t  -  1  -0.02  ∗∗∗  0.25  ∗∗∗  1.00  EXRET  -  10  ,  -  2  0.01  0.03  ∗∗∗  -0.01  ∗∗  1.00  Loss  -0.08  ∗∗∗  -0.18  ∗∗∗  -0.13  ∗∗∗  -0.02  ∗∗∗  1.00  Anl  0.01  ∗  0.09  ∗∗∗  0.09  ∗∗∗  0.00  -0.21  ∗∗∗  1.00  Inst  0.02  ∗∗∗  0.07  ∗∗∗  0.07  ∗∗∗  -0.00  -0.17  ∗∗∗  0.25  ∗∗∗  1.00  Size  0.05  ∗∗∗  0.13  ∗∗∗  0.12  ∗∗∗  0.01  ∗  -0.42  ∗∗∗  0.61  ∗∗∗  0.20  ∗∗∗  1.00  MB  0.04  ∗∗∗  0.06  ∗∗∗  0.06  ∗∗∗  -0.01  0.07  ∗∗∗  0.07  ∗∗∗  0.03  ∗∗∗  0.11  ∗∗∗  1.00  Sent  0.01  ∗∗  0.04  ∗∗∗  0.04  ∗∗∗  0.01  -0.13  ∗∗∗  0.09  ∗∗∗  0.03  ∗∗∗  0.15  ∗∗∗  0.00  1.00  Happy  -0.01  0.01  ∗∗  0.03  ∗∗∗  0.08  ∗∗∗  0.07  ∗∗∗  0.07  ∗∗∗  -0.04  ∗∗∗  0.04  ∗∗∗  0.05  ∗∗∗  -0.07  ∗∗∗  1.00  Sad  -0.01  -0.01  -0.01  -0.05  ∗∗∗  0.07  ∗∗∗  0.06  ∗∗∗  -0.06  ∗∗∗  0.01  0.03  ∗∗∗  -0.09  ∗∗∗  0.04  ∗∗∗  1.00  Anger  -0.01  -0.01  ∗∗  -0.01  -0.02  ∗∗∗  0.10  ∗∗∗  0.03  ∗∗∗  -0.06  ∗∗∗  -0.01  0.03  ∗∗∗  -0.08  ∗∗∗  0.09  ∗∗∗  0.14  ∗∗∗  1.00  Disgust  -0.01  -0.02  ∗∗∗  -0.02  ∗∗∗  -0.04  ∗∗∗  0.10  ∗∗∗  0.02  ∗∗∗  -0.08  ∗∗∗  -0.02  ∗∗∗  0.03  ∗∗∗  -0.08  ∗∗∗  0.06  ∗∗∗  0.13  ∗∗∗  0.14  ∗∗∗  1.00  Surprise  -0.01  -0.01  ∗  -0.01  -0.02  ∗∗∗  0.11  ∗∗∗  0.02  ∗∗∗  -0.08  ∗∗∗  -0.02  ∗∗∗  0.04  ∗∗∗  -0.09  ∗∗∗  0.12  ∗∗∗  0.10  ∗∗∗  0.13  ∗∗∗  0.11  ∗∗∗  1.00  Fear  -0.01  -0.00  -0.00  -0.06  ∗∗∗  0.05  ∗∗∗  0.08  ∗∗∗  -0.03  ∗∗∗  0.05  ∗∗∗  0.03  ∗∗∗  -0.04  ∗∗∗  0.00  0.16  ∗∗∗  0.08  ∗∗∗  0.09  ∗∗∗  0.07  ∗∗∗  1.00  Observations  81886   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 4 presents pairwise correlation coefficients among my analysis variables. The variables include my StockTwits based emotion measure, earnings surprise (SUE), abnormal stock returns around earnings announcements (EXRET), and my control variables. My emotion measures in Table 4 show low pairwise correlations with investor sentiment (below 0.1 for each, using Spearman and Pearson, respectively), suggesting that they may be capturing different aspects of investor opinion. The small pairwise correlation coefficients among my control variables indicate that there is little evidence of a multi-collinearity.

## 4 Empirical Strategy

## 4.1 Emotions and Earnings Surprises

I start with addressing my first research question: do investor emotions predict the company's earnings? This would be the case when investor emotions contain information relevant to company's future earnings. In particular, it is conceivable that positive investor emotions indicate performance exceeding prior expectations. To test this question I estimate the following model:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, the dependent variable is the earnings surprise, measured using standardized unexpected earnings (SUE) for firm f during announcement t. My test variables, EMOTION iftj , is the average firm-specific emotion extracted from individual messages written 10 trading days before until 2 trading days before the announcement. Specifically, EMOTION iftj for j ∈ { happy, sad, fear, disgust, angry, surprise } is a probabilistic measure of the average emotion from StockTwits, where the benchmark group is the neutral. In Equation (1), the hypothesis that the average emotion from individual messages is predictive of the upcoming earnings surprise implies | β j | &gt; 0 for some j.

The control variables (X ift ) include: the lagged earnings surprise from the previous quarter to control for the positive autocorrelation in earnings surprises (SUE i,t -1 ); Carhart (1997) four-factor buy-and-hold abnormal stock returns for the firm over the window [ -10 , -2] to control for information outside of the realm of StockTwits that may have reached the capital market prior to the earnings release (EXRET -10 , -2 ); firm size (Size); market-to-book ratio

(MB); number of analysts in the consensus I/B/E/S/ quarterly earnings forecast (ANL); institutional investor holding (INST); where applicable, indicator variable for the fourth fiscal quarter (Q4); an indicator variable for past quarterly loss (Loss). These last seven variables control for effects shown by prior research to explain the cross-sectional variation in earnings surprises. I include firm ( δ f ) and time ( δ t ) fixed effects (year, month, day of the week) to account for firm-specific and time patterns in earnings surprises that my controls might not account for. Along the lines of prior research (e.g., Petersen (2009)), I cluster standard errors by firm, because the errors may be correlated over time at the firm level.

## 4.2 Emotions and Announcement Returns

I now address my second research question: Can the emotions extracted from StockTwits messages predict quarterly earnings announcement stock returns? Certainly, if emotions are irrelevant, then the answer is no. Given Shu (2010), I expect a negative association between pre-existing enthusiasm and announcement returns. To test this question empirically, I examine the relationship between abnormal stock returns (EXRET) in the three days around earnings announcements, [ -1 , 1], where day 0 is the earnings announcement date, and investor emotions in a nine-trading-day period leading to the earnings announcement, [ -10 , -2]. To this end, I estimate Equation (1) with the dependent variable being Carhart (1997)'s buy-and-hold abnormal stock returns for firm f during announcement t over the three-day window [ -1 , 1], EXRET ift .

The prediction that pre-announcement emotional states are informative of earnings announcement returns imply that | β j | &gt; 0 for some j ∈ { happy, sad, fear, disgust, angry, surprise } . This would be the case if, as discussed in Bartov, Faurel, and Mohanram (2018), the market uses stock recommendations and analyst earnings forecasts in forming its earnings expectations and stock prices, but does not extract information as they are released from other, less prominent sources, such as StockTwits. Based on Shu (2010), I expect to find β happy &lt; 0.

Here, the control variables (X ift ) leverage the findings of prior research: For instance, I include excess returns from ten days before the announcement until two days before the announcement to control for momentum in stock returns. This ensures that the effects I attribute to emotional states are not driven by momentum of pre-announcement returns. I include institutional ownership as a control variable, to acknowledge that the marginal investor who sets stock prices is a sophisticated investor whose equity valuations and earnings expectations may not only rely on analyst forecasts and recommendations. The other four variables are used to control for effects shown by prior research to explain the cross-sectional variation in stock returns around earnings announcements. I also include my realized earnings surprise variable of the current quarter (SUE) to explore the nature of the StockTwits information that predicts stock returns. If the information conveyed by emotions is above and beyond earnings realizations, then the coefficient on emotions will continue to be significant even after controlling for SUE. Once again, I include firm ( δ f ) and time ( δ t ) fixed effects to account for firm-specific and time patterns in earnings surprises that my controls might not account for. I cluster standard errors by industry-quarter, using Fama-French 48-industry groupings, because the errors may be correlated in the same calendar period across firms in the same industry.

## 4.3 Estimation Concerns

It is conceivable that firms that tend to have positive earnings surprises make investors always more excited before announcements. To rule out that my results are driven by this, I use firm fixed effects. I also control for year, month, and day-of-the-week fixed effects, to ensure that my results are not driven by factors which effect emotions and returns across all firms simultaneously. I take a number of steps to mitigate additional concerns regarding the estimation. First, to guarantee that I am not picking up reactive emotions, I look at the impact of pre-announcement emotions on earnings announcements, so there is a clear temporal separation between my independent and dependent variables. Second, I tackle misattribution - the concern that my emotion measures are not capturing emotions correctly - by training an additional emotion model and use emotion variables obtained by this model for robustness checks and by investigating the impacts of contemporaneous emotions and asset prices, and find that my algorithm classifies messages as happier when they are talking about assets that have gone up in value. One caveat of my analysis is that I do not control for traditional media coverage, and hence, I cannot exclude the possibility that it is the emotions invoked from traditional media coverage that drive my results.

## 5 Primary Findings

## 5.1 Emotions and Earnings Surprises

I start with addressing my first research question: do investor emotions predict the company's earnings? Before I exploit within-firm variation, Columns (1-2) of Table 5 documents relationship between investor emotions and earnings surprises without firm fixed effects. As the results show, emotions alone can only explain some of the variation in earnings surprises (0.8%). I find that a standard deviation increase in happiness results in a 1.8% standard deviation increase in earnings surprises (0 . 4359 ∗ 0 . 162 / 3 . 8609). Still, I find that investors on the platform are more enthusiastic about firms that end up beating expectations. Upon including control variables, only happy remains significant, and its effect size is reduced by approximately 30%.

Table 5: Emotions, Earnings Surprises and Announcement Returns

| (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  SUE  SUE  EXRET  -  1  ,  1  EXRET  -  1  ,  1  Happy  -  10  ,  -  2  0.4359  ∗∗∗  0.3101  ∗∗∗  -0.3902  ∗∗  -0.4423  ∗∗  (0.0993)  (0.0935)  (0.1833)  (0.1804)  Sad  -  10  ,  -  2  -0.4343  -0.0468  -0.9214  -0.0858  (0.3087)  (0.2725)  (0.6212)  (0.6067)  Disgust  -  10  ,  -  2  -2.6191  ∗∗∗  -0.1508  -0.8860  1.9378  (0.7429)  (0.6628)  (1.6837)  (1.6766)  Anger  -  10  ,  -  2  -3.1294  ∗∗∗  -1.1747  -5.3028  ∗∗  -1.4846  (1.0204)  (0.9393)  (2.3774)  (2.3273)  Fear  -  10  ,  -  2  -0.0272  0.0816  -0.3175  -0.0400  (0.1935)  (0.1796)  (0.3821)  (0.3685)  Surprise  -  10  ,  -  2  -0.6937  ∗∗  0.3012  -0.2477  0.8543  (0.3078)  (0.2952)  (0.6945)  (0.6769)  Constant  1.0474  ∗∗∗  0.1720  ∗  0.0499  0.0472  (0.0349)  (0.1004)  (0.0491)  (0.1211)  Year, Month, Day of Week FE  X  X  X  X  Control Variables  X  X  Mean of DV  1.0518  1.0732  -0.0877  -0.0801  Std. of DV  3.8609  3.8215  8.4472  8.4445  Observations  81886  77563  81886  80808  adj.  R  2  0.0080  0.0896  0.0015  0.0730   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the firm (SUE) and industry-quarter (EXRET) level are in parentheses. ∗ p &lt; 0 . 10, ∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 05, ∗∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 01. Continuous variables winsorized at the 1% and 99% level to mitigate the impact of outliers.

I next account for unobservables by including firm, year, month, and day of the week fixed effects. Table 6 presents the results. When I estimate the entire sample, I find that within-firm variation in anger can be useful in predicting earnings surprises (Column (1)). The significance disappears when I restrict the sample to S&amp;P 1500 firms (Column (2)), or when I only include messages that do not contain information about earnings or firm fundamentals (Column (3)). Looking at messages pertaining to stock fundamentals, I find a negative relationship between sad and earnings surprises, i.e., a within-firm standard deviation increase in sad is associated with a 0.9% within-firm standard deviation decrease in earnings surprise (Column (4)). Next, the predictive power is only present for messages containing original information (Column (5)), and not for those disseminating existing ones (Column (6)). Taken together, my results provide support that investor emotions extracted from social media marginally help predicting earnings surprises.

## 5.2 Emotions and Announcement Returns

I now address my second research question: Can emotions extracted from StockTwits messages predict quarterly earnings announcement stock returns? I first present the results from estimating Equation (1) without firm fixed effects in Columns (3-4) of Table 5. Column (3) suggests a negative relationship between emotions and abnormal returns around earnings announcements, as the coefficients on fear, anger, and happy are significantly negative. When controls from prior research explaining the cross-sectional variation in stock returns around earnings announcement are included (Column (4)), only the effect of happy remains statistically significant. Considering the results in Column (4), these impacts are not negligible; a standard deviation increase in excitement decreases announcement returns by 7.2 basis points per three trading days ( -0 . 4423 ∗ 0 . 162), an approximately -5.8% annualized loss.

I illustrate this finding graphically in Figure 6. To do so, I split my sample into firms with below versus above median pre-announcement enthusiasm, and into firms with positive versus negative earnings surprise. Figure 6 shows substantially different paths of cumulative abnormal returns for firms enjoying high levels of investor excitement. Specifically, when comparing firms that exceed expectations (red line versus green line), I find smaller price adjustments for firms having over the median share of happy posts. In contrast, when looking at firms that disappoint expectations (yellow line versus blue line), I document larger price adjustments. Interestingly, firms that exceed expectations but have below the median share of happy messages trend similarly to firms that disappoint expectations while having above the median share of happy messages until the announcement is released.

Table 6: Pre-Announcement Emotions and Earnings Surprises

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the firm level are in parentheses. ∗ p &lt; 0 . 10, ∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 05, ∗∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 01. Continuous variables winsorized at the 1% and 99% level to mitigate the impact of outliers. I report the within-firm (demeaned) standard deviation of the dependent variable.

| (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  Chat Type  Information Type  Chat  Fundamental  Original  Dissemination  Dependent Variable: SUE  t  Happy  -  10  ,  -  2  0.1385  0.1141  0.0721  0.0475  0.0648  -0.0097  (0.0893)  (0.1234)  (0.0611)  (0.0769)  (0.0593)  (0.0798)  Sad  -  10  ,  -  2  -0.3764  -0.3107  0.2420  -0.6728  ∗∗∗  -0.1211  -0.3434  (0.2568)  (0.3600)  (0.1620)  (0.2469)  (0.1553)  (0.2718)  Disgust  -  10  ,  -  2  -0.6156  -0.6320  -0.2484  -0.9476  -0.0678  -1.0491  (0.6551)  (0.9976)  (0.4848)  (0.6798)  (0.4409)  (0.8083)  Anger  -  10  ,  -  2  -1.7652  ∗  -0.4885  -0.6513  -1.7059  -1.5067  ∗∗∗  0.9194  (0.9717)  (1.4546)  (0.6497)  (1.0473)  (0.5283)  (1.9162)  Fear  -  10  ,  -  2  0.0009  0.3366  -0.0380  0.0425  -0.0950  0.0516  (0.1740)  (0.2483)  (0.1572)  (0.1535)  (0.1027)  (0.1621)  Surprise  -  10  ,  -  2  -0.0423  -0.4844  -0.1267  0.1717  0.0064  0.2992  (0.2883)  (0.4028)  (0.1470)  (0.2915)  (0.1313)  (0.3220)  Constant  0.2984  -1.6463  ∗∗∗  0.6890  ∗∗  0.2824  0.7121  ∗∗  0.2620  (0.2823)  (0.4570)  (0.3037)  (0.2853)  (0.3063)  (0.2871)  Firm FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  Year, Month, Day of Week FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  Controls  X  X  X  X  X  X  S&amp;P 1500 Firms  X  ≥  median users  σ  y,within  3.4196  3.4346  3.3624  3.4191  3.3307  3.4208  Observations  77242  36663  58379  76750  55936  75778  adj.  R  2  0.1902  0.1609  0.2048  0.1900  0.2040  0.1902   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Figure 6: Emotion and Announcement Returns.

<!-- image -->

Notes: Relationship between pre-announcement happiness (i.e., [ -10 , -2]) and cumulative abnormal returns. Abnormal returns are winsorized at the 1% and 99% level.

Table 7 shows that this relationship holds even with firm fixed effects (Column (1-6)), for larger firms (Column (2)), and the impacts are larger when user engagement is higher (Column 3)). Columns (4-5) repeat the analysis using measures of emotions disaggregated between messages that convey earnings or trade-related information (fundamental) and messages that provide other information (chat). I find that emotions extracted from messages specifically mentioning firm fundamentals and earnings have larger point estimates. Next, contrasting Column (6) and Column (7), I find that both messages containing original information and those disseminating existing information drive my results. Since I control for realized earnings surprise, my findings suggest that the value relevance of emotions provided by StockTwits for stock returns stems not only from predicting the earnings surprise, but also from other information relevant to stock valuation not accounted for by unobservable time-invariant stock characteristics or by time patterns.

Table 7: Pre-Announcement Emotions and Announcement Returns

| (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  Chat Type  Information Type  Chat  Fundamental  Original  Dissemination  Dependent Variable: EXRET  -  1  ,  1  Happy  -  10  ,  -  2  -0.6243  ∗∗∗  -0.7001  ∗∗∗  -1.0927  ∗∗∗  -0.2457  ∗  -0.4849  ∗∗∗  -0.3814  ∗∗∗  -0.4656  ∗∗  (0.1975)  (0.2633)  (0.4066)  (0.1379)  (0.1754)  (0.1304)  (0.1819)  Sad  -  10  ,  -  2  0.3823  -0.5314  0.7295  0.7799  ∗  -0.7828  0.2393  0.2127  (0.6652)  (0.8586)  (1.1672)  (0.4013)  (0.6459)  (0.3983)  (0.6995)  Disgust  -  10  ,  -  2  2.5680  3.5904  3.8202  -0.9432  4.8074  ∗∗∗  1.7455  0.9779  (1.7652)  (2.5799)  (2.3828)  (1.5008)  (1.7696)  (1.2119)  (2.2292)  Anger  -  10  ,  -  2  0.0334  2.0671  0.9995  0.1685  -1.7922  0.0446  -7.6382  (2.4488)  (3.6239)  (3.2609)  (1.7560)  (2.7051)  (1.4306)  (4.7303)  Fear  -  10  ,  -  2  0.4902  0.3964  1.3151  ∗  0.4197  0.4748  0.1099  0.2370  (0.3891)  (0.5210)  (0.7202)  (0.3667)  (0.3390)  (0.2222)  (0.3683)  Surprise  -  10  ,  -  2  1.0479  0.9908  1.3625  -0.4526  1.8338  ∗∗∗  0.3430  0.0424  (0.7149)  (0.9850)  (1.1271)  (0.3756)  (0.6894)  (0.3389)  (0.7412)  Constant  0.5219  0.3583  -0.0695  0.4829  0.5087  0.2963  0.5549  ∗  (0.3322)  (0.5414)  (0.5386)  (0.3912)  (0.3345)  (0.4026)  (0.3317)  Firm FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  Year, Month, Day of Week FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  Control Variables  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  S&amp;P 1500 Firms  X  ≥  median users  X  σ  y,within  8.1392  7.7552  8.6499  8.3875  8.1401  8.5494  8.1195  Observations  80492  37509  41535  60773  79963  58260  78817  adj.  R  2  0.0854  0.1031  0.0765  0.0796  0.0857  0.0773  0.0861   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the industry and quarter level are in parentheses. ∗ p &lt; 0 . 10, ∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 05, ∗∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 01. Continuous variables winsorized at the 1% and 99% level to mitigate the impact of outliers. I report the within-firm (demeaned)

standard deviation of the dependent variable.

A comparison of the results in Tables 5-7 presents an interesting contrast. Investor enthusiasm extracted from messages matters both for predicting earnings surprises and the market reaction to earnings news. In particular, it seems that investors are excited about firms that exceed expectations (i.e., positive relationship between happy and SUE), but their enthusiasm may lead to short-term overpricing, and hence, when I compare firms announcing similar earnings surprises, ones that experienced higher investor enthusiasm tend to experience lower announcement returns. While the emotion-earnings relationship only holds without firm fixed effects, both within-firm and inter-firm variation in emotions are indicative of the market reaction to earnings news.

## 6 Additional Findings

## 6.1 Testing the Theoretical Framework

To help corroborate the theoretical work of Shu (2010), I further analyze the link between investor emotions and excess returns. I first estimate the relationship using contemporaneous emotions and excess returns during windows [ -10 , -2] and [ -1 , 1]. Then to confirm the negative relationship between investor excitement and expected returns, I examine the impacts of earnings announcement emotions ([ -1 , 1]) on post-announcement returns ([2 , 4]). If the theory holds, I expect to see similar impacts between earnings announcement emotions and post-announcement returns as I saw for pre-announcement emotions and announcement returns. That is, when comparing companies with similar earnings surprises, ones that experienced higher enthusiasm should experience lower post-announcement returns.

I now examine the effects of pre-announcement investor emotions on contemporaneous excess returns by estimating Equation (1) with EXRET -10 , -2 being my dependent variable, while excluding controls for earnings surprise. Table 8 presents the results. As expected, I find a large positive (negative) association between positive (negative) emotional states and excess returns. This relationship is smaller for larger firms (Column (2)), larger when user engagement is higher (Column (3)), and holds for messages of all types (Columns (4-7)).

To provide further support that my emotion measures are capturing investor emotions accurately, I also estimate Equation (1) with contemporaneous (i.e., same window) emotion variables. Even after controlling for the content of the report, I find a large positive (negative)

Table 8: Pre-Announcement Emotions and Pre-Announcement Returns

| (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  Chat Type  Information Type  Chat  Fundamental  Original  Dissemination  Dependent Variable: EXRET - 10 , - 2  Happy  -  10  ,  -  2  3.5511  ∗∗∗  2.4076  ∗∗∗  6.7529  ∗∗∗  1.5568  ∗∗∗  2.4344  ∗∗∗  1.0133  ∗∗∗  1.8890  ∗∗∗  (0.1768)  (0.1861)  (0.3895)  (0.1121)  (0.1504)  (0.0972)  (0.1519)  Sad  -  10  ,  -  2  -4.8477  ∗∗∗  -3.2560  ∗∗∗  -10.9442  ∗∗∗  -2.7631  ∗∗∗  -2.9521  ∗∗∗  -2.8623  ∗∗∗  -3.0090  ∗∗∗  (0.5168)  (0.6058)  (0.9473)  (0.3429)  (0.5091)  (0.2962)  (0.5242)  Disgust  -  10  ,  -  2  -9.5653  ∗∗∗  -9.5326  ∗∗∗  -12.9609  ∗∗∗  -4.3280  ∗∗∗  -10.7611  ∗∗∗  -5.8141  ∗∗∗  -10.4051  ∗∗∗  (1.4950)  (1.8327)  (1.9634)  (1.0027)  (1.6383)  (0.9697)  (1.8998)  Anger  -  10  ,  -  2  -4.7888  ∗∗∗  -3.0401  -8.7994  ∗∗∗  -4.9647  ∗∗∗  -3.8246  ∗  -2.5236  ∗∗  0.0341  (1.7639)  (2.4596)  (2.2383)  (1.2621)  (2.1306)  (1.0315)  (3.3809)  Fear  -  10  ,  -  2  -4.2870  ∗∗∗  -3.7990  ∗∗∗  -8.3775  ∗∗∗  -2.6132  ∗∗∗  -3.3360  ∗∗∗  -1.9855  ∗∗∗  -3.7747  ∗∗∗  (0.3256)  (0.3857)  (0.6514)  (0.3129)  (0.2890)  (0.1779)  (0.3240)  Surprise  -  10  ,  -  2  -2.7351  ∗∗∗  -1.2561  ∗  -5.6229  ∗∗∗  -1.7570  ∗∗∗  -1.5261  ∗∗∗  -1.9512  ∗∗∗  0.6704  (0.5804)  (0.6704)  (0.9729)  (0.2815)  (0.5546)  (0.2557)  (0.6197)  Constant  -0.4264  0.3664  -0.3876  -0.0911  -0.3600  0.1014  -0.2248  (0.2911)  (0.3820)  (0.4945)  (0.3665)  (0.2955)  (0.3846)  (0.2915)  Firm FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  Year, Month, Day of Week FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  Control Variables  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  S&amp;P 1500 Firms  X  ≥  median users  X  σ  y,within  5.9999  5.0492  6.7689  6.3793  6.0034  6.5221  5.9796  Observations  80492  37509  41535  60773  79963  58260  78817  adj.  R  2  0.0293  0.0180  0.0447  0.0210  0.0245  0.0212  0.0231   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the industry-quarter level are in parentheses. ∗ p &lt; 0 . 10, ∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 05, ∗∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 01. Continuous variables winsorized at the 1% and 99% level to mitigate the impact of outliers. I report the within-firm (demeaned) standard deviation

of the dependent variable.

Table 9: Announcement Emotions and Announcement Returns

| (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  Chat Type  Information Type  Chat  Fundamental  Original  Dissemination  Dependent Variable: EXRET  -  1  ,  1  Happy  -  1  ,  1  12.3042  ∗∗∗  11.3934  ∗∗∗  22.0977  ∗∗∗  4.6221  ∗∗∗  9.6529  ∗∗∗  3.2759  ∗∗∗  7.0904  ∗∗∗  (0.4095)  (0.4530)  (0.6941)  (0.2018)  (0.3524)  (0.1620)  (0.3299)  Sad  -  1  ,  1  -19.5434  ∗∗∗  -17.3859  ∗∗∗  -32.3191  ∗∗∗  -10.1680  ∗∗∗  -13.5993  ∗∗∗  -6.6619  ∗∗∗  -12.1201  ∗∗∗  (0.9214)  (1.1943)  (1.4882)  (0.4868)  (0.8466)  (0.3493)  (0.9798)  Disgust  -  1  ,  1  -44.0120  ∗∗∗  -43.9898  ∗∗∗  -52.5682  ∗∗∗  -16.7932  ∗∗∗  -41.5975  ∗∗∗  -15.2944  ∗∗∗  -48.1765  ∗∗∗  (2.9657)  (4.2516)  (3.6714)  (1.5248)  (3.1578)  (1.3594)  (3.9800)  Anger  -  1  ,  1  -14.4643  ∗∗∗  -3.9460  -18.5428  ∗∗∗  -9.9765  ∗∗∗  -13.5246  ∗∗∗  -10.2545  ∗∗∗  10.5939  ∗  (3.8101)  (5.0062)  (4.7128)  (1.9380)  (3.8342)  (1.6866)  (6.3188)  Fear  -  1  ,  1  -17.2914  ∗∗∗  -16.5278  ∗∗∗  -30.5120  ∗∗∗  -7.3773  ∗∗∗  -14.8993  ∗∗∗  -4.5893  ∗∗∗  -21.2039  ∗∗∗  (0.7554)  (0.8928)  (1.2096)  (0.4906)  (0.7057)  (0.3500)  (0.8863)  Surprise  -  1  ,  1  -5.1685  ∗∗∗  -4.8144  ∗∗∗  -13.5744  ∗∗∗  -2.4853  ∗∗∗  -4.7825  ∗∗∗  -3.5753  ∗∗∗  1.4096  (0.8949)  (1.1746)  (1.5627)  (0.4883)  (0.8350)  (0.3600)  (0.8692)  Constant  0.2622  0.0547  -0.2526  0.6980  ∗  0.3739  0.7434  ∗  0.4038  (0.3334)  (0.5436)  (0.5525)  (0.3936)  (0.3364)  (0.4247)  (0.3369)  Firm FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  Year, Month, Day of Week FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  Control Variables  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  S&amp;P 1500 Firms  X  ≥  median users  X  σ  y,within  8.5198  8.0162  9.7884  8.9351  8.5211  9.1901  8.5201  Observations  78089  36598  42598  64890  78051  60174  77614  adj.  R  2  0.1389  0.1542  0.1974  0.1175  0.1252  0.1176  0.1239   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the industry and quarter level are in parentheses. ∗ p &lt; 0 . 10, ∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 05, ∗∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 01. Continuous variables winsorized at the 1% and 99% level to mitigate the impact of outliers. I report the within-firm (demeaned) standard deviation of the

dependent variable.

Table 10: Announcement Emotions and Post-Announcement Returns

| (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  Chat Type  Information Type  Chat  Fundamental  Original  Dissemination  Dependent Variable: EXRET  2  ,  4  Happy  -  1  ,  1  -0.5222  ∗∗∗  -0.4323  ∗∗  -0.6795  ∗∗  -0.1133  -0.4303  ∗∗∗  -0.1867  ∗∗  -0.3595  ∗∗  (0.1614)  (0.1932)  (0.2772)  (0.0863)  (0.1505)  (0.0725)  (0.1512)  Sad  -  1  ,  1  0.5187  1.0992  ∗∗  0.7152  -0.1234  0.6562  0.1506  0.3632  (0.4271)  (0.5182)  (0.6573)  (0.2186)  (0.4023)  (0.1574)  (0.4620)  Disgust  -  1  ,  1  0.3158  1.6946  0.5729  -0.7885  0.7143  -0.5280  2.9407  ∗  (1.3971)  (1.7116)  (1.6394)  (0.7627)  (1.4270)  (0.6765)  (1.6958)  Anger  -  1  ,  1  -0.5171  1.6903  0.1925  -0.7382  0.8352  0.1741  0.6276  (1.6884)  (2.2690)  (2.2101)  (0.9413)  (1.8149)  (0.7439)  (3.0866)  Fear  -  1  ,  1  0.8190  ∗∗∗  0.4908  1.4762  ∗∗∗  0.6231  ∗∗∗  0.5382  ∗  0.3450  ∗∗  0.5006  ∗  (0.3128)  (0.3733)  (0.5282)  (0.2040)  (0.2885)  (0.1571)  (0.2748)  Surprise  -  1  ,  1  -0.0184  -0.2576  0.3396  0.0036  0.0596  0.0312  -0.2071  (0.4236)  (0.5326)  (0.7212)  (0.2338)  (0.3937)  (0.1718)  (0.4088)  Constant  -1.0104  ∗∗∗  -0.8762  ∗∗∗  -1.3892  ∗∗∗  -1.0139  ∗∗∗  -1.0321  ∗∗∗  -1.1223  ∗∗∗  -1.0162  ∗∗∗  (0.1746)  (0.2330)  (0.2803)  (0.2013)  (0.1751)  (0.2110)  (0.1744)  Firm FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  Year, Month, Day of Week FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  Control Variables  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  S&amp;P 1500 Firms  X  ≥  median users  X  σ  y,within  3.9859  3.2876  4.1997  4.0925  3.9852  4.1632  3.9830  Observations  78089  36598  42598  64890  78051  60174  77614  adj.  R  2  0.0228  0.0091  0.0298  0.0217  0.0227  0.0236  0.0226   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the industry and quarter level are in parentheses. ∗ p &lt; 0 . 10, ∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 05, ∗∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 01. Continuous variables winsorized at the 1% and 99% level to mitigate the impact of outliers. I report the within-firm (demeaned) standard

deviation of the dependent variable.

association between positive (negative) emotional states and announcement returns (Table 9). Given Table 8 and Table 9, my measure of happy must be picking up happiness, because when excess returns are high people should be happy, which is what my measure shows. I abstain from analyzing the contemporaneous effects further, since these could be reactive and not predictive (i.e., I do not know whether emotion leads or lags price movements).

I next relate announcement emotions (window: [ -1 , 1]) to post-announcement returns (window: [2 , 4]). The results in Table 10 show a negative relationship between happy and post-announcement returns; effects that are smaller for larger firms (Column (2)), and larger when user engagement is higher (Column (3)); only messages related to earnings or firm fundamentals are driving the results (Column (4-5)). Taken together, these results confirm Shu (2010): negative relationship between investor enthusiasm and expected returns, while positive association between investor enthusiasm and contemporaneous returns.

## 6.2 Heterogeneous Effects

## 6.2.1 Emotions, Expectations and Volatility

Theory on investor sentiment posits that younger, smaller, more volatile, unprofitable, nondividend paying, distressed stocks are most sensitive to investor sentiment. Conversely, 'bond-like' stocks are less driven by sentiment (see, Baker and Wurgler (2007)). To examine whether emotions behave similarly to sentiment, I interact my happy variable with a dummy variable intended to capture high volatility stocks. In line with this, I find larger point estimates for more volatile firms (Column (2) of Table 11).

I also explore the effect of emotions for firms exceeding versus disappointing expectations, and find larger impacts for firms disappointing expectations (Column (3) vs. Column (4) of Table 11).

## 6.2.2 User Characteristics

Hong and Page (2004) show that a diverse group of intelligent decision makers reach reliably better decisions than a less diverse group of individuals with superior skills. I investigate this by segmenting my messages coming from traders with similar investment horizons (long-term, short-term), trading approaches (value, technical), trading experiences (amateur, intermediate, professional), popularity levels (users with followers in the 95th percent versus the rest), Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the industry and quarter level are in parentheses. ∗ p &lt; 0 . 10, ∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 05, ∗∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 01. Continuous variables winsorized at the 1% and 99% level to mitigate the impact of outliers. I report the within-firm (demeaned) standard deviation of the dependent variable. Indicator variable for experiencing volatility in the top 10% leading up to the announcement (Volatility).

Table 11: Pre-Announcement Emotions, Announcement Returns and Earnings

| (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  Earnings Surprise  Negative  Positive  Dependent Variable: EXRET  -  1  ,  1  Happy  -  10  ,  -  2  -0.6243  ∗∗∗  -0.5346  ∗∗∗  -1.1025  ∗∗∗  -0.6622  ∗∗∗  (0.1975)  (0.1917)  (0.3604)  (0.2434)  Sad  -  10  ,  -  2  0.3823  0.2940  0.4018  0.5493  (0.6652)  (0.6641)  (1.2452)  (0.8062)  Disgust  -  10  ,  -  2  2.5680  2.2372  2.6393  2.1848  (1.7652)  (1.7677)  (3.0227)  (2.1069)  Anger  -  10  ,  -  2  0.0334  -0.3450  2.5157  -2.1957  (2.4488)  (2.4459)  (4.4799)  (3.0352)  Fear  -  10  ,  -  2  0.4902  0.4003  0.5965  0.5223  (0.3891)  (0.3887)  (0.7157)  (0.4832)  Surprise  -  10  ,  -  2  1.0479  0.9065  2.3052  ∗  0.6077  (0.7149)  (0.7127)  (1.2193)  (0.8413)  Volatility  1.4387  ∗∗∗  (0.2785)  Volatility  ×  Happy  -  10  ,  -  2  -1.8081  ∗  (1.0352)  Constant  0.5219  0.3269  -1.2743  ∗∗  1.6897  ∗∗∗  (0.3322)  (0.3308)  (0.5399)  (0.4328)  Firm FE  X  X  X  X  Year, Month, Day of Week FE  X  X  X  X  Control Variables  X  X  X  X  σ  y,within  8.1392  8.1387  8.1245  7.8016  Observations  80492  80469  27448  51504  adj.  R  2  0.0854  0.0863  0.0898  0.0519   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

and account type (institutional vs. human).

I report heterogeneity across user types in Table 12 and document a few interesting observations. First, in line with the value of diversity hypothesis, I find that the emotions of homogeneous groups are less informative in predicting announcement returns. Second, the relationship between happiness and returns are negative in most specifications, and is statistically significant in over half of them. Last, it is the variation in excitement expressed by traders, and not by institutions that predicts returns (Columns (10-11)).

Table 12: Pre-Announcement Emotions and Announcement Returns across Users

| (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  (8)  (9)  (10)  (11)  Trading Approach  Investment Horizon  Trading Experience  Popularity  Account Type  Technical  Fundamental  Long-Term  Short-Term  Professional  Intermediate  Novice  Top 5%  Rest  Institution  Trader  Happy  -  10  ,  -  2  -0.2518  ∗∗  -0.3770  ∗∗  -0.1995  -0.0147  -0.3922  ∗∗∗  -0.0738  -0.4237  ∗∗  -0.4732  ∗∗∗  -0.5287  ∗∗∗  0.0231  -0.5363  ∗∗∗  (0.1264)  (0.1549)  (0.1722)  (0.1826)  (0.1452)  (0.1574)  (0.1869)  (0.1709)  (0.1890)  (0.1760)  (0.1858)  Sad  -  10  ,  -  2  0.3607  0.7488  0.2779  0.6395  0.4344  0.2652  0.0905  0.1569  0.5196  -1.0240  0.4570  (0.3903)  (0.5447)  (0.5172)  (0.4630)  (0.5096)  (0.4691)  (0.4401)  (0.5868)  (0.6326)  (0.6360)  (0.6470)  Disgust  -  10  ,  -  2  -1.1741  0.7368  1.0984  -0.0098  0.4807  -1.7150  2.4639  -0.3395  2.6239  1.6832  1.8661  (1.6891)  (1.8056)  (2.0663)  (2.3011)  (1.9836)  (1.9473)  (1.5957)  (2.7879)  (1.8238)  (1.8907)  (1.7735)  Anger  -  10  ,  -  2  -2.4514  -0.9718  2.7262  -0.5905  -1.5046  0.1033  -1.3494  -3.8852  -0.1071  4.0924  -0.6228  (2.1222)  (2.7324)  (3.0251)  (2.8356)  (2.8813)  (2.1588)  (1.2150)  (3.9396)  (2.3984)  (2.6472)  (2.3500)  Fear  -  10  ,  -  2  -0.0468  0.0447  -0.2501  0.2915  0.3356  0.3687  0.0216  -0.1295  0.3173  0.4696  0.3853  (0.1967)  (0.3584)  (0.3569)  (0.2970)  (0.3032)  (0.2844)  (0.3107)  (0.2878)  (0.3649)  (0.3036)  (0.3752)  Surprise  -  10  ,  -  2  -0.0907  0.3807  -0.0301  0.1403  -0.1350  0.5638  -0.0573  -0.1769  0.7662  0.2107  1.0712  (0.5229)  (0.5388)  (0.4919)  (0.5070)  (0.6094)  (0.6188)  (0.3504)  (0.6512)  (0.6574)  (0.5916)  (0.6892)  Constant  0.2669  0.0783  0.1693  -0.3485  0.3813  0.2132  0.4092  0.2085  0.5105  -0.5456  0.5247  (0.3913)  (0.4000)  (0.4395)  (0.6031)  (0.3541)  (0.4113)  (0.8218)  (0.5414)  (0.3304)  (0.5812)  (0.3311)  Firm FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  Year, Month, Day of Week FE  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  Control Variables  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  σ  y,within  8.3455  8.2059  8.2603  8.5650  8.1225  8.3073  9.0067  8.3757  8.1403  8.4991  8.1411  Observations  59331  57302  49863  32927  71115  59831  22628  41081  80179  35014  80398  adj.  R  2  0.0818  0.0828  0.0814  0.0733  0.0839  0.0827  0.0785  0.0737  0.0851  0.0783  0.0854   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the industry and quarter level are in parentheses. ∗ p &lt; 0 . 10, ∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 05, ∗∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 01. Continuous variables winsorized at the 1% and 99% level to mitigate the impact of outliers. I report the within-firm (demeaned) standard deviation of the dependent variable.

## 6.3 Sensitivity Analysis

I report the results of the sensitivity analysis in Table 13.

## Four-year sample

I compare my point estimate on sentiment in Column (1) with Bartov, Faurel, and Mohanram (2018) using their empirical specification. One difference between my four year sample and their is that it starts a year later. Yet, I find similar coefficients (0.0638 versus 0.0599). Controlling for the sentiment variable only marginally affects the coefficients on emotions, and does not impact the statistical significance on happy.

## Alternative Dependent Variable

My main specification for excess returns is defined in Table 2, but as I show in Columns (2-3), my results are robust to alternative specifications.

## Extending the Window Length

My primary analyses concerns the window just leading up to earnings announcements ([ -10 , -2]). I now expand the window to [ -20 , -2]. I find slightly larger coefficients Column (4), suggesting that investor emotions measured over longer-term horizons are also relevant.

## Alternative Classification

Arguably the most important part of my robustness checks, I now explore my Twitter based model in Column (5). The point estimate on happy is comparable to the one obtained by the StockTwits based model. This finding provides strong support that it is indeed investor enthusiasm that helps predicting the market response to earnings reports.

## Alternative Weighting

As a validity check, I consider two alternative weighting schemes. First, I investigate abandoning the weighting scheme entirely, and hence, messages are weighted equally (Column (6)), and second, I weight each message by the number of likes it received, 1+log(1+# of likes to be specific (Column (7)). The results, are largely unaltered under these alternative specifications. That is, I continue to find that average investor excitement from messages is associated with lower announcement returns.

Table 13: Sensitivity Analysis

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered at the industry and quarter level are in parentheses. ∗ p &lt; 0 . 10, ∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 05, ∗∗∗ p &lt; 0 . 01. Continuous variables winsorized at the 1% and 99% level to mitigate the impact of outliers. Aside from Column (1), I report the within-firm (demeaned) standard deviation of the dependent variable. In Column (2), I use cumulative abnormal returns over the three-day trading window as my dependent variable, while in Column (3) I use a longer estimation window for excess returns (see Figure F.1). The 'Long Window' in Column (4) refers to [ -20 , 2], while my alternative weighting in Column (7) refers to my like-based weighting scheme: 1 + log(1+# of likes).

| (1)  (2)  (3)  (4)  (5)  (6)  (7)  2010-2013  Alternative Dep. Var.  Longer Window  Twitter Model  Unweighted  Alternative Weighting  Dependent Variable: EXRET  -  1  ,  1  Happy  -0.6022  ∗∗∗  -0.6024  ∗∗∗  -0.9121  ∗∗∗  -0.9187  ∗∗  -0.8015  ∗∗∗  -0.5605  ∗∗∗  (0.1944)  (0.1943)  (0.2654)  (0.3861)  (0.2022)  (0.1713)  Sad  0.2700  0.1995  0.0516  1.3213  0.8529  0.4125  (0.6616)  (0.6599)  (0.8061)  (1.2923)  (0.6524)  (0.4647)  Disgust  1.8904  1.7418  3.4765  ∗  6.8876  3.1532  ∗  1.6039  ∗  (1.7589)  (1.7539)  (1.9949)  (8.5461)  (1.6381)  (0.8593)  Anger  -0.8264  -0.7744  1.2356  -9.1694  0.8667  0.2786  (2.4123)  (2.4100)  (2.9537)  (8.6857)  (2.2006)  (1.0009)  Fear  0.4674  0.4435  0.4154  -1.5889  0.4329  0.3064  (0.3881)  (0.3861)  (0.5047)  (1.6614)  (0.3767)  (0.2903)  Surprise  0.9738  0.9188  1.4252  0.4809  0.6559  0.7545  ∗  (0.7074)  (0.7101)  (0.9251)  (1.3585)  (0.6586)  (0.4547)  Sentiment  0.0638  ∗∗  (0.0262)  Constant  -0.2561  0.6121  ∗  0.6052  ∗  0.5662  ∗  0.6313  ∗  0.5464  0.5370  (0.2398)  (0.3291)  (0.3270)  (0.3330)  (0.3423)  (0.3336)  (0.3314)  Firm FE  X  X  X  X  X  Year, Month, Day of Week FE  X  X  X  X  X  Control Variables  X  X  X  X  X  X  X  σ  y  8.4107  8.0730  8.0696  8.1072  8.1072  8.1072  8.1072  Observations  21470  83385  83385  83385  83385  83385  83385  adj.  R  2  0.0820  0.0892  0.0894  0.0868  0.0867  0.0869  0.0869   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 7 Conclusion

In this paper, I study the impact of firm-specific emotions on quarterly earnings announcements. I demonstrate that investor emotions can help predict the company's quarterly earnings. I find that both within- and inter-firm variation in investor enthusiasm is linked with lower announcement returns. In particular, I find that both messages that convey original information, and those disseminating existing information drive my results. When considering messages that carry information directly related to earnings, firm fundamentals, and/or stock trading and those covering other information, I find that the former has a larger impact on announcement returns.

The link between emotions and market behavior has interesting policy implications. It demonstrates that there is a concrete foundation for the idea that central banks, governments, firms, and the media should consider the effects of announcements and data release on the emotional state of market participants and how this might, in turn, affect market prices. Such impacts would arise alongside the influence of new information on economic fundamentals that might affect asset prices accordingly. While the effects of information on fundamentals can be identified with well-established techniques in finance and economics, studying the emotional component requires new tools. In my view, the methods described herein constitute a step forward in this direction.

## References

- Abadi, Mart´ ın, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, et al. 2016. 'Tensorflow: a system for large-scale machine learning.' OSDI , Volume 16. 265-283.
- Abarbanell, Jeffrey S. 1991. 'Do analysts' earnings forecasts incorporate information in prior stock price changes?' Journal of Accounting and Economics .
- Albanesi, Stefania, and Domonkos F Vamossy. 2019. 'Predicting consumer default: A deep learning approach.' Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
- Andrade, Eduardo B, Terrance Odean, and Shengle Lin. 2016. 'Bubbling with excitement: an experiment.' Review of Finance 20 (2): 447-466.
- Antweiler, Werner, and Murray Z Frank. 2004. 'Is all that talk just noise? The information content of internet stock message boards.' The Journal of finance 59 (3): 1259-1294.
- Athey, Susan, and Guido W Imbens. 2019. 'Machine learning methods that economists should know about.' Annual Review of Economics , vol. 11.

- Azar, Pablo D, and Andrew W Lo. 2016. 'The wisdom of Twitter crowds: Predicting stock market reactions to FOMC meetings via Twitter feeds.' The Journal of Portfolio Management 42 (5): 123-134.
- Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler. 2007. 'Investor sentiment in the stock market.' Journal of economic perspectives 21 (2): 129-152.
- Barber, Brad M, and Terrance Odean. 2013. 'The behavior of individual investors.' In Handbook of the Economics of Finance , Volume 2, 1533-1570. Elsevier.
- Bartov, Eli, Lucile Faurel, and Partha S Mohanram. 2018. 'Can Twitter help predict firm-level earnings and stock returns?' The Accounting Review 93 (3): 25-57.
- Berg, Joyce, Robert Forsythe, Forrest Nelson, and Thomas Rietz. 2008. 'Results from a dozen years of election futures markets research.' Handbook of experimental economics results 1:742-751.
- Blankespoor, Elizabeth, Gregory S Miller, and Hal D White. 2014. 'The role of dissemination in market liquidity: Evidence from firms' use of Twitter.' The Accounting Review 89 (1): 79-112.
- Bollen, Johan, Huina Mao, and Xiaojun Zeng. 2011. 'Twitter mood predicts the stock market.' Journal of computational science 2 (1): 1-8.
- Breaban, Adriana, and Charles N Noussair. 2018. 'Emotional state and market behavior.' Review of Finance 22 (1): 279-309.
- Carhart, Mark M. 1997. 'On persistence in mutual fund performance.' The Journal of finance 52 (1): 57-82.
- Chen, Hailiang, Prabuddha De, Yu Jeffrey Hu, and Byoung-Hyoun Hwang. 2014. 'Wisdom of crowds: The value of stock opinions transmitted through social media.' The Review of Financial Studies 27 (5): 1367-1403.
- Chollet, Fran¸ cois, et al. 2015. 'Keras: Deep learning library for theano and tensorflow.' URL: https://keras. io/k 7, no. 8.
- Chung, Junyoung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. 2014. 'Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling.' arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555 .
- Cookson, J Anthony, and Marina Niessner. 2020. 'Why don't we agree? Evidence from a social network of investors.' The Journal of Finance 75 (1): 173-228.
- Curtis, Asher, Vernon J Richardson, and Roy Schmardebeck. 2014. 'Investor attention and the pricing of earnings news.' Handbook of Sentiment Analysis in Finance, Forthcoming .
- Da, Zhi, Joseph Engelberg, and Pengjie Gao. 2011. 'In search of attention.' The Journal of Finance 66 (5): 1461-1499.
- Das, Sanjiv R, and Mike Y Chen. 2007. 'Yahoo! for Amazon: Sentiment extraction from small talk on the web.' Management science 53 (9): 1375-1388.
- De Long, J Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H Summers, and Robert J Waldmann. 1990. 'Noise trader risk in financial markets.' Journal of political Economy 98 (4): 703-738.

- Drake, Michael S, Darren T Roulstone, and Jacob R Thornock. 2012. 'Investor information demand: Evidence from Google searches around earnings announcements.' Journal of Accounting research 50 (4): 1001-1040.
- Duxbury, Darren, Tommy G¨ arling, Amelie Gamble, and Vian Klass. 2020. 'How emotions influence behavior in financial markets: a conceptual analysis and emotion-based account of buy-sell preferences.' The European Journal of Finance , pp. 1-22.
- Epstein, Larry G, and Martin Schneider. 2008. 'Ambiguity, information quality, and asset pricing.' The Journal of Finance 63 (1): 197-228.
- Felbo, Bjarke, Alan Mislove, Anders Søgaard, Iyad Rahwan, and Sune Lehmann. 2017. 'Using millions of emoji occurrences to learn any-domain representations for detecting sentiment, emotion and sarcasm.' arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00524 .
- Gabrovˇ sek, Peter, Darko Aleksovski, Igor Mozetiˇ c, and Miha Grˇ car. 2017. 'Twitter sentiment around the Earnings Announcement events.' PloS one 12, no. 2.
- Galbraith, John Kenneth. 1994. A short history of financial euphoria . Volume 3856. Penguin Books.
- Gilbert, Eric, and Karrie Karahalios. 2010. 'Widespread worry and the stock market.' Fourth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media .
- Graves, Alex, and J¨ urgen Schmidhuber. 2005. 'Framewise phoneme classification with bidirectional LSTM and other neural network architectures.' Neural networks 18 (5-6): 602-610.
- Hirshleifer, David, and Tyler Shumway. 2003. 'Good day sunshine: Stock returns and the weather.' The Journal of Finance 58 (3): 1009-1032.
- Hochreiter, Sepp, and J¨ urgen Schmidhuber. 1997. 'Long short-term memory.' Neural computation 9 (8): 1735-1780.
- Hong, Lu, and Scott E Page. 2004. 'Groups of diverse problem solvers can outperform groups of high-ability problem solvers.' Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 (46): 16385-16389.
- Hunter, John D. 2007. 'Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment.' Computing in science &amp; engineering 9 (3): 90-95.
- Jacobsen, Ben, and Wessel Marquering. 2008. 'Is it the weather?' Journal of Banking &amp; Finance 32 (4): 526-540.
- Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Woojin Kim. 2010. 'Do analysts herd? An analysis of recommendations and market reactions.' The Review of Financial Studies 23 (2): 901937.
- Jung, Michael J, James P Naughton, Ahmed Tahoun, and Clare Wang. 2018. 'Do firms strategically disseminate? Evidence from corporate use of social media.' The Accounting Review 93 (4): 225-252.
- Kamstra, Mark J, Lisa A Kramer, and Maurice D Levi. 2003. 'Winter blues: A SAD stock market cycle.' American Economic Review 93 (1): 324-343.

- Lawrence, Alastair, James Ryans, Estelle Sun, and Nikolay Laptev. 2016. 'Yahoo Finance search and earnings announcements.' Available at SSRN 2804353 .
- Li, Qian, Bing Zhou, and Qingzhong Liu. 2016. 'Can twitter posts predict stock behavior?: A study of stock market with twitter social emotion.' 2016 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing and Big Data Analysis (ICCCBDA) . IEEE, 359-364.
- Loewenstein, George F, Elke U Weber, Christopher K Hsee, and Ned Welch. 2001. 'Risk as feelings.' Psychological bulletin 127 (2): 267.
- Loughran, Tim, and Bill McDonald. 2011. 'When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis, dictionaries, and 10-Ks.' The Journal of Finance 66 (1): 35-65.
- Lucas Jr, Robert E. 1978. 'Asset prices in an exchange economy.' Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society , pp. 1429-1445.
- Lundberg, Scott M, and Su-In Lee. 2017. 'A Unified Approach to Interpreting Model Predictions.' In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 , edited by I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, 4765-4774. Curran Associates, Inc.
- Mao, Yuexin, Wei Wei, Bing Wang, and Benyuan Liu. 2012. 'Correlating S&amp;P 500 stocks with Twitter data.' Proceedings of the first ACM international workshop on hot topics on interdisciplinary social networks research . 69-72.
- McKinney, Wes, et al. 2010. 'Data structures for statistical computing in python.' Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference , Volume 445. Austin, TX, 51-56.
- Meursault, Vitaliy. 2019. 'The Language of Earnings Announcements.' Technical Report, Working paper.
- Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Jann Spiess. 2017. 'Machine learning: an applied econometric approach.' Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (2): 87-106.
- Pennington, Jeffrey, Richard Socher, and Christopher D Manning. 2014. 'Glove: Global vectors for word representation.' Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP) . 1532-1543.
- Petersen, Mitchell A. 2009. 'Estimating standard errors in finance panel data sets: Comparing approaches.' The Review of Financial Studies 22 (1): 435-480.
- Ratner, Alexander, Stephen H Bach, Henry Ehrenberg, Jason Fries, Sen Wu, and Christopher R´ e. 2020. 'Snorkel: Rapid training data creation with weak supervision.' The VLDB Journal 29 (2): 709-730.
- Schmidhuber, J¨ urgen. 2015. 'Deep learning in neural networks: An overview.' Neural networks 61:85-117.
- Schuster, Mike, and Kuldip K Paliwal. 1997. 'Bidirectional recurrent neural networks.' IEEE transactions on Signal Processing 45 (11): 2673-2681.
- Shiller, Robert J. 2020. ''Gut Feelings' Are Driving the Markets.' The New York Times .
- Shiller, Robert J. 2003. 'From efficient markets theory to behavioral finance.' Journal of economic perspectives 17 (1): 83-104.

- Shu, Hui-Chu. 2010. 'Investor mood and financial markets.' Journal of Economic Behavior &amp; Organization 76 (2): 267-282.
- Surowiecki, James. 2004. 'The wisdom of crowds: Why the many are smarter than the few and how collective wisdom shapes business.' Economies, Societies and Nations , vol. 296.
- Tetlock, Paul C. 2007. 'Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market.' The Journal of finance 62 (3): 1139-1168.
- Walt, St´ efan van der, S Chris Colbert, and Gael Varoquaux. 2011. 'The NumPy array: a structure for efficient numerical computation.' Computing in Science &amp; Engineering 13 (2): 22-30.
- Welch, Ivo. 2000. 'Herding among security analysts.' Journal of Financial economics 58 (3): 369-396.
- Wolfers, Justin. 2015. 'How Emotion Hurts Stock Returns.' The New York Times .

## Appendix

## A A Simple Model of Investor Emotion

The theoretical framework of this paper is motivated by Epstein and Schneider (2008). I include this simple model to illustrate how emotion can affect asset prices. There are three dates, labeled 0, 1, and 2. I focus on news about one particular asset (asset A). There are 1 n shares of this asset outstanding, where each share is a claim to a dividend:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where m denotes the mean dividend, ϵ a isan aggregate shock, and ϵ i is an idiosyncratic shock that affects only asset A.

Assumption 1. Shocks are mutually independent and normally distributed with mean zero.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

I summarize the payoff on all other assets by a dividend:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

There are n -1 n shares of other assets outstanding and each pays ˜ d . The market portfolio is then a claim to 1 n d + n -1 n ˜ d .When n = 1, asset A is the market. Aside from this special case, asset A can be interpreted as a stock in a single company (for n large). In this scenario, ˜ d can be interpreted as the sum of stock payoffs for other companies. For what follows, I assume a symmetric case of n stocks that each promise a dividend of the form Equation (2), with the aggregate shock being identical, while the idiosyncratic shocks being independent across companies. I use this symmetric case for simplicity and tractability, however, the precise nature of ˜ d is irrelevant for most of my results.

Dividends are revealed at date 2. At date 1, the representative agent receives two noisy signals ( s 1 , s 2 ), informing her about the aggregate and the idiosyncratic shock. This captures the idea that the investor is able to access news updates (sector and company specific).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assumption 2. Signals are imprecise; ϵ 1 and ϵ 2 are mutually independent and normally distributed with mean zero.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The investor tries to infer ϵ i + ϵ a from the two signals ( s 1 , s 2 ). The set of one-step-ahead beliefs about s 1 and s 2 at date 0 consists of normals with mean zero and variance σ 2 i + σ 2 1 and σ 2 a + σ 2 2 respectively. The set of posteriors about ϵ i + ϵ a is calculated using standard rules for updating normal random variables. For fixed σ i ( i =1 , 2) , let γ i denote the regression coefficient 13 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For fixed σ i , the coefficient γ i ( σ i ) determines the fraction of prior variance in ϵ a and in ϵ i that is resolved by the signal. Given ( s 1 , s 2 ), the posterior density ϵ a + ϵ i is also normal. In particular

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assumption 3. There is a representative agent who does not discount the future and cares only about consumption at date 2. Her utility function is represented by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

13 It is common to measure the information content of a signal relative to the volatility of the parameter (Epstein and Schneider (2008)).

## A.1 Bayesian Benchmark

The price of asset A equals the expected present value minus a risk premium that depends on risk aversion and covariance with the market. It is straightforward then to calculate the price of asset A at dates 0 and 1:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

At date 0, the expected present value is simply the prior mean dividend m. At date 1, it is the posterior mean dividend m + γ 1 s 1 + γ 2 s 2 , as it now depends on the value of the signals (given that the signal is informative: γ i &gt; 0). The risk premium depends only on time (and is independent of s 1 and s 2 ): it is smaller at date 1, since the signal resolves some uncertainty. At either date, it is composed of two parts, one is driven by the variance of the aggregate shock ( ϵ a ), and the other one equals the variance of the idiosyncratic shock ( ϵ i ) multiplied by the market share of the asset: 1 n . As n becomes large, idiosyncratic risk is diversified away and does not matter for prices.

## A.2 Investor Emotion

In absence of signals, the investor is guided by her emotions at date 0. As it has been shown in the literature, the investor overprices the asset when in a good mood (Breaban and Noussair (2018)).

I use η to represent the investors emotional state at date 0, such that η ∈ ( -1 , 1). For simplicity, I assume that her emotional state only affects the valuation of asset A. In particular, the investor overweights the mean dividend when pricing asset A by 1 + η . 14 . In this environment, the price of asset A in period 0:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As there is information to process at date 1, the investor loses her emotional attachment and relies on the signals. The date 0 price, however exhibits a premium (discount) due to emotion, when the investor is in a good (bad) mood. This premium (discount) is directly related to the extent of emotion. Since the emotion parameter enters the asset price linearly, for η = 0, I obtain the same price as in the Bayesian Benchmark.

14 This can be easily extended. Say η a is the emotion parameter for asset A, while η m is the emotion parameter for all other assets in the market.

## A.3 Comparative Statics

I are interested in the price adjustment dynamics from period 0 to period 1:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, compared with the Bayesian benchmark, which also corresponds to neutral valuation, the price of asset A responds more to the signals when investors draw a negative emotion shock with respect to asset A. This is a testable implication of the model, which I investigate in Section 5.2 empirically. In particular, I examine asset price movements surrounding quarterly earnings announcements (this stands for the idiosyncratic shock).

## B Text Processing

I first remove images, hyperlinks, and tags from the text. I discard tweeted at (e.g., @dvamossy), cashtags (e.g., $FORD), and the retweet indicator (i.e., 'RT') where applicable. I set text to lower case, translate emojis and emoticons (e.g., ':)' substituted with 'happyface'), fix contractions (e.g., 'i've' changed to 'i have'), and correct common misspellings 15 . I replace numberspreceded by a $ sign with 'isdollarvalue', other numbers with 'isnumbervalue', and the % sign with 'ispercentage'. This feature is important for distinguishing between general chat versus stock trading related messages. I then remove any non-word tokens, such as punctuation marks. I include the 60,000 most frequent words in the model dictionary, changing all other tokens to 'NONE'. The messages are then tokenized (i.e., words are changed to numbers) and split into sentences using keras.

15 I provide a description of my misspell correction in the Online Appendix.

## C Measuring Emotions with Deep Learning

My deep learning model operates by sequentially learning a latent representation. These reflect features such asword order, word usage, and local context. Minimization of prediction error 16 drives feature extraction. I use a Bidirectional-GRU model, which can be defined as the composition of several functions (layers):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X j,t is the jth message of length T, Emb is the embedding, BiGRU is the Bidirectional Gated Recurrent Unit, O is a linear layer, D is a two-layered NN with ReLu activation, and S is the final softmax layer, which ensures that the output is between 0 and 1. I next define each component of the model.

## C.1 Message

I define a message as a vector X = [ x 1 . . . x T ], where x k is the index of the kth word in the model dictionary, and T is the maximum document length (30 in my case). For documents shorter than the maximum document length, I fill the extra space with special padding words.

## C.2 Embedding

Embedding (Emb) assigns vectors to individual words. I obtain the starting value for my word embeddings from Pennington, Socher, and Manning (2014), leveraging 2 billion tweets, 27 billion tokens, and a vocabulary of 1.2 million words. These embedding vectors are then updated during estimation via backpropagation. I denote the embedding of the word x i as e(x i ) = e i ∈ R d ( E ) , where d(E) is the embedding size (200 in my case). Thus, the document can be represented as:

16 I use a categorical-cross entropy loss function.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Words frequently used interchangeably are prone to cluster in the embedding space. 17

## C.3 Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)

Introduced by Chung et al. (2014), the Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) is a slight variation on the LSTM (see Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997)). It addresses the high memory requirements imposed by the LSTM by combining the forget and input gates into a single 'update gate', and by merging the cell state with the hidden state. The resulting model requires less computation, and has enjoyed growing popularity. I illustrate the GRU cell in Figure C.1.

Figure C.1: The architecture of the GRU unit

<!-- image -->

The update gate decides which parts of the previous hidden state are updated (or discarded). By selecting valuable parts from the previous hidden state, the reset gate determines which parts are used to compute new content. This is then used along with current input to compute the hidden state update. Notice that the update gate controls both what is kept from the previous hidden state, and what is taken from the hidden state update. The sigmoid function ensures that the output is between zero and one. To illustrate this as a sequence of operations, consider time-step t (t-th word) and input X t ∈ R n × d (n is sample size, d denotes input). The computations (forward-propagation) for the GRU unit can be summarized as:

17 This property allows me to capture word similarities without imposing any additional structure.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ⊙ denotes elementwise multiplication, X t denotes the input, H t ∈ R n × h the output, Z t ∈ R n × h the update gate, R t ∈ R n × h the reset gate, and h the number of hidden states. Here, W xr , W xz ∈ R d × h and W hr , W hz ∈ R h × h are weight matrices, while b r , b z ∈ R 1 × h are bias parameters. Typically σ g is a sigmoid function to transform input values to the interval (0,1), while σ h is tanh.

## C.4 Bidirectional GRU

Bidirectional RNNs were developed by Schuster and Paliwal (1997). The key feature of the bidirectional architecture is that dependencies and training can go forwards and backwards in time. 18 Before I move forward, let me denote my previous operations defined in Equations (15)-(17) as Z t = - → Z t , R t = - → R t , H t = - → H t . The key addition of the bidirectional architecture is that for a given timestep t, I also compute hidden state updates as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

I then concatenate the forward and backward hidden states ← -H t and - → H t to obtain the hidden state H t ∈ R n × 2 h .

18 For instance, if I were to ingest 'oil and gas' with a forward architecture, 'oil' would receive signal from 'gas' during backpropagation but not the reverse. The bidirectional architecture allows for both relationships. For an in-depth discussion of different bidirectional architectures see Graves and Schmidhuber (2005).

## C.5 Linear Layer, Neural Network and Softmax Activation

My next step is to apply another set of weights and bias terms and pass it to two-layered Neural Network:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the output of the GRU is O t ∈ R n × q , the output of the first dense layer is D ∈ R n × q ′ , while the output of the second dense layer is D ′ ∈ R n × q ′′ where q, q', q' denote the number of hidden units for each of the layers, and σ d is the RELU activation function in my case, defined as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This is then passed to another hidden layer, followed by a softmax layer to obtain the final output:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ˆ y denotes the final output with ˆ y ∈ R n × y , and y denotes the number of outputs, 7 in my case for the emotion classification, and 3 for the chat type classification.

## C.6 Training Data Sources

Since performing textual analysis using any word classification scheme is inherently imprecise (see, e.g., Loughran and McDonald (2011)), I train two different models based on different data sources. My first, and preferred model is similar to Li, Zhou, and Liu (2016). It relies on building the training data from dictionaries. In particular, I define dictionaries for each emotional states. My dictionaries include both emojis and emoticons, and consists of 2,250 words. To map emojis and emoticons to emotions I use https: //unicode.org/Public/emoji/13.0/emoji-test.txt . I translate emoticons into cate- gories such as 'happyface', while I retain emojis in their original format, such as 'facewithopenmouth'. I do this to keep the diversity of my emotional labels, which has been shown to improve predictive power (e.g, Felbo et al. (2017)). It is important to note that the Naive Bayes based sentiment methodology assigns a score of 0.5 (i.e., neutral) for each of the emoticons and emojis included in my dictionaries, both in its original format (i.e., :)) and its changed format (i.e., 'happyface'). I then prepare a training data with messages containing such words, and augment this with messages not containing any of these words while having zero sentiment as neutral ones. 19 I then use these dictionaries and Ratner et al. (2020) to generate my training data. The second classification scheme builds a model from pre-compiled emotion datasets based on Twitter messages. I construct this training data from https://github.com/sarnthil/unify-emotion-datasets/tree/master/datasets . I compare the performance of these two models in Appendix D, and discuss further limitations of using the Twitter based model in the Online Appendix.

For my information-based classification, my 'fundamental' data comes from StockTwits data with messages containing earnings or fundamental information, while my 'chat' data comes from my Twitter training data, excluding messages containing such information. This allows me to isolate general chat-like messages from those containing financial information. I rely on these models instead of using a dictionary-based method since it gives me a probabilistic assessment whether a message belongs to a certain class. Additionally, trained word-embeddings learn words often co-occurring with entries from my dictionaries, so that words not included in the dictionary but containing financial information could be picked up by my model.

## C.7 Implementation

I include 30 words for each message and train roughly 47 million messages for my emotion classification 20 . I use a batch-size of 4,096, a learning rate of 0.01 (0.001 for Twitter), an early-stopping parameter of 1 (20 for Twitter), an embedding dropout of 0.25, 256 hidden units for my GRU, and 256-128 hidden units respectively for my dense layers.

19 I further require positive (negative) emotions to have positive (negative) sentiment, classified by https: //textblob.readthedocs.io/en/dev/ . I do not impose this for surprise. This reduced the coverage of my labeling model, but increased the accuracy.

20 Training data messages by class: 19M neutral, 13.9M happy, 5M fear, 4.2M surprise, 2.6M sad, 1.5M disgust, 1.2M anger.

My deep learning models are made up of millions of free parameters. Since the estimation procedure relies on computing gradients via backpropagation, which tends to be time and memory intensive, using conventional computing resources (e.g., desktop) would be impractical (if not infeasible). Acknowledging the impact of GPUs in deep learning (see Schmidhuber (2015)), I train my models on a GPU cluster GPU cluster (1-2 NVIDIA GeForceGTX1080 GPUs proved to be sufficient). I conduct my analysis using Python 3.6.3 (Python Software Foundation), building on the packages numpy (Walt, Colbert, and Varoquaux (2011)), pandas (McKinney et al. (2010)) and matplotlib (Hunter (2007)). I develop my bidirectional gru model with keras (Chollet et al. (2015)) running on top of Google TensorFlow, a powerful library for large-scale machine learning on heterogenous systems (Abadi et al. (2016)).

## D Model Comparison &amp; Output

I contrast my model trained on Twitter with the one trained on StockTwits data. Each methodology presents strengths and weaknesses. Given that the training data for the first model was built using dictionaries, it may miss words that my emotional in nature but were not included in the dictionary. To alleviate this concern, I report the accuracy and coverage of my dictionary based training data preparation on a sample of 5,000 hand-tagged messages from StockTwits in Table D.1.

Table D.1: Generating Training Data: Dictonary Based Labeling Accuracy

| Class  Correct  Incorrect  Empirical  Accuracy  Neutral  1251  36  97.2%  Happy  837  110  88.4%  Sad  163  51  76.2%  Anger  84  12  87.5%  Disgust  99  36  73.3%  Surprise  310  44  87.6%  Fear  330  73  81.9%   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Labeling accuracy evaluated on the hand-tagged 5,000 messages. Note: my labeling model would cover 68.7% of these messages, so it would not classify 1,564 messages (i.e., would not label the message with any of our classes).

This shows that approximately 2/3 of my messages can be tagged with this approach with an accuracy of 89.5%, suggesting that this issue might not be severe. The second model, however, was developed using Twitter messages, and it is unclear whether this model would be directly applicable to messages about stocks and companies (we provide mixed evidence in the Online Appendix). In addition, a large number of words are not accounted for using this technique: while in terms of word frequencies my Twitter words cover 96.2% of my StockTwits words, they only cover 5.02% of the vocabulary. Thus, trained on this data, my model discards potentially important words for classification.

## D.1 Classifier Performance

To directly compare these two models, I test the accuracy of both classifiers on a sample of 5,000 hand-tagged messages from StockTwits. I report the results in Table D.2. This shows that the StockTwits trained model performs significantly better in terms of accuracy (roughly 31% better), but lower in terms of loss. The worse performance in terms of loss is due to the StockTwits based model's tendency to classify non-neutral messages as neutral with almost certainty.

Table D.2: Five Fold Cross Validation with Hand-Tagged Test Sample

| StockTwits  Twitter  In-Sample  Test Sample  In-Sample  Test Sample  Fold  Loss  Accuracy  Loss  Accuracy  Loss  Accuracy  Loss  Accuracy  #1  0.0218  99.13%  1.9602  80.38%  0.8669  69.60%  1.6034  47.96%  #2  0.0216  99.14%  1.9071  79.86%  0.8679  69.97%  1.6562  45.88%  #3  0.0216  99.11%  2.0113  79.82%  0.8569  70.49%  1.5904  47.68%  #4  0.0212  99.16%  2.1130  78.14%  0.8517  70.51%  1.5862  47.74%  #5  0.0216  99.14%  1.9954  80.94%  0.8518  70.31%  1.6575  46.74%   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Test sample refers to the hand-tagged 5,000 messages; these messages are never fed into the model during training. Model that gets selected based on in-sample loss in bold.

I confirm this with first plotting the classification errors for each emotions in the data for each of my models. Panel (a) of Figure D.1 plots it for my StockTwits based model, while Panel (b) does so for the Twitter based model. The diagonal entries represent the precision of the classifier. For instance, the 83.6% in the upper right corner of Panel (a) implies that my StockTwits classifier accurately classified 83.6% of all neutral messages as neutral, while the 12.3% in the second row first column represents that my classifier mistakenly tagged 12.3% happy messages as neutral. As we can see, majority of my mistakes with the StockTwits based model is classifying non-neutral messages as neutral. Since I take neutral as my benchmark group, these types of mistakes likely bias my coefficients towards zero, but retain the true ordinal ranking. Particularly important for my results is the lack of misclassification between positive and negative valence emotions. This is not the case for my Twitter based model. Though the most mistakes are towards neutral, there is a large degree of misclassification from sad, angry, and disgust to both happy, and fear, I mainly use this model for a robustness check, and use my StockTwits model for most of my analyses.

I also plot the distributions of each emotions in the data in Figure D.2. Combining Figure D.2 and Figure D.1: the mistakes the StockTwits based model makes is to classify non-neutral messages as neutral with almost certainty. 21

Figure D.1: Confusion Matrices for Emotion Classification Models.

<!-- image -->

Notes: (a) StockTwits based model, (b) Twitter based model. Results reported are based on performance on the hand-tagged sample for the best performing model on the validation set during five-fold CV.

21 I find few errors in my chat type classification, but it was not evaluated on a hand-tagged sample, and hence the results are not surprising.

Figure D.2: Kernel Density Distributions of Emotional States.

<!-- image -->

Notes: Panel (a) plots the Kernel Density Distribution for the StockTwits model, while Panel (b) displays it for the Twitter model.

## D.2 Examples of Messages &amp; Outputs

I provide examples of my model's predictions in Table D.3.

Table D.3: Examples of Model Outputs

| Text  Emotion  Emotion  (%)  Type  angryfacesymbolshead  angryfacesymbolshead  angryfacesymbol-  shead angryfacesymbolshead  anger  100.0%  chat  i hate google chrome so buggy even with windows isnumbervalue  anger  100.0%  chat  fu shorts f*** right the f*** off  anger  100.0%  finance  d*mn it i do not have funds in yob it how long does it usually take  anger  100.0%  finance  this guy is f*g made accounts to shill his own account lm*ao  disgust  99.7%  chat  those shorter are silent now say something losers  disgust  100.0%  chat  new high the master mind price gouging and manipulator martin  ceo will push up  disgust  68.7%  finance  now we know which a**holes are shorting crooks isnumbervalue  disgust  97.4%  finance  dump it  fear  100.0%  chat  big boys dumping ah  fear  100.0%  chat  these fools bashing instead of loading all they can while still under  dont want to make a lot of lol isnumbervalue  fear  90.4%  chat  er is nov what s the problem isnumbervalue  fear  100.0%  finance  what would you do price may drop as it breaks higher dillinger  band view odds of downtrend  fear  99.4%  finance  a gift  happy  100.0%  chat  love the fear they try to spread it s literally a discord channel for  them they try unbelievably hard i ll give them that isnumbervalue  happy  98.0%  chat  trend reversed in complete bull momentum and will continue to  rally hard going up thumbsup  happy  100.0%  finance  way way undervalued here rocket moneywithwings rocket money-  withwings rocket moneywithwings rocket moneywithwings  happy  100.0%  finance  same patterns  neutral  100.0%  chat  brussels is the center of european union  neutral  100.0%  chat  bank of marin bangor ceo russell colombo sells in isdollarvalue is-  numbervalue  neutral  100.0%  finance  just filed a earnings release and a financial exhibit  neutral  100.0%  finance  ding dong the witch is dead for now  sad  100.0%  chat  tough to watch having doubts will even hold might have to not  watch and check back in a few months brutal isnumbervalue  sad  100.0%  chat  this stock is brutal  sad  100.0%  finance  stop  bleeding  they  are  reducing  staff  and working on getting a  billion dollars tax credit isnumbervalue  sad  100.0%  finance  this makes no sense lmao  surprise  100.0%  chat  this thing might even push holy crap isdollarvalue  surprise  100.0%  chat  i seriously doubt that if you are still holding or god forbid buying  at these levels right before an earnings miss  surprise  100.0%  finance  gifted some shares at the opening bell lol isdollarvalue  surprise  86.3%  finance   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## E Model Explanations

I next uncover associations between the explanatory variables (words) and my model's predictions. I implement SHapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP), a unified framework for interpreting predictions, to explain the output of my GRU model 22 . SHAP leverages a game theoretical concept to give each feature (word) a local importance value for a given prediction. Shapley values are local by design, yet they can be combined into global explanations by averaging the absolute Shapley values word-wise. Then, I can compare words based on their absolute average Shapley values, with higher values implying higher word importance.

To do the SHAP analysis, I a draw a random sample of 100,000 StockTwits messages. Table E.1 reports average absolute SHAP for my StockTwits model, while Figure E.1 plots the distribution of the ten most important words for each emotions. For instance, the first entry in Panel (b) of Figure E.1 is 'insane', and this word is strongly associated with an increased model output for the surprise class. As another example, the ninth entry of Panel (d) is 'problem', which has a dispersed distribution, illustrating that in certain cases the word 'problem' nudges the model's prediction towards fear by relatively insignificantly 23 . A quick inspection of Figure E.1 and Table E.1 confirm that my StockTwits model relates words to emotions correctly. When looking at the SHAP values of the Twitter model, however, we can see some of the roots of my misclassifications. For instance, 'marketing' is a strong predictor for the happy class, while 'natural' is a strong predictor for surprise.

The interpretability results for my 'chat type' model are as expected (see Figure E.3 and Table E.3). For instance, words such as transaction, bankruptcy are associated with a lower (higher) predicted probability for my 'chat' ('fundamental') class.

22 For a detailed description of the approach see Lundberg and Lee (2017).

23 These are typically sentences where 'problem' is surrounded by other words that are associated with fear.

Figure E.1: Selected Distribution of Word Importances for StockTwits Emotion Model.

<!-- image -->

Notes: SHAP values evaluated on a random sample of 100,000 StockTwits messages. (a) happy, (b) surprise, (c) sad, (d) fear, (e) anger, (f) disgust. Not shown here: neutral.

Figure E.2: Distribution of Word Importances for Twitter Emotion Model.

<!-- image -->

Notes: SHAP values evaluated on a random sample of 100,000 StockTwits messages. (a) happy, (b) surprise, (c) sad, (d) fear, (e) anger, (f) disgust. Not shown here: neutral.

Figure E.3: Distribution of Word Importances &amp; Confusion Matrix for Information Content Model.

<!-- image -->

Notes: Confusion Matrix results reported on the test set are based on the best performing model on the validation set. SHAP values plotted for the 'fundamental' class. Given that the ranking is based on absolute average SHAP values, the 'chat' class values are the negative of the 'fundamental' class values.

Table E.1: Shap Values: StockTwits Model

Average absolute SHAP values evaluated on a random sample of 100,000 StockTwits messages. Words reported, followed by their corresponding average absolute SHAP values, are the 50 most important words that appear at least 50 times in the SHAP sample. stuckout = facewithstuckouttonguewinkingeye.

| Neutral  Happy  Sad  Anger  Disgust  Surprise  Fear  large  1.916  large  4.808  ripping  0.680  large  1.615  losers  0.500  insane  0.808  worthless  0.801  new  0.858  new  1.810  fail  0.602  mad  0.600  idiot  0.458  curious  0.710  careful  0.698  events  0.554  calm  1.072  sad  0.588  su**  0.492  pathetic  0.440  crazy  0.706  safety  0.661  calm  0.504  funny  1.048  terrible  0.587  f***  0.468  idiots  0.408  wtf  0.624  trapped  0.646  full  0.489  welcome  1.037  worst  0.567  f**ked  0.452  shorty  0.395  holy  0.595  nervous  0.631  impressive  0.478  right  1.003  pain  0.565  hate  0.416  trash  0.382  why  0.591  downtrend  0.616  excellent  0.466  won  0.982  crap  0.563  b*tch  0.413  lmfao  0.366  seriously  0.586  dumped  0.611  insane  0.453  best  0.977  failed  0.557  welcome  0.412  pig  0.365  ridiculous  0.570  trouble  0.609  welcome  0.445  full  0.971  bad  0.548  stupid  0.384  loser  0.358  unusual  0.552  problem  0.589  winning  0.443  glad  0.915  ouch  0.546  dumb  0.370  junk  0.357  whoa  0.546  halted  0.588  latest  0.437  events  0.913  ugh  0.542  full  0.359  bullshit  0.354  surprised  0.546  falls  0.580  right  0.433  own  0.908  dead  0.526  right  0.355  fake  0.352  wow  0.536  worry  0.577  glad  0.433  kind  0.904  crushed  0.521  su**s  0.353  garbage  0.348  surprise  0.527  bashing  0.576  careful  0.432  congrats  0.897  scalp  0.520  largest  0.341  clown  0.346  jesus  0.525  tanking  0.574  great  0.431  loving  0.890  maxpain  0.492  f***ing  0.332  lie  0.337  nuts  0.508  rs  0.574  amazing  0.431  love  0.883  desperate  0.480  d*mn  0.329  turd  0.334  omg  0.500  dumping  0.573  awesome  0.430  impressive  0.873  silly  0.473  sh**  0.320  fool  0.333  god  0.460  correction  0.571  worst  0.430  fair  0.872  alone  0.471  tv  0.295  bags  0.328  new  0.448  manipulated  0.569  live  0.429  locked  0.871  sadface  0.463  pileofpoo  0.286  screwed  0.327  geez  0.440  worries  0.558  beautiful  0.429  amazing  0.861  rip  0.459  trades  0.260  scam  0.321  thinkingface  0.387  dropping  0.558  terrible  0.429  excellent  0.860  death  0.449  mostly  0.259  bashers  0.317  personshrugging  0.369  falling  0.558  fair  0.426  excited  0.838  facewithrollingeyes  0.441  own  0.257  fools  0.309  flushedface  0.304  panic  0.556  nice  0.425  hopefully  0.835  regret  0.422  a**  0.255  bs  0.297  sick  0.287  pumping  0.554  funny  0.425  storm  0.833  missed  0.417  best  0.237  pumpers  0.295  welcome  0.253  recession  0.550  loving  0.421  huge  0.821  losing  0.409  calm  0.234  bagholders  0.293  best  0.224  covering  0.546  safety  0.418  bullish  0.819  bleeding  0.405  kind  0.232  bag  0.285  lol  0.215  trap  0.545  easy  0.416  winning  0.816  smh  0.373  fair  0.231  fraud  0.282  calm  0.206  manipulation  0.544  golden  0.416  great  0.811  hurt  0.357  hilarious  0.227  pumper  0.271  interesting  0.185  contracts  0.544  kind  0.414  hope  0.802  decent  0.337  TRUE  0.226  lies  0.270  zanyface  0.183  selloff  0.535  failed  0.413  cheers  0.799  personfacepalming  0.320  tired  0.223  lmao  0.256  guess  0.179  dropped  0.528  best  0.412  interested  0.797  tired  0.309  new  0.220  stupid  0.064  full  0.167  crash  0.525  love  0.409  nice  0.795  events  0.300  freaking  0.218  holder  0.053  won  0.163  attack  0.522  good  0.408  moon  0.792  new  0.281  latest  0.215  f***ing  0.045  sure  0.156  bearish  0.514  worthless  0.408  golden  0.791  crude  0.226  live  0.214  peers  0.043  hopefully  0.155  bubble  0.511  nervous  0.407  live  0.789  base  0.210  fine  0.209  welcome  0.039  live  0.154  downside  0.500  nicely  0.404  awesome  0.788  poor  0.185  positive  0.203  special  0.038  tired  0.147  fear  0.500  trapped  0.403  program  0.786  exp  0.184  high  0.202  hate  0.038  wonder  0.146  scared  0.495  pain  0.402  beautiful  0.781  black  0.184  across  0.202  boring  0.037  happened  0.144  greedy  0.495  excited  0.402  lol  0.772  weak  0.175  fly  0.200  firm  0.034  huge  0.142  overbought  0.488  bad  0.402  happy  0.771  late  0.171  quick  0.199  poor  0.033  kind  0.138  pullback  0.483  own  0.400  decent  0.763  tough  0.166  rich  0.197  mad  0.033  storm  0.138  pump  0.481  wins  0.400  rich  0.761  tight  0.165  lol  0.195  pure  0.025  right  0.130  squeeze  0.476  ouch  0.398  finally  0.761  sorry  0.165  dillinger  0.190  su**s  0.025  funny  0.129  risky  0.475  mad  0.398  bargain  0.758  loudlycryingface  0.160  ignore  0.182  a**  0.024  TRUE  0.129  scare  0.473  happy  0.397  good  0.757  common  0.159  good  0.182  sound  0.024  outstanding  0.126  divergence  0.454  fly  0.393  exciting  0.754  wrong  0.158  perfect  0.178  dumb  0.024  wants  0.125  warning  0.449  lol  0.393  rally  0.753  loving  0.157  pro  0.176  stuckout  0.023  fly  0.124  worried  0.430  crazy  0.393  special  0.750  worse  0.156  top  0.171  faith  0.023  weird  0.122  bearface  0.421  sweet  0.391  positive  0.749  active  0.154  funny  0.167  noise  0.022  begin  0.122  dump  0.399  perfect  0.389  easy  0.748  flushedface  0.148  outstanding  0.165  favorite  0.022  good  0.121  bomb  0.382   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table E.2: Shap Values: Twitter Model

| Neutral  Happy  Sad  Anger  Disgust  Surprise  Fear  natural  3.814  natural  4.292  picking  1.169  snap  0.440  natural  0.692  revenue  4.417  picking  1.758  picking  2.464  picking  4.242  jury  1.090  natural  0.262  unusual  0.553  natural  2.307  revenue  1.319  pressure  2.028  mess  2.000  lies  0.779  surprise  0.159  pileofpoo  0.493  st  1.738  natural  1.175  favor  1.800  science  1.869  eth  0.773  shake  0.159  stuck  0.416  expecting  1.703  redheart  1.012  david  1.714  cloud  1.835  revenue  0.758  waste  0.155  scared  0.374  q  1.510  favor  0.800  cloud  1.651  david  1.805  favor  0.752  idiots  0.151  b*tch  0.359  beyond  0.979  eth  0.705  revenue  1.631  mining  1.784  natural  0.726  slap  0.145  mistake  0.320  weird  0.949  seriously  0.677  marketing  1.621  marketing  1.755  su**  0.722  mad  0.140  f***  0.320  signals  0.857  cheers  0.657  mess  1.590  rebound  1.700  hi  0.716  private  0.120  hate  0.298  surprise  0.848  cat  0.649  accumulation  1.500  sounds  1.659  dead  0.690  f***  0.115  signal  0.295  fighting  0.786  mining  0.636  talks  1.479  presentation  1.580  radar  0.680  completely  0.112  su**  0.284  talks  0.770  fighting  0.623  presentation  1.424  talks  1.520  fade  0.655  a**  0.099  storm  0.280  winners  0.740  scared  0.622  sounds  1.410  holiday  1.463  itself  0.620  dude  0.099  net  0.273  swings  0.687  opposite  0.614  scared  1.400  itself  1.440  sounds  0.617  weird  0.099  statement  0.269  scared  0.673  gamble  0.613  b*tch  1.354  boring  1.435  stuck  0.615  accumulate  0.098  limited  0.264  fear  0.647  dead  0.598  itself  1.340  material  1.430  reading  0.614  facewithrollingeyes  0.098  themselves  0.260  panic  0.629  david  0.571  impressive  1.305  betting  1.425  boring  0.572  grab  0.096  fighting  0.253  bids  0.618  sounds  0.546  multi  1.183  impressive  1.424  fighting  0.571  trash  0.094  sh**  0.253  idiots  0.597  prob  0.545  serious  1.152  along  1.331  deep  0.569  smilingheart  0.093  idiots  0.249  owner  0.572  itself  0.536  somebody  1.132  ideas  1.264  both  0.563  mess  0.092  competition  0.248  science  0.565  radar  0.529  awesome  1.113  pressure  1.263  lost  0.533  join  0.091  favor  0.246  omg  0.560  boring  0.518  tried  1.111  ish  1.246  cat  0.532  hype  0.090  omg  0.240  nervous  0.554  st  0.516  pivot  1.110  whale  1.235  cancer  0.511  sh**  0.088  f***ing  0.236  pivot  0.553  expecting  0.506  impact  1.088  impact  1.211  mess  0.509  rocket  0.088  picking  0.235  basically  0.532  signals  0.500  beyond  1.087  awesome  1.209  trump  0.505  ridiculous  0.086  mad  0.231  flag  0.532  missing  0.492  fighting  1.084  okhand  1.163  ga  0.500  mentioned  0.086  bo  0.229  awesome  0.531  beyond  0.491  along  1.083  serious  1.149  scared  0.499  stuck  0.085  worthless  0.226  beautiful  0.527  impressive  0.481  ish  1.069  storm  1.132  rolling*  0.493  mins  0.084  ridiculous  0.226  scare  0.526  multi  0.481  rebound  1.061  somebody  1.122  weak  0.488  dumb  0.083  su**s  0.223  wall  0.503  feeling  0.480  stuck  1.056  pivot  1.092  dillinger  0.487  hate  0.083  pressure  0.221  vs  0.496  material  0.478  truly  1.028  amazing  1.072  sad  0.473  moneywithwings  0.083  d*mn  0.214  yes  0.495  acting  0.470  shake  1.021  multi  1.064  multi  0.473  joke  0.082  accumulation  0.213  multi  0.492  omg  0.466  betting  1.004  lots  1.056  side  0.468  beyond  0.081  boring  0.212  stocktwits  0.490  tried  0.465  president  1.004  google  1.048  loss  0.464  blow  0.078  ranks  0.211  somebody  0.489  q  0.464  omg  0.999  finally  1.038  strike  0.461  stanley  0.077  social  0.210  acquired  0.484  plz  0.463  movement  0.985  smell  1.033  alot  0.457  af  0.077  fair  0.210  lots  0.465  broke  0.461  boring  0.975  beyond  1.029  feeling  0.457  panic  0.076  multi  0.210  monster  0.463  accumulation  0.455  stuff  0.968  classic  1.028  worried  0.457  multi  0.076  mess  0.208  congrats  0.461  mess  0.450  exactly  0.946  stuff  1.028  canada  0.441  crap  0.076  part  0.207  movement  0.449  su**  0.445  lots  0.946  powell  1.006  tried  0.431  favor  0.075  blocked  0.206  portfolio  0.436  deep  0.438  science  0.943  car  0.994  missing  0.430  beating  0.075  grab  0.205  positions  0.429  storm  0.422  gamble  0.942  completely  0.977  intel  0.425  clown  0.074  session  0.197  holiday  0.426  recovery  0.418  dead  0.910  scam  0.975  momentum  0.421  talks  0.074  beyond  0.192  favor  0.424  f***  0.418  stocktwits  0.902  gas  0.973  worst  0.415  momo  0.072  perfect  0.187  performance  0.418  burn  0.411  happyface  0.899  cool  0.947  slow  0.411  bull  0.072  surprised  0.186  tank  0.417  spread  0.408  ideas  0.891  congrats  0.935  smilingsun*  0.411  okhand  0.071  panic  0.183  momentum  0.411  minimum  0.407  amazing  0.888  dog  0.931  losers  0.411  literally  0.071  vs  0.179  become  0.405  biotech  0.404  owner  0.886  exactly  0.928  hand  0.410  boring  0.071  somebody  0.179  pig  0.395  extremely  0.404  radar  0.882  funny  0.928  rally  0.404  d*mn  0.070  intraday  0.176  grinning*  0.390  funds  0.399  signals  0.878  beautiful  0.918  signals  0.401  vs  0.070  ha  0.176  picking  0.388  scam  0.395   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Average absolute SHAP values evaluated on a random sample of 100,000 StockTwits messages. Words reported, followed by their corresponding average absolute SHAP values, are the 50 most important words that appear at least 50 times in the SHAP sample. rolling* = rollingonthefloorlaughing, smilingsun*=smilingfacewithsunglasses,

smilingheart=smilingfacewithhearteyes, grinning*=grinningfacewithsmilingeyes.

Table E.3: Shap Values: Chat Type

## Most Important Words

| transaction  0.366  break  0.340  bears  0.328  shorts  0.325  missed  0.319  performance  0.318  played  0.317  bear  0.313  broke  0.312  board  0.311  downgraded  0.310  climb  0.308  longs  0.308  bulls  0.304  news  0.304  bought  0.300  bull  0.298  reversal  0.297  buying  0.295  halt  0.294  oversold  0.291  move  0.291  pumpers  0.291  stop  0.290  close  0.289  economy  0.287  highs  0.286  charts  0.286  rally  0.285  miss  0.285  profits  0.284  sells  0.284  support  0.284  spike  0.283  breaks  0.283  long  0.282  ceo  0.282  stops  0.282  moving  0.281  bankruptcy  0.281  bullish  0.281  sold  0.280  upgraded  0.279  production  0.278  premarket  0.277  fed  0.277  watchlist  0.277  plays  0.276  vix  0.276  bearish  0.275   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Average absolute SHAP values evaluated on a random sample of 100,000 StockTwits messages. Words reported, followed by their corresponding average absolute SHAP values, are the 50 most important words that appear at least 50 times in the SHAP sample.

## F Computing Excess Returns: Windows

Figure F.1 illustrates the event and estimation windows for the event study calculations.

<!-- image -->

Figure F.1: Excess Return Calculation Windows

Notes: Panel (a) reports estimation windows for my preferred specification, while Panel (b) presents the alternative estimation window for robustness checks.

## G StockTwits Activity &amp; Sample Distributions

Table G.1 presents the descriptive statistics on StockTwits activity for my sample. In particular, it reports the frequency distributions by calendar quarter. We can see a dramatic rise in StockTwits activity over my sample period: starting from 8,961 messages in 2010Q1 to 186,742 messages in 2019Q4. This pattern demonstrates the increased popularity of social media during the decade of 2010. Similarly, my coverage also expands to more firms, from 587 in 2010Q1 to 2,663 in the 2019Q4.

I also compare the sample distributions of messages and firm-quarters by the Fama-French 48-industry groupings with the CRSP universe during my sample period. The results are reported in Table G.2. My sample spans all 48 industries, and my firm-quarter distribution is fairly similar CRSP's. Therefore, I find little evidence of industry clustering in my sample.

Table G.1: Distribution of Twits by Calendar Quarter

| (1)  (2)  Firm-Quarter Observations  Twits  2010Q1  518  8780  2010Q2  717  12717  2010Q3  630  12390  2010Q4  850  14126  2011Q1  1231  20488  2011Q2  1297  22567  2011Q3  1332  23730  2011Q4  1354  27495  2012Q1  1495  35889  2012Q2  1220  47628  2012Q3  1257  50147  2012Q4  1206  58129  2013Q1  1739  85368  2013Q2  1610  58828  2013Q3  1813  52671  2013Q4  1803  85817  2014Q1  2229  105835  2014Q2  2075  64998  2014Q3  2307  88872  2014Q4  2523  81936  2015Q1  2592  104294  2015Q2  2626  111147  2015Q3  2437  116640  2015Q4  2380  129342  2016Q1  2627  113920  2016Q2  2653  125894  2016Q3  2611  137382  2016Q4  2493  167053  2017Q1  2835  198029  2017Q2  2736  197646  2017Q3  2791  202406  2017Q4  2608  203824  2018Q1  2606  222239  2018Q2  2879  270343  2018Q3  2587  207093  2018Q4  2394  216816  2019Q1  2705  208230  2019Q2  2777  210109  2019Q3  2711  179989  2019Q4  2632  186654  Total  81886  4467461   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table G.2: Distribution of Twits Based on Fama-French 48-Industry Classification

| (1)  (2)  (3)  Fama-French industry code (48 industries)  CRSP (%)  Twits (%)  Firm-Quarters (%)  Agriculture  0.26  0.03  0.14  Food Products  1.12  0.46  1.21  Candy &amp; Soda  0.35  0.17  0.34  Beer &amp; Liquor  0.28  0.09  0.27  Tobacco Products  0.13  0.10  0.16  Recreation  0.48  0.13  0.41  Entertainment  0.89  2.14  0.97  Printing and Publishing  0.62  0.10  0.44  Consumer Goods  0.97  0.35  0.98  Apparel  0.70  0.60  0.81  Healthcare  1.28  0.63  1.25  Medical Equipment  2.43  1.08  2.23  Pharmaceutical Products  4.75  10.87  4.89  Chemicals  1.70  0.67  1.95  Rubber and Plastic Products  0.34  0.08  0.36  Textiles  0.22  0.01  0.13  Construction Materials  0.97  0.15  0.91  Construction  1.04  0.25  1.21  Steel Works Etc  0.97  0.77  1.02  Fabricated Products  0.22  0.07  0.16  Machinery  2.23  1.13  2.35  Electrical Equipment  1.23  1.79  1.04  Automobiles and Trucks  1.23  0.61  1.40  Aircraft  0.40  0.48  0.54  Shipbuilding, Railroad Equipment  0.16  0.04  0.17  Defense  0.18  0.14  0.19  Precious Metals  0.36  0.25  0.45  Non-Metallic and Industrial Metal Mining  0.50  0.87  0.63  Coal  0.29  0.20  0.35  Petroleum and Natural Gas  4.18  3.62  5.21  Utilities  3.00  1.04  3.12  Communication  2.73  1.60  2.23  Personal Services  1.07  0.36  0.97  Business Services  10.41  14.22  10.86  Computers  2.16  8.68  2.22  Electronic Equipment  5.02  10.49  5.10  Measuring and Control Equipment  1.42  0.71  1.41  Business Supplies  0.74  0.09  0.65  Shipping Containers  0.18  0.04  0.24  Transportation  3.14  1.37  3.45  Wholesale  2.64  0.95  2.64  Retail  3.82  4.22  4.71  Restaraunts, Hotels, Motels  1.57  1.34  1.81  Banking  8.61  1.86  5.85  Insurance  2.98  0.70  2.89  Real Estate  0.75  0.19  0.46  Trading  7.65  1.98  6.73  Almost Nothing  11.62  22.32  12.53  Observations  11471550  4467461  81886   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

CRSP sample corresponds to 2010-2019 NASDAQ/NYSE subsample.