## Effective Trade Execution 1

## RICCARDO CESARI

Department of Statistics, University of Bologna

## MASSIMILIANO MARZO

Department of Economics, University of Bologna

## PAOLO ZAGAGLIA

Department of Economics, University of Bologna

This version: June 2012

## ABSTRACT

This  paper  examines  the  role  of  algorithmic  trading  in  modern financial markets. Additionally, order types, characteristics,  and special  features  of  algorithmic  trading  are  described  under  the  lens provided by the large development  of high frequency trading technology.  Special  order  types  are  examined  together  with  an intuitive  description  of  the  implied  dynamics  of  the  order  book conditional  to  special  orders  (iceberg  and  hidden).  The  chapter provides an analysis of the transaction costs associated  with trading activity and examines the most common trading strategy employed in the  market.  It  also  examines  optimal  execution  strategy  with  the description of the Efficient Trading Frontier. These concepts represent the  tools  needed  to  understand  the  most  recent  innovations  in financial  markets  and  the  most  recent  advances  in  microstructures research.

KEYWORDS: Order  book;  price  impact;  execution  strategy;  high frequency trading. JEL: G12, G14, G19

1  This paper is forthcoming as Chapter 19 in 'Portfolio Theory and Management', ed. By Gregg Filbeck and Kent Baker, Oxford University Press, December 2012.   We thank Kent Baker and Gregg Filbeck for precious comments.  The usual disclaimer applies.

## 1. I NTRODUCTION

The  traditional  view  about  financial  market  organizations  is  that  market participants  meet  to  exchange  securities  in  their  respective  interests  and  positions. According  to  this  wisdom,  intermediaries  (brokers  or  dealers)  conduct  floor  trades with the goal of finding the various matches between market participants. Technological  advances  represent  a  critical  component  relative  to  the  evolution  of market  organization.  The  strong  development  of  technology  adoption  results  in  an increased  speed  of  financial  transactions  by  gradually  reducing  the  importance  of physical location on the trading floor.

Moreover, the search for liquidity, which is  the tension of the trading industry towards  the  minimization  of  execution  costs  and  trade  impact,  creates  room  for  an increase  in  the  number  of  competing  trading  venues.  The  resulting  international trading  landscape  is  characterized  by  a  substantial  amount  of  automated  trading technologies employed in the trading activity and an increase of market fragmentation with  the  emergence  of  several  trading  venues  and  the  consequent  emergence  of competition for the order flow. The adoption of Algorithmic Trading (AT) and High Frequency Trading (HFT) is the direct consequence of this competition.

This paper explores the role of innovation in trading activity and its impact on the various order characteristics, trading strategies and costs in the recent evolution of market microstructure literature. The rapidly evolving scenario witnessed by the role of  trading  algorithms  results  in  a  very  important  set  of  changes  in  the  market architecture,  regarding  optimal  order  size,  market  timing  strategies,  information disclosure, and competition among trading venues and market participants. Existing microstructure theories are being re-evaluated as a result of the expanding role of AT and HFT.

AT results in implementing a set of trading strategies or 'algorithms' that often involve  computer-based  implementation.  An algorithm is  a  set  of  decision  rules  and strategies used to satisfy a specific goal. HFT is an evolution of AT. HFT represents the implementation of proprietary trading strategies by agents by adopting fast technological computing to realize trading at very high frequencies and extremely low latencies (below 10 microseconds). The main drivers of AT and HFT can be identified according to the following elements: (1) the market access model; (2) the fee structure; and (3) latency reduction and increases in competition and fragmentation of the order flow.

The  market  access  model  has  evolved  in  an  important  way.  In  the  past, designated intermediaries (brokers or market makers) had the role of collecting orders from their customers and allocated them to appropriate market venues. This business model has evolved over time by qualifying the market access in two ways: (1) direct market access (DMA) and (2) sponsored access (SA). With DMA, investors can directly place their orders in the marketplace by using the broker's infrastructure of access to the market. In this case, brokers do not intervene in the order placement mechanisms: their  role  is  only  to  provide  the  infrastructure  to  their  clients  to  gain  access  to  the market, after only a pre-trade risk check.

With SA, an agent (which could be an investment firm, a private wealthy client, or a mutual fund) can have access to the market without being a member of the floor by using the broker's member ID, without necessarily using the latter's infrastructure. If the trading venue provides filtered SA, then the broker can implement pre-trade risk checks.  Conversely, if  the  market  provides  'naked'  access,'  then  the  sponsor  does  a preliminary check to protect his own risk exposure.  The main advantage of SA over DMA is the strong reduction of latency, which makes SA more attractive for AT of HFT operators.

The  recent  evolution  of  policies  implemented  at  the  level  of  each  market exchange  results  in  a  strong  increase  in  fee  competition  among  trading  venues  and attracts the highest possible quantity of the order flow. Market participants reducing liquidity from the market are charged a higher fee, while traders increasing liquidity are  charged  a  lower  fee  or  are  provided  with  a  rebate.  BATS,  Chi-X  and  Turquoise, which  are  some  specific  trading  venues  used  to  raise  the  competition  for  the  order flow,  implemented  this  fee  structure  for  the  first  time,  Given  the  implementation  of such aggressive trading schemes, all European exchanges have lowered their fees to avoid losing order flow. If an order is incorrectly implemented, substantial risk exists that the order is no longer appropriate in terms of price limit or size, because the order may be executed at an improper price or even not executed at all. In this context, the design  of  a  proper  infrastructure  minimizing  the  communication  delay  between market and traders is crucial in allowing execution of data receipt, order submissions, and confirmations at the highest possible speed. Further, reading the full order book in real time and designing the more appropriate trading strategy is one of the key drivers of a successful trading strategy. Latency minimization goals are generally obtained by co-locating servers of market participants directly close to the market's infrastructure.

Regulation  results  in  an  increased  role  of  algorithmic  trader.  In  many  cases, laws  encourage  market  fragmentation  and,  at  the  same  time,  competition  among market venues. In this case, the availability of tools that allow traders to place or cancel orders on multiple venues is essential to the ability to generate profits from arbitrage as a  result  of  the  lowest  possible  trading  fees.    Gomber  et  al.  (2011)  point  out  that regulatory  changes  are  one  of  the  key  drivers  of  the  recent  innovations  in  financial markets.

This  paper  provides  an  overview  of  the  most  recent  advances  in  trading systems and strategies, together with the cost of benefits of their respective implementations.  The  topics  discussed  in  this  chapter  are  presented  in  a  sequential order.  The  next  section presents  the  various  definitions  of  AT, HFT,  qualifying  their importance  in  the  current  evolution  of  trading  technologies.  Next,  the  reader  is introduced in the various order types: to appreciate trading execution techniques, the third section presents the definitions of basic limit and market orders together the most common instructions currently adopted in the trading practice (Fill or Kill, Immediate or Cancel, and so on). Having established the general terminology, a special section is dedicated  to  the  description  of  the  main  algorithms,  classified  according  to  impact driven,  cost-driven  and  opportunistic:  within  this  context  we  will  analyze  the  main characteristics of Volume Weighted Average Price (VWAP), Percent of Volume (POV), Time  Weighted  Average  Price  (TWAP)  algorithms.    The  choice  of  execution  is conditional  to  pre  and  post-trade  analysis  needed  to  estimate  transaction  costs involved in trading activity: this is discussed in a separate section where all the types of transaction costs both explicit and implicit are presented, following and extending the  concept  of  Implementation  Shortfall  by  Perold  (1988).  The  choice  of  a  trading strategy can be presented as an optimization problem: this is discussed in the section entitled 'Optimal Execution Strategies', where it is presented the approach leading to the  trading  path  which  minimizes  transaction  costs,  together  with  the  concept  of Efficient  Trading  Frontier  highlighted  by  Almgren  and  Chriss  (2000).  A  final  step  is about  the  practical  implementation  of  the  concept  discussed.  In  a  final  section  the Execution Tactics divided in Impact-driven, Price Risk driven and Opportunistic are presented  with  a  special  emphasis  to  hidden  and  iceberg  order.  The  final  section concludes. Basically, the first two sections introduce the reader to the main language and definitions. Then the next step is a general descriptions of the algorithms. To be implement efficiently an  algorithm we need to understand the constraints:  these  are basically given by transaction costs. The design of an optimal trading strategy delivers a  set  of  alternatives  classified  according  to  trade  aggressiveness:  this  originates  the Efficient  Trading  Frontier.    The  path  for  our  presentation  starts  from  definitions  to bring the reader to the construction of optimal and implementable trading strategies.

## 2. TRADING ALGORITHMS CLASSIFICATION

The first problem when exploring the subjects of AT is the lack of a consistent set of definitions regarding algorithmic processes. However, Gomber et al. (2011) contends that HFT may be viewed as a subgroup of AT as professional traders observe market parameters  or  other  information  in  real  time  and  properly  design  specific  trading strategies aimed at achieving specific goals without human intervention. These goals generally apply to DMA or SA technologies for order routing.

The  main  characteristics  of  AT  include  the  following:  (1)  automated  order submission; (2)  automated  order  management;  and  (3)  use  of  DMA.  In  contrast,  the main  characteristics  of  HFT  include  the  following:  (1)  the  ability  to  handle  a  large number of orders; (2) rapid order cancellation; (3) proprietary trading; (4 no significant position at the end of day; (5) a very short holding period and low latency requirement; and  (6)  co-location/proximity  services.  According  to  the  Securities  and  Exchange Commission (SEC), HFT refers to 'professional traders acting in a proprietary capacity that  engages  in  strategies  that  generate  a  large  number  of  trades  on  a  daily  basis.' Brogaard (2010) estimates that HFT accounts for more than 50 percent of the overall daily volume on equity markets.

With  the  massive  use  of  computerized  trading  system,  market  making  has experienced further evolution: traders simultaneously quote buy and sell limit orders to profit from bid-ask differences. In some circumstances, this evolution is specifically imposed by market regulation, such as for the Designated Market Maker at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) or the Designated Sponsor via the trading system XETRA at the Frankfurt Stock Exchange. Basically, this feature highlights market making with obligations for registered market makers. Therefore, a close link exists between market making and HFT: designated liquidity provisions are a specific subset of rules of the market making strategies, which can be very efficiently implemented by using HFT. At the same time, non-mandatory market making strategies and not necessarily linked to liquidity  provisions  can  be  implemented  with  HFT.  Market  fragmentation  allows traders to choose the best trading venue in terms of price discovery mechanism and liquidity.

Quantitative  Portfolio  Management  (QPM)  refers  to  the  technical  ability  of portfolio managers to relate stock movements to other market data. This approach has the main goal of monitoring large securities portfolios for a prolonged period of time, as  opposed to HFT where positions tend to be liquidated overnight. Greater human intervention can occur by using QPM. The strategy uses algorithms to generate trading decisions based on statistical calculations and data analysis techniques. QPMs are built in order to make automated analysis and decisions related to portfolio selection. The generation of trading signals is a consequence of previous analysis. This process can be automated as well, but the human role intervenes in the verification of the analysis and the trading strategies to be implemented. In principle, QPM differs from HFT since the latter does not have the goal of portfolio optimization and selection. On the other hand, the increasing role of latency and computer speed makes the distinction between HFT and QPM more evanescent.

An interesting aspect emerges as a consequence of both increased fragmentation and transaction in the role of Smart Order Routing (SOR) systems.  SOR systems allow access simultaneously to several venues or liquidity pools to search for the best order destination to optimize order execution to minimize implicit and explicit trading costs. In practice, SORs scan predefined markets in terms of bid/ask quotes in real time and direct the order in a dynamic way toward the best venue offering more convenient  conditions  at  the  time  of  order  entry.  This  process  is  an  extremely complicated because achieving the best results requires disposing of a routing system able  to  screen  in  real  time  the  entire  order  flow/order  book  composition  of  each trading venue in the market together with the price evolution and to compute the total execution costs of each trades in each different market, by applying the explicit cost dimension  (commissions,  fees  and  taxes).  This  activity  is  mainly  reserved  for  fully automated systems for HFT, which have the ability to reduce search costs and increase search speed across trading venues.

Overall  the  assessment  of  AT  and  HFT  misses  the  fact  that  both  procedures represent one of the most important advances in modern market arena. Given the large complexity of actions traders must implement (risk exposure analysis, gross position netting, matching order size and strategies with regulations and market rules and so on), algorithms can be of great help in mitigating cognitive limits associated with the human mind and behavior in collecting and processing large masses of information in a few seconds. Another benefit of algorithms is their ability to provide liquidity when it is scarce.

Biais, Foucault, and Moinas (2010) maintain that there is a problem of adverse selection  after  the  introduction  of  algorithms.  Asymmetric  information  emerges between slow and fast  traders:  fast  traders  observe  information  before  other  agents. Because fast traders can profit  from such knowledge, slow traders lose. The authors show  that  the  increase  in  algorithm  trading  might  cause  an  increase  of  adverse selection costs when slow traders are evicted from the market. Empirically, Jovanovic and  Menkveld  (2010)  have  verified  this  when  fast  algorithm  trader  enters  Chi-X  (a Dark Pool listed in the Dutch Market). A fast drop in volume is clearly documented, probably due to slow traders pulling away from the market. The risk with AT and HFT is  then  given  by  a  multiplicity  of  equilibria  where  identifying  positive  and  negative effects  is  possible.  At  the  moment,  no  strong  evidence  either  favors  or  opposes algorithms.

## 3. ORDER TYPES AND TRADING STRATEGIES

A  distinction  exits  between  two  types  of  orders  in  the  market:  limit  orders  and market  orders.  With  a limit  order ,  a  trader  specifies  and  orders  to  buy  (or  sell)  a quantity of securities at a pre-specified price. A market order is an instruction to trade a given quantity at the best possible price. The main difference between the two types of orders  involves  the  immediacy  need:  the  market  order  is  a  demand  of  immediacy expressed by a trader because it does not impose a price limit on the transaction. As a result, market orders have a high probability of being executed. Uncertainty surrounding this type of order relates to the execution price. Conversely, a limit order fixes a price limit above or below which the order should not be executed. For a buy limit  order,  the  execution  must  occur  at  or  below  the  limit  price;  while  for  sell  limit order, the execution must take place at or above the price limit. Limit orders are more uncertain than market orders because if the book does not contain a proper match, the order  either  will  expire  or  remain  unexecuted.  If  the  order  is  partially  executed,  a residual quantity can be left on the order book.

Additional  instructions  can  be  attached  to  the  main  order.  Some  of  the  most common features include the following:

-  Fill  or  Kill  (FOK) :  A  fill  or  kill  instruction  ensures  that  either  the  order  gets executed immediately in full or not at all.
-  Immediate  or  Cancel  (IOC) :  An  immediate  or  cancel  instruction  states  that  any portion of the order that cannot be executed immediately against any order on the  book  is  cancelled.  IOC  orders  can  be  associated  with  both  market  orders and limit orders. When a limit price is inserted, the order will execute as the required quantity is available.
-  All or none (AON) : This instruction forces a 100 percent completion requirement on an order. The focus after inserting this instruction in not on immediacy. In fact, there might be some persistence of the order on the book.

According  to  the  time  duration  of  presence  on  the  order  book,  orders  are classified in the following manner:

-  GTD, Good Til Date : The order remains active until the end of the trading session at the pre-specified date. For example: GTW, for Good This Week; GTM, for Good This Month.
-  GTC, Good Til Cancel : The order should stay active until the user specifically cancels it (Good Till Expiration).
-  GAT, Good After Time Date : The order allows control over when it becomes active. This type of order is useful for broker systems

where clients may choose to spread orders over the day. In trading algorithms, this instruction is a start-time parameter initializing the trading process.

Among the different order types, various preferencing and directed instructions may exist. Such instructions allow directing orders toward a specific broker or dealer or  trading  venue.  The  order  can  contain  the  routing  instructions  including  the  price and quantity instructions.

Some specific routing instructions are:

- Order protection rules in the US :  Brokers and venues are responsible for finding the best price. The host venue should either reject or forward the order to the market when achieving a better price is possible.
- Additional instructions : Such instructions as Do not Route or Inter-Market Sweep allow for better control on the order routing.

A specific and interesting order instruction is represented by flash orders. These orders  display  the  source  venue  for  a  short  period  before  being  routed  to  another destination. The idea underlying such orders involves the possibility offered to a trader of achieving the best price. Only AT and HFT can exploit the advantage emerging from flash orders because technological requirements are binding. These types of orders are under scrutiny because of the advantage assigned to specific traders. In some senses, the  asymmetric  information  phenomena  previously  discussed  becomes  part  of  the problem.

Hybrid  order  mechanisms  combine  features  typical  of  limit  orders  together with those of market orders. An example of this combination is given by market with protection  orders,  whose  goal  is  to  offer  the  immediate  execution  of  a  market  order with the protection of a price limit. In this type of order, the limit price is established as being different from the last execution price. This type of order balances the certainty of execution and certainty of price.

Sometimes, specifying the conditions for the execution of a given order may be useful. Under these conditions, conditional order types emerge. Such orders are valid under a given set of conditions, usually determined by the limit assigned to the market price. If the specific conditions (say, with respect to the price limit) are met, then the order is effectively executed.

Stop  orders (sometimes  also  called stop  loss  orders )  become  binding  when  the market price reaches a given threshold. In this case, they are transformed into market orders. In continuous trading, the triggering price is the last traded price. In an open outcry  auction,  the  triggering  price  is  the  closing  price.  Activation  occurs  for  buy orders when the market price hits the stop price or above. For sell orders, activation occurs  when  the  market  price  goes  below  the  threshold.  For  example,  suppose  an investor initiated a long position at a price of 10. It the price increases to 11, a stop sell order  is  placed  at  11  as  a  means  of  protection.  If  the  price  trend  reverts,  the  stop threshold will be triggered. Alternatively, the stop order is never implemented. Such order  types  are  implemented  and  combined  with  the  market  with  protection  order types  in  order  to  increase  the  probability  of  execution  and  to  obtain  strong  price controls.

Next,  this  paper  discusses  hidden  orders  and  iceberg  orders.  These  types  of orders  are  at  the  core  of  the  functioning  of  some  specific  venues,  such  as  the  'dark pools,' where the identity of traders is hidden alternatively or jointly with the full size of the order book. Transparency in financial markets allows traders to correctly track demand  and  supply.  Conversely,  when  some  traders  need  to  exchange  large  size orders,  consequences may be too strong based on the price patterns. For example, a large order might convey wrong information to the whole market and might generate herd behavior, which, in turn, could cause strong oscillations. For these reasons, many trading venues often allow the retention of large orders hidden in the book. Moreover, a  compromise  between  hidden  orders  and  visible  orders  is  represented  by  iceberg orders, where only a fraction of the order is made visible to the market. If the market allows hidden orders, traders can participate without revealing their positions to the market. To further illustrate, consider the example reported in Table 1 that presents the order book for trades of a given stock.

## (Insert Table 1 about here)

Currently, a market order is hidden to purchase 2,000 shares of stock. The book outlined in Table 1 represents the situation before the order is sent to the market. If the order is kept hidden, after the order has been routed to the venue and executed, the book after  the  execution  can  be  represented  to  the  right,  where  the  depiction  of  the effects  on  the  sell  side  of  the  book  with  1000  shares  being  matched  with  the  initial order. Note that the order does not appear on the buy side since it is a hidden order. As a market order, it does not have price priority and can immediately be matched with the best prices offered by the sell side. Secondly, after having executed half of the order (1,000 shares), the remaining part becomes latent, standing on the book. If an IOC is issued  to  sell  additional  1,000  shares  at  51,  the  investor  can  'ping'  the  market  to attempt to cross with the remaining portion of the order. If an order to sell occurs, and the  order  is  executed,  the  implication  is  that  on  the  book  there  was  a  hidden  order ready to be exchanged.

A different pattern can be observed for iceberg orders. In this case, only a small part is visible, with the remaining portion of the order hidden. The visible portion of the order is virtually non evindent from other types of limit orders. When the visible portion of the order is executed, the trading system slices a new order from the hidden part until the whole order is completed. The visible part has time priority, while the hidden portion has only price priority.

## (Insert Table 2 about here)

Consider the example of the iceberg order from Table 2. In the table on the left side, a portion of the sell order S1 has been issued on the book, the whole order is H1, which is not visible. When order S1 at a price of 51 is executed, a new portion of the hidden order is released from the hidden order H1 and is included in the book as order S4.  If  there  were  two  hidden  orders  at  the  same  price,  time  priority  indicates  which order gets executed first.

The current market practice has created a more granular structure of orders. In the  present  context,  this  paper  limits  its  treatment  to  the  most  important.  The  next section discusses the main trading strategies and related algorithm selection.

## 4. ALGORITHM SELECTION

As discussed previously, an algorithm identifies a set of instructions to accomplish a specific trading task. Three types of algorithm are described below:

-  Impact driven algorithms : These algorithms attempt to minimize the overall market impact. They are established in order to reduce the effect that trading activity might have on the market price.
-  Cost-driven algorithms : The underlying goal of a cost-driven algorithm is cost minimization. These algorithms do not take into account market impact, timing risk, and other related factors such as the measures of benchmarking and implementation shortfall.
-  Opportunistic algorithms : These algorithms take advantage of market evolutions

## 4.1 Impact-driven Algorithms

The most common impact algorithms are named time weighted average price (TWAP)  and  volume  weighted  average  price  (VWAP).  The  general  feature  of  such algorithms is that they focus of the behavior of a pre-specified benchmark and track it systematically with limited sensitivity to market conditions.

## TWAP

A example of TWAP is represented by the strategy  to  buy  10,000  shares  of  a  given asset. Two strategies are possible. First, a trader could issue regular-sized orders to buy 500 shares every 15 minutes for five hours. A second strategy can be implemented such that the trader issues an order to buy 1,000 shares every 15 minutes for 2.5 hours. The trade profile is very simple and can be easily forecasted, implying a signalling risk.

After  systematically  observing  the  behavior  exhibited  with  such  trades,  the market  can  easily  forecast  the  next  trade  and  implement  actions  that  may  create adverse price movements. After the trading pattern is discovered, the only unknown to the market is the total size of the order. An alternative to this behavior might consist of inserting  a  tilting  factor,  acceleration  or  deceleration  of  the  order  size,  after  an established threshold of the total order has been fulfilled.

As an example, the trader may insert a tilting factor  that results in the order executing more quickly after 30 percent of the total order has been executed. Another alternative is the insertion of a randomized approach that can be adjusted according to the position the fulfilment of the order has been completed. In general, the tilting factor defines the degree of aggressiveness attached to the algorithm. An aggressive strategy occurs when a larger percentage of the order is executed earlier. In contrast, a passive strategy  occurs  when  the  order  size  is  smoothed  out  over  time.  The  algorithm  is generally completed by the presence of some parameters, such as an on/off switch that highlights how far the order might be from the benchmark. Another choice parameter is the frequency of trades and the degree of randomization of the trade sizes.

The  more  aggressive  the  order  strategy,  the  greater  is  the  price  impact associated with the trade. The primary shortcoming of the TWAP strategy is associated with a passive strategy. An alternative to the passive strategy involves implementing a trading  schedule  with  a  dynamical  adjustment  path  that  evolves  according  to  the general market conditions.

## VWAP

The main property of VWAP is its ability to design trading strategies according to the total market volume. More generally, the definition of the VWAP is given by Equation (1):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Vi is the size of the i th  trade and Pi is the price associated to the i th  trade. VWAP identifies the ratio of total traded value to the total traded quantity. In Equation (1), n represents the number of trades. The main way in which VWAP differs from TWAP is by the n variable: the total number of trades when the strategy is formulated can be unknown. Estimation methods on the basis of historical volume can be used to solve for  the  optimal  number  of  trades.  Kissel  and  Glantz  (2003)  contend  that  the  optimal trading strategy can be found by using Equation (2):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where zj is the percentage of daily volume traded; X is the total volume traded; and Xj is the target quantity. Thus, VWAP can be re-interpreted as shown in Equation (3):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P j is the average price level in each period. According to Equation (3), VWAP is defined as the weighted average value of the prices associated with trades executed to implement a given strategy.

The VWAP trading activity is dependent on the historical pattern of the trading volume, not from actual volume or actual price changes. The performance evaluation of VWAP is given by how closely it tracks the target and predicted market values. If historical and actual market values do not differ substantially, then the performance of the  VWAP  strategy  will  not  suffer.  The  performance  of  the  VWAP  strategy  is  less effective  if  there  are  substantial  differences  between  historical  and  actual  traded volume.

VWAP can be complemented by special tracking parameters that monitor how closely  the  algorithm  tracks  the  target  together  with  trending  or  tilting  instructions. The  objective  of  the  VWAP  strategy  is  to  adjust  the  trade  path  to  closely  target  the execution method.

## Percent of Volume (POV)

POV is an algorithm designed to closely target the market volume. In fact, with TWAP and VWAP, the trading schedule is deterministically determined, independent on the market  volume.  Conversely,  the  trading  schedule  based  on  POV  is  dynamically adjusted.  The  deterministic  choice  involves  the  proportion  of  market  volume,  or participation  rate,  that  is  to  be  targeted    For  example,  by  establishing  a  10  percent participation rate, the POV algorithm implies an order submission strategy equal to 10 percent of the total market volume (or possibly associated with either the buy or sell side of the order book). As a result, the trader no longer has any certainty about the trade completion within a specific time period because trade size is dependent on total market  volume.  Although  POV  is  similar  to  VWAP,  the  difference  is  given  by  the actual  volume  employed  by  POV  as  opposite  to  historical  or  estimated  volume employed by VWAP. In practice, POV reacts to repeated trades i trading target with the observed value.  Clearly, the trade sizes need to be adjusted to take into account the own trading. The adjustment factor is given by 1/ (1-pr) where pr is  the participation rate.

One  of  the  main  problems  associated  with  this  algorithm  is  given  by  the competition  for  liquidity.  If  several  traders  adopt  a  similar  algorithm  for  trading illiquid  assets,  the  direct  consequence  can  be  a  strong  price  pressure  as  liquidity  is reduced  by  absorbing  available  market  volume.  Thus,  using  this  algorithm  is  often accompanied by price limits associated with excessive liquidity tension.

To  avoid  the  risk  of  the  market  being  able  to  predict  the  trade  schedule implemented  with  POV,  order  aggressiveness  and  placement  is  often  adjusted  with tilting deterministic parameters. Further, some safeguards are often inserted in order to prevent excessive fluctuation of market volume. This is usually obtained by inserting the maximum trade size.

A  variant  of  POV  is  offered  by  its  price-adaptive  version.  In  this  case,  the participation  rate  is  adjusted  according  to  how  the  market  price  compares  to  a benchmark, which could be either a market index or an exchanged traded fund- (ETF) based index. Trade aggressiveness is reduced when price tension is high and relaxed if price  tension  is  low.  Another  modification  of  the  POV  strategy  can  be  implemented when another type of price condition is added to the algorithm such that child orders are not going to receive a price higher than the last trade or the current best bid.

Overall,  the  dynamical  features  of  POV  make  this  algorithm  more  attractive and  less forecastable  than  the  simple  VWAP  or  TWAP.  However,  regulatory authorities are now leading market participants to adopt variants of POV that may not endanger the safety of the market as a whole. In this case, including as such variants as an adjustment mechanism towards a market benchmark with mandatory parameters may  be  possible.  Currently,  no  formal  prescriptions  made  by  SEC,  FSA  or  other regulatory agencies exist so more research needed in this field.

## 4.2 Opportunistic Algorithms

Opportunistic algorithms are designed to take advantage of favorable market conditions. Liquidity-driven algorithms designed to search for liquidity across several market  venues  play  a  key  role  in  this  process.  After  the  introduction  of  algorithms, liquidity  has  become  even  more  central  in  judging  the  quality  of  market  status. Traditionally,  liquidity  has  been  associated  with  lower  bid-ask  spreads,  focusing exclusively  on  the  explicit  transaction  costs.  As  this  paper  will  clarify  after  the presentation  of  transaction  costs  analysis,  a  non-liquid  asset  implies  excessive  price volatility after a trade, signalling a trading activity even slightly above what the market may  expect.  The  increasing  degree  of  fragmentation  occurring  in  modern  markets delivers a more careful definition of opportunistic algorithms. In this context, liquiditydriven  opportunistic  algorithms  are  designed  to  search  for  liquidity  over  multiple execution venues. The most important element is given by liquidity aggregation across venues with technology that is able to collect order book data from all possible venues for  the  purpose  of  collecting  everything  into  a  unique  order  book.  The  design  of  a proper  opportunistic  algorithm  should  take  into  account  the  following:  (1)  the  fee structure associated to each trading venue; (2) the latency, which in this case represents the  time  lag  between  orders  sent and  processed  from  each  single  venue;  and (3)  the probability  of  execution  associated  to  each  trading  venue.  Orders  are  aggregated  by using price priority and then by the probability of execution.

Given  that  algorithms  are  designed  to  capture  the  performance  of  the  entire order book, implementing a way to track the behavior of the order book over time is extremely  important.  In  this  context,  historical  data  analysis  and  a  close  monitoring scheme of the order book may help in estimating hidden liquidity. Often, the setup of the opportunistic algorithm includes specific actions such as 'pinging for liquidity' in the book of a given trading venue. This practice consists of inserting a specific type of order like IOC or FOK to test for liquidity inside the order book. If an IOC or FOK gets executed, then hidden liquidity exists on the book.

In  practice,  opportunistic  algorithms  represent  a  form  of  liquidity-seeking strategies that do not react to traded volume. Instead, it is the market depth, reflecting the  volume  at  each  favorable  price  point  that  represents  the  indicator  leading  the strategies  of  the  algorithm.  When  prices  are  favorable,  the  algorithm  is  designed  to trade more aggressively to consume liquidity. When market conditions are unfavorable, participation trade falls to zero. Of course, in this context, liquidity plays a crucial  role.  With  such  types  of  algorithms,  orders  do  not  necessarily  complete.  The algorithm  often  contains  a  set  of  warnings  about  the  liquidity  situation  of  a  given security in each trading venue. Some of the key parameters to be specified at the order initiation  include  visibility  and benchmark  practice.  Visibility  specifies how  much  of the order may actually be displayed at each execution venue. For example, in the case of  low  visibility,  IOC  order  types  are  largely  employed.  An  alternative  to  this  is represented by processing the order through dark pools. The role of benchmark pricing is employed  to  decide  if  the security's price is  favorable  enough  to  measure participation.

## 5. PRE-TRADE AND POST-TRADE ANALYSIS

In trading activity, the role of transactions is crucial and an accurate quantification of them helps traders to properly decide when and where to make transactions. In this context, pre-trade analysis is very important because it helps traders to make informal decisions  about  the  best  order  execution.  Pre-trade  analysis  is  conducted  by  using information coming from data. There are two sources of information employed for this type of analysis. The first source comes from information relative to fundamentals of securities such as price/earnings for stocks and coupons for fixed income. The second source emerges from trade-related sources: prices, liquidity, and cost estimates.

Information  is  gathered  from  trade-related  sources  relative  to  price  ranges, trends,  momentum.  Obtaining  liquidity  information  permits  getting  average  daily volume  (ADV),  volume  profile,  and  indicators  of  trading  stability.  Risk  indicators include volatility, beta, and risk exposure. Cost estimates are defined by measures of market impact and timing risk. The estimate of transaction costs implies  exactly  the importance and the difficulty of executing a given order.

Post-trade analysis delivers results  about broker/trader performance for both investment  and  execution  decisions.  The  key  element  of  the  post-trade  analysis  is obtained  by  breaking  down  costs  into  several  components  including  fees  and commissions.  With  post-trade  analysis,  establishing  the  relative  performance,  net  of costs, is possible for the trading activity implemented by a trader. Within this context, the  choice  of  the  benchmark  becomes  essential  in  performance  computations.  The average  execution  price  of  any  given  trades  has  to  be  compared  with  a  benchmark. Post-trade  benchmarks  are  based  on  closing  prices.  The  main  purpose  of  these benchmarks is to determine the mark-to-market computation and profit and loss. The problem  with  closing  prices  is  their  scarce  representative  power  of  real  market conditions. An algorithm can be designed in order to track closing prices. However, closing prices tend to be more sensitive to the order flow than in other periods during the day. This situation implies that orders can be more exposed to timing risk and to more volatile conditions.

Intra-day  benchmarks  are  generally  given  in  the  following  manner:  (1)  the average of open-high, low-close, (2) TWAP and (3) VWAP. The average of the openhigh represents an average over only four data points and can be easily distorted by extreme values TWAP represents an average of all observed trade price over a given timing  period.  Thus,  all  trades  are  weighted  equally,  which  has  the  drawback  that smaller  trades  occurring  at  extreme  prices  may  markedly  affect  TWAP  calculations. However, TWAP is generally employed when trade volume data are unavailable. In general, VWAP is probably the fairest indication of how market prices have changed over a specific time span. VWAP does not have a strong impact on small trades and can  be  considered  as  a  very  good  representation  of  average  market  conditions.  A higher value of VWAP indicates a higher market impact determined by the last trade. Conversely, VWAP does not deliver good performance when the sample of analysis includes large order or when the volatility of orders is large. At the same time, market conditions that include large price reversals do not represent an ideal context to apply VWAP.

## 5.1 Pre-trade analysis

Pre-trade benchmarks can be distinguished into those that are directly available and those that not publicly observable. Directly available benchmarks are represented by the previous close and opening price. Such benchmarks do not necessarily reflect actual  market  conditions  during  the  trading  day.  Other  useful  prices  include  the decision price and arrival price. The decision  price is  the  price  at  which  the  choice  to invest has been actually made.  The decision price is used in the calculations related to implementation shortfall, which will be discussed in a later section. The arrival price is the price registered at the time when the order was actually traded, which is the time at which the order arrives from the investor. The problem with such information is that the decision/arrival price is not always recorded by the investor.

Kissel and Glantz (2003) propose a Relative Performance Measure (RPM) based on the comparison of what the trade achieved in relation to market condition. Equation (4) presents RPM for volume while Equation (5) gives the RPM for trades.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  advantage  of  RPM  is  that  it  is  already  normalized  in  percentage  terms.  For example, a trade achieving 90 percent of RPM is better than another trade reaching 60 percent.

## 5.2 Post Trade Transaction Costs

The most important measure of performance in post-trade analysis is implementation shortfall (IS), which is the difference between the price that an investor decides to trade and the average execution price that is actually achieved. The decision price is the benchmark. If the decision price is not specified, the mid price is generally accepted as default benchmark.  Perold's (1988) measure of IS consists of comparing the return on a 'paper' (hypothetical) portfolio with the return obtained in the real, actually traded portfolio as shown in Equation (6).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The performance of the theoretical or paper portfolio depends on three factors: (1) the price where the decision to invest was made, Pd ; (2) the final market price PN ; and (3) the size of the intended investment X . More formally, given xj the size of the j th  order, with achieved price pj , the IS can be defined as shown in Equation (7):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assuming that the order is fully executed, the IS measure, as shown in Equation (8), becomes:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If the order is not fully executed, the IS can be rewritten as shown in Equation (9):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∑ indicates the size of the unexecuted position.

According to Kissel and Glantz (2003), transaction costs can be classified in two ways:  (1)  fixed  and  variable  and  (2)  visible  and  transparent.  Typically,  visible  costs cannot  be  managed,  while  non-transparent  components  are  manageable  through  an appropriate execution strategy.

The Perold's IS measure can be expanded by adding investment-related delay costs, as suggested by Wagner and Glass (2001). In this case, the expanded measure of transaction costs is given in Equation (10):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where X indicates the total amount of shares traded at j th  transaction; Pj is the price of the j th  transaction; Pd is the price observed at the time of investment decision; P0 is the price  at  time  when  the  order  is  released  to  the  market; Pn is  the  price  at  the  end  of trading session; and n is the total number of trading periods.

Cost minimization  strategies focus on developing  analytical  methods  to manage trade-related transaction costs. Minimization of delay costs and opportunity costs  is  a  natural  consequence  of  adopting  a  fast  trading  method, with  the  ability  of minimizing trade latency as much as possible. The rapid increase of HFT techniques and infrastructures is motivated by the need to minimize delay and opportunity costs. The  design  of  an  optimal  execution  method  allows  reducing  the  trade-related component of transaction costs.

## 6. OPTIMAL EXECUTION STRATEGIES

Trading  activity  is  a  complex  set  of  strategies,  market  conditions,  and  costs. Trading  too  aggressively  produces  a  higher  market  impact.  Conversely,  trading  too passively implies a higher timing risk. In general, optimal execution strategies attempt to  find  a  balance  between  these  two  extremes.  Synthetically,  the  optimal  execution strategies can be represented by Figure 1.

## (Insert Figure 1 about here)

The market impact is decreasing over time by trading strategies, while timing risk increases over time. The optimal execution strategies mix up the balance between these two cost measures. In general, the optimal solution is determined by the trader's degree of risk aversion. The balance between market impact and timing risk defines the famous optimal trading horizon.

The  design  of  an  optimal  algorithm  has  the  goal  of  minimizing  total  costs related to trading activity. The characteristics of a transparent and efficient algorithm are given by two elements: (1) the choice of a desired benchmark price (close, open, and arrival) and (2) the choice of a desired trading style: aggressive, normal, moderate, including  the  choice  of  market  adaptation  (representing  the  choice  about  how  the algorithm  should  adapt  to  market  conditions).  Algorithms  should  built  in  order  to balance the tradeoff between market impact and timing risk over the trading horizon. According to Kissel and Glantz (2003), market impact is the movement in stock caused by  the  order  or  the  trade.  Permanent  impact  costs  are  the  result  of  an  information leakage. Almgren and Chriss (2000) focus on designing optimal execution strategies. The  difficulty  with  their  approach  is  the  need  to  determine  an  approximate  market impact function at the trade level that also takes into account price movements. Kissel and Malamut (2006) solve this problem by considering a top-down approach, where the  average  market  impact  cost  is  estimated  for  aggregated  trade  imbalance  and allocated to trading periods.

According to Kissel and Malamut (2006), the impact cost is defined according to Equation (11):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where  X  is  the  number  of  shares  contained  in  the  order;  ADV  is  the  average  daily trading volume; σ is the annualized volatility; and P0 is  the current price. The market impact function is given in Equation (12):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where xj indicates the number of shares transacted in period j; vj is the expected volume (net of the order) in period j; and b1 is the percentage of temporary market impact costs. Assuming  the  existence  of  a  constant  trading  rate,  Equation  (13)  emerges  in  the following manner:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

After rearrangement (Kissel and Malamut, 2006), the entire expression can be rewritten for the market impact given in Equation (12) as a function of the trading rate shown in Equation (14):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which, after rearrangement, becomes Equation (15):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Equation (16) provides an alternative formulation for market impact:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where I(Q,σ) is  the  trade  impact  function  whose  arguments  are  market  imbalance  Q and  volatility  σ.  Function is  the  dissipation  function,  where / and ∑ (    ) indicates the cumulative amount of order on the same side of the market (in buy or in sell, according to the sign of vj ).

Given the above information, the problem of optimal trade execution consists in finding the optimal trading rate that minimizes the cost, given the risk. Formally, the problem can be stated in Equation (17):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where is the threshold level of timing risk. Following Kissel and Glantz (2003), the timing  risk  is  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  expected  market  impact  cost  that  is related with volume and intraday volume patterns. By definition, timing risk is given in Equation (18):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In terms of the trading rate α , the timing risk can be reformulated as shown in Equation (19):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The  goal  of  finding  optimal  execution  consists  of  finding  the  trading  rate α which minimizes the expression in Equation (20):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A crucial parameter in Equation (20) is λ, which represents the degree of risk aversion of the trader. In other words, choosing the value of λ can affect the aggressiveness of the  trading  strategy.  A  lower  λ  indicates  a  patient  trader  because  less  weight  is assigned  to  timing  risk  and  more  weight  is  assigned  to  trading  cost.  Conversely,  a higher λ implies a more aggressive trading strategy with higher weights assigned to market impact costs and lower weights assigned to timing risk.

Figure 1 captures a pictorial representation of the optimization procedure. The figure illustrates the evolution of market impact cost and timing risk as a function of trading rates. Clearly, the optimal trading rate is obtained as the minimum point of the curve  outlined  by  Equation  (20),  for  any  given  level  of  risk  aversion  λ.  Given  the optimal  strategy,  which  is  defined  in  terms  of  the  trading  rate  as  a  function  of  the parameters  and  exogenous  variables  of  the  model,  Equation  (20),  conditional  to  the optimal  solution,  delivers  the  efficient  trading  frontier  (ETF)  as  defined  by  Almgren and  Chriss  (2000).  In  Figure  2,  the  ETF  is  shown  for  two  given  levels  of  price benchmarks adopted to study trade performance.

## (Insert Figure 2 about here)

The dotted-line ETF has been constructed adopting the previous close price as a benchmark, while the solid-line ETF is based on the arrival price. In general the ETF computed with previous close price can be above or below ETF conditional to arrival price  for  two  reasons.    First,  the  ETF  includes  permanent  price  impacts,  not  just  the temporary component. Second, the ETF includes price movements between the time of investment decisions and the trade starting time.

By definition, the ETF is the locus of all optimal trading strategies, i.e., the least cost for a given level of timing risk and the lowest timing risk for a specified cost. An efficient strategy is on the ETF. All strategies above the ETF are inefficient, in the sense that finding another strategy with lower timing risk, given the expected cost and/or a lower expected cost, given the timing risk, is always possible. Movements along the curve are governed by the size of parameter λ. That is, if λ is higher (implying a more aggressive trading strategy), the optimal trading point will be located in the top left part of the curve, while for lower λ, the solution will be associated with lower expected cost and higher timing risk.

The notion of the ETF has recently expanded to several other optimal trading models  that  include  the  uncertainty  of  prices.  Almgren  (2012)  develops  an  optimal trading  model  with  an  arithmetical  Brownian  motion  process  for  the  stock  prices. Gatheral  and  Schied  (2011)  expand  their  optimal  trading  model  on  the  basis  of geometric Brownian motion. This area of research is rapidly expanding which is not surprising given the strong impact that this type of research will have in the design of trading strategies and on its global market impact.

## 7. EXECUTION TACTICS

Passive approaches adopt limit orders priced at or behind the market whereas aggressive approaches adopt either market or marketable orders. Neutral tactics tend to be more flexible. They start passively to seek price improvement. If they fail, these neutral tactics should be replaced with more aggressive ones. A more dynamic tactic strategy  considers  market  conditions  and  adapts  strategy  to  it.  Broadly  speaking, execution tactics may be classified on the basis of the goals that drive their usage:

-  Impact-driven tactics seek to further reduce market impact by splitting the order into smaller quantities or by hiding a portion of it.
-  Price/risk  driven approaches  strive  to  dynamically  adjust  based  on  market conditions.
-  Opportunistic tactics seek out advantages when conditions are favorable.

## 7.1 Impact-driven Tactics

## Slicing

Order slicing  is  the  precursor  to  the  early  schedule-driven  algorithms.  Reducing  the size  of  an  order  can  lower  its  market  impact  and  any  associated  signaling  risk. Randomization is a way of further reducing signaling risk. This reduction applies to both  quantities  to  be  split  and  the  time  between  each  child  order.  When  adopted sequentially, order slicing effectively acts as a hiding mechanism. The strategy may be adopted to create synthetic iceberg orders for venues that do not natively support this order type. For native iceberg orders, the hidden portion is still part of the order book so  it  may  still  participate  in  the  trade  crossing  mechanism,  with  only  price  priority. Order slicing, instead, relies  on  execution  confirmations  to  know  when next to send another order slice. These orders are dispatched after a matching process is employed. In this way, a trader may miss some crossing opportunities. For example, consider a requirement to sell 10,000 shares of ABC stock from which the trader has split an initial child order for 1,000 shares at 51 as S1. The main advantage of order slicing is that the trader has much more control of the display size. In this case, the second order can be split  with  a  random  size,  rather  than  simply  splitting  1,000  shares  each  time.  Order slicing  can  be  also  applied  in  parallel,  allowing  simultaneous  trading  across  several execution venues. The example reported in Table 3 represents the effect of an order to buy 2,200 shares on the order book.

## (Insert Table 3 about here)

In Panel B, note the highlighted effect due to MO crosses. In Panel C, note that for a synthetic iceberg order, an immediate cross exists for orders S1 and S2 at 51. The next cross will be with S3 at 52. After the venue sends confirmation for these fills, there will be another split for S6 for 850 shares. In Panel D, the table illustrates the effects from a native iceberg. In this case, the hidden size completes the market order at 51. A new display  size  would  have  been  split  as  order  S6,  400  shares  of  which  complete  the market order, the remaining 600 shares stay on the order book.

## Hiding

Hiding is associated with reducing signaling risk, which is the potential information that trading pattern relays to other market participants. The example reported in Table 4 records large block orders.

## (Insert Table 4 about here)

Algorithmic orders are implicitly hidden because most strategies only release a small portion  of  the  order  for  immediate  trading.  Liquidity  is  another  critical  variable because even a small order may have important price effects in case of illiquid assets. Discretionary  orders  allow  a  trader  to  hide  his  actual  limit  price.  In  Panel  A,  the intention to execute an order S3 with a limit price 52 exists even though the trader was prepared to trade at 51. The trader could increase his discretionary amount to shift his order deeper in the order book. This change would place more orders in front of the trader in terms of execution priority. Iceberg orders allow the trader to display only a portion of the order, with the remaining portion retains price priority. For example in Panel B, 1,000 shares are displayed with the remaining 7,000 shares hidden until S3 is completed, although it will maintain price priority over S4. This example illustrates the importance  of  obtaining  the  right  balance  between  the  visible  and  hidden  parts. Smaller  trades  may  take  too  long  to  complete  with  larger  visible  portions  having greater predictability.

## 7.2 Price Risk Driven Tactics

Price risk driven tactics are based on changes in the spread and short-term price trends. As the gap between the best bid and offer narrows, a trader can afford to pay the spread, and the tactics may indicate issuing more marketable limit orders or market orders. When the spread widens, more passive pricing is used. Market conditions are also important. In a favorable price trend, a passive trading style tends to price orders farther away from market to try to take maximum advantage of price improvements. Conversely, during unfavorable price trends, a passive strategy may price orders closer to  the  market  in  order  to  reduce  potential  losses.  Aggressive  price  strategies  tend  to rely on trends mean reverting so that they behave in the opposite fashion.

Risk-driven tactics  consider  the  asset's  price  volatility  and  how  much  time  is left  to  execute.  The  tactics  may  be  combined  to  create  a  timing  factor,  which  can  be incorporated  into  order  placement  decisions.  For  a  liquid  asset  at  the  start  of  the execution, the timing factor is minor, but increases over time. For less liquid assets, the timing factor is more important. Other execution tactics are defined as catching, which is based on cutting the losses when the price looks to be trending away.

The layering tactic simultaneously maintains a range of standing limit orders. Orders are spread throughout the order book, usually with different limit prices. This approach attempts to take advantage of favorable price movements. With price/time priority,  layering  allows  for  the  preservation  of  time  priority  for  each  order.  This occurs because as the market price moves, a new order can be split, rather than just updating an existing order to match the new level. Time priority is very important for liquid stocks that have a densely populated order book. If time priority is lost, the only way to regain it is with a more aggressive price. In general, layering is useful for highly liquid assets with dense order books, where achieving time priority is difficult. In this way  we  can  track  price  moves  without  significantly  affecting  our  overall  execution probability.

## 7.3 Opportunistic Tactics

These tactics tend to maximize the benefits from favorable market conditions, such as liquidity. Three types of such tactics follow.

-  Seeking :  This  tactic  aims  to  source  additional  liquidity  from  hidden  orders. Seeking tactics may also focus on reducing signaling risk. Monitoring the state of the order book can enable creating models to estimate the probability of how much volume is hidden at the various price levels throughout the order book. Another  important  concern  when  searching  for  liquidity  is  to  keep  orders hidden. The goal is to fill the orders at the best price possible without giving away information about the actual requirements. The choice is between various fill instructions available for limit orders. Only IOC or FOK are suitable because the others all leave residual orders on the order book. IOC allows partial fills whereas FOK is a strict execution.
-  Sniping : This tactic allows the capture of liquidity while minimizing signaling risk. The tactic is a way for liquidity demanding traders to hide their strategy. As  such,  sniping  is  a  variation  of  the  seeking  tactic  for  visible  liquidity.  To reduce  signaling  risk,  traders  use  marketable  limit  orders  with  specific  fill instructions. When liquidity becomes available, an aggressive order is used to cross with it.
-  Routing : This tactic chooses the best destinations to send orders. Many factors have to be analyzed before deciding where to send an order including: (1) the probability  of  hidden  liquidity;  (2)  the  likelihood  of  successful  execution;  () latency;  and  (4)  the  venue  specific  costs  or  fees.  Routing  mechanisms  make these  decisions,  based  on  available  market  data.  Liquidity  aggregation  is  the key  aspect  for  trading  in  a  fragmented  market.  Virtual  order  books  can  be formed by collecting data from all possible execution venues.

## 8. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

This paper presents the key piece of knowledge to follow based on the most recent advances  in  market  evolutions,  mainly  represented  by  HFT  and  AT.  The  order characteristics  and  all  the  variants  of  the  basic  limit  and  market  order  types  are considered for different trading needs. Given that AT and HFT involve using a specific trading  strategy,  the  paper  also  presents  the  main  characteristics  of  the  most  often employed  trading  strategies  such  as  VWAP,  TWAP,  POV  and  others.  Implicit  and explicit transaction costs are also introduced, which are at the core of the choice process of  an  optimal  trading  strategy.    Also  introduced  is  the  optimal  trade  execution  of Kissell and Malamut (2006) together with a full description of the EFT.

The  material  covered  in  this  paper  is  evolving  quickly  and  is  new  to  the microstructure literature. The authors believe that adopting HFT and AT will radically modify the way in which researchers and practitioners approach the field of market microstructure  and  market  architecture.  Many  research  areas  are  now  open  to  these new advances,  which  challenge  traditional  concepts  about  market  quality,  liquidity, and price discovery. HFT has a role in propagating liquidity shortages and generating market  crashes.  While  limited  research  exists  on  this  topic,  the  design  of  optimal execution methods that do not endanger market conditions will be the challenge for the future.

## REFERENCES

Almgren,  Robert.  2012.  'Optimal  Trading  with  Stochastic  Liquidity  and  Volatility.' SIAM  Journal  of  Financial  Mathematics 3:  163-181.  Earlier  version  released  as  NYU Mathematics in Finance Working Paper 2009-2, New York University, New York.

Almgren, Robert, and Neill Chriss. 2000. 'Optimal Execution of Portfolio Transactions.' Journal of Risk 3(2): 5  39.

Biais,  Bruno,  Thierry  Foucault,  and  Sophie  Moinas.  2010.  'Equilibrium  Algorithmic Trading.' Working Paper, Toulouse School of Economics, Toulouse, France.

Brogaard,  Jonathan  A.  2010.  'High  Frequency  Trading  and  Its  Impact  on  Market Quality.'  Working  Paper,  Kellogg  School  of  Management,  Northwestern  University, Evanston, IL.

Gatheral, Jim, and  Alexander  Schied. 2011.  'Optimal  Trade  Execution  under Geometric  Brownian  Motion  in  the  Almgren  and  Chriss  Framework.'  International Journal of Theoretical and Applied Finance 14(3): 353-68.

Gomber,  Peter,  Bjöern  Arndt,  Marco  Lutat,  and  Tim  Uhle.  2011.  'High-Frequency Trading: A European Perspective.' HoF Quarterly 2: 9-10

Jovanovic, Boyan, and Albert J. Menkveld. 2010. 'Middlemen in Limit Order Markets.' Working Paper, New York University, New York.

Kissel, Robert, and Roberto Malamut. 2006. 'Algorithmic Decision-Making Framework.' Institutional Investor: Guide to Algorithmic Trading . Spring: 81  91.

Kissel, Robert, Roberto Malamut, and Morton Glantz. 2003. Optimal Trading Strategies: Qualitative Approaches  for  Managing  Market  Impact  and  Trading  Risk .  New  York: AMACOM.

Perold, André F. 1988. 'The Implementation Shortfall: Paper versus Reality.' Journal of Portfolio Management 14(3): 4  9.

- Wagner, Wayne H., and Steven Glass. 2001. 'What Every Plan Sponsor Needs to Know about Transaction Costs.' Trading 2001(1): 20-35

## Table 1 Hidden Order Example

This table contains the behavior of the order book  when  hidden  orders are implemented.

## Table 2 Hidden Order Example

This table highlights the evolution of the order book after the introduction of an iceberg order.

## Figure 1

This figure shows the market impact cost and timing risk as a function of the trading rate.  The  optimal  trading  rate  is  obtained  from  the  minimum  point  on  the  curve .

<!-- image -->

Trade Rate This figure shows the ETF computed as conditional to two prices: previous close and arrival price.

Figure 2

## Expected Cost

<!-- image -->

Table 3 Slicing Execution Tactics Example

Panel A. Before: Incoming Market Order to Buy 2200

Panel B. Market Order Crosses

Panel C.  After for a Synthetic Iceberg

Panel D. For a Native

Table 4 Hiding Execution Tactics Example