## The Need and Status of Sea Turtle Conservation and Survey of Associated Computer Vision Advances

Aditya Jyoti Paul  1,2

<!-- image -->

1. Cognitive Applications Research Lab, India.

2. Department of Computer Science and Engineering, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur, Tamil Nadu -603203, India. aditya\_jyoti@carlresearch.org

Abstract -For  over  hundreds  of  millions  of  years,  sea turtles and their ancestors have swum in the vast expanses of the ocean. They have undergone a number of evolutionary changes, leading to speciation and sub-speciation. However, in the past few decades, some of the most notable forces driving the genetic variance and population decline have been global warming and anthropogenic impact ranging from large-scale poaching, collecting turtle eggs for food, besides dumping trash including plastic  waste  into  the  ocean.  This  leads  to  severe  detrimental effects in the sea turtle population, driving them to extinction. This research focusses on the forces causing the decline in sea turtle  population,  the  necessity  for  the  global  conservation efforts along with its successes and failures, followed by an indepth  analysis of the  modern  advances  in  detection  and recognition  of  sea  turtles,  involving  Machine  Learning  and Computer Vision systems, aiding the conservation efforts.

Keywords -Face Detection, Identification, Object Detection, Sea Turtles, Wildlife Conservation.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Sea turtles are some of the most majestic creatures of the ocean.  They  have  become  an  emblem  of  marine  wildlife conservation across the globe. Not only are they one of the most widely recognized and iconic sea creatures but also are one of the oldest, the first creatures of the modern sea turtle species have been around for over a 100 million years.

Rhodin et al. [1] , in the latest taxonomic revision in 2017 defined  tortoises  as  a  terrestrial  sub-group  within  turtles (Chelonians). This implies that all tortoises are turtles but not vice versa [2]. In fact, 'turtles' is an umbrella categorization for about 360 currently recognized extant and extinct species of the order Testudines which includes turtles, tortoises and terrapins.  Non-tortoise  turtles  are  predominantly  aquatic creatures  including  terrestrial,  freshwater  as  well  as  sea turtles [3]. Decrease in population of turtles at the current rate are  much  more  pronounced  than  those  observed  at  the Cretaceous-Paleogene border and suggest an upcoming sixth mass  extinction within the next few  centuries, in this Anthropocene [4].

The remaining article primarily focuses on sea turtles, the existence and population density of which play an important role  in  the  marine  biodiversity,  and  are  also  considered  a barometer for environmental health. This ancient creature has its unique  set of characteristics and  vulnerabilities, an analysis of its population offers a lens into a lot of important environmental  factors  like  ocean  health  and  biodiversity, along with the anthropogenic impact on our planet [5].

Currently there are seven species of sea-turtles, which can be  grouped  into  six  genera.  The  common  names  for  the species are Loggerhead, Green Turtle, Leatherback, Hawksbill, Kemp's Ridley and Olive Ridley, and this article will analyze their conservation status and Machine Learning (ML) and Computer Vision (CV) advances aiding the same.

The rest of the article is structured as follows. Section II discusses some of the characteristics of the turtle species under study,  Sec.  III  presents  their  current  conservation  statuses, Sec. IV examines the threats and impact of various natural and anthropogenic forces, Sec. V analyzes the advances in ML and CV  aiding  conservation  efforts.  Sec.  VI  discusses  some ongoing research, followed by some future avenues in Section VII. Sec. VIII serves as the conclusion for this research.

## II. SPECIES OF SEA TURTLES

## A. Loggerhead (Caretta caretta)

Loggerhead sea turtles possess comparatively larger heads and  that  gives  them  their  name  as  shown  in  Fig.  1.  Their powerful jaws enable them to feed on prey with hard shells like  conchs  and  whelks  [6,7].  The  top  shell  of  an  adult  is slightly heart-shaped and reddish-brown in color, with at least five pleural scutes and the plastron is yellow [8]. They are the most common sea-turtles in the US coast. Analyzing the data from 437 loggerheads suggested they weigh between 5.2 to 184.6 kg having a mean ± SD of  46.5 ± 21.6 kg, and a straight carapace length (SCL) of upto 104.5 cm [9].

Fig. 1. Loggerhead turtles.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## B. Green Turtle (Chelonia mydas)

Green  turtles  are  endangered  but  yet  found  in  massive populations in the eastern coasts of Florida. Their carapace is usually heart-shaped and of varying color. They have a small head and single-clawed flippers. They grow to about four feet [10]  and  adults  weigh  about  200  kilograms  [11].  Some population studies in the northern Great Barrier Reef [12] and also in the northern Persian Gulf and Oman Sea [13], Iran have been discussed. Fig. 2 shows some green turtles in the wild.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2. Green Turtles.

<!-- image -->

## C. Leatherback (Dermochelys coriacea)

The leatherback is the largest of all sea turtle species. It also  dives  to  the  deepest  depths  of  the  ocean  (over  1000 meters) and is the most migratory species of all sea turtles. The carapace  is  composed  of  an  agglomeration  of  osteoderms (small bony plates), covered by firm, elastic and rubbery skin with  seven  longitudinal  keels  or  ridges  [14],  instead  of  the usual keratinous shell [15], as shown in Fig. 3. The skin is mostly  black  with  some  light  spotting.  The  adults  notably feature  a  pink  spot  on  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  head.  A toothlike cusp is located on both sides of the gray upper-jaw with an anteriorly hooked lower jaw [16]. Numerous studies [17-20]  in  the  past  two  decades  however  indicate  that  the population  is  rapidly  declining,  primarily  due  to  fisheries, harvest of eggs and coastal development.

Fig. 3. Leatherback Turtles.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## D. Hawksbill (Eretmochelys imbricata)

Hawksbill  turtles  are  so  named  for  their  pointed  and narrow  beak  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  They  primarily  consume sponges  but  were  also  reported  to  feed  on  jellyfish,  other invertebrates and marine flora [21,22]. Adult hawksbills may reach  upto  three  feet  in  carapace  length  and  about  140 kilograms in weight, though they typically measure upto 2.5 feet and weigh less than 80 kilograms [23]. They are seldom found in water deeper than 65 feet. Their carapace features a pattern of overlapping scales, giving a distinct serrated look [24]. These patterned and colorful shells, commonly known as 'tortoiseshell', make  them  very  attractive  for  poachers  [2527], which along with other factors like by-catch and loss of their  coral  reef  habitat,  justified  its  critically  endangered IUCN status in 1996 [28] (further explained in Section III). They  play  an  important  role  in  the  marine  ecosystem, supporting a variety of epibionts [29] and have now spread to sea pastures as a peripheral habitat [30].

Fig. 4. Hawksbill Turtles.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## E. Kemp's ridley (Lepidochelys kempii)

It  is  one  of  the  smallest  of  sea  turtles  and  adults  weigh about 45 kilograms and reach about 2 feet in length, their oval carapace is measures about the same in length and width, and is usually olive-green in color. The species, shown in Fig. 5, features a triangular-shaped head with two pairs of prefrontal scales and a somewhat hooked beak with large surfaces for crushing  prey.  This  supports  its  shallow  benthic  diet  [31] consisting primarily of crabs [32] . The Kemp's Ridley is the most endangered of all sea-turtle species [33].

Fig. 5. Kemp's Ridley sea turtles .

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## F. Olive ridley (Lepidochelys olivacea)

This is the smallest and most abundant [34] of all sea turtle species across the globe, an adult and a hatchling shown in Fig.  6.  They  are  primarily  found  in  the  warm  waters  and despite their large numbers, their population decline has got them  a  vulnerable  status  in  the  IUCN  Red  List.  They  are carnivores [35] with their diet primarily composed of fish and crustaceans. Their curved carapace length is usually 58-77 cm and  weigh  about  35  kilogram  on  average,  very  seldom crossing the 45 kilogram mark [36]. When they aggregate in arribadas for mating [37], they were and are often susceptible to large-scale poaching for meat, eggs and skin [38].

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6. Olive Ridley sea turtles.

<!-- image -->

## G. Flatback (Natator depressus)

The  flatback  turtles  are  endemic  to  the  shallow  turbid waters in the Australian continental shelf [39] and get their name from having a flattened carapace curvature than other sea  turtles  [40],  as  show  in  Fig.  7.  The  carapace  is  usually olive-green  to  grey  and  the  plastron  is  cream  colored.  The IUCN  Red  List  marks this species as Data Deficient, indicating  insufficient  information  to  indicate  its  current conservation status. They have the smallest geographic range of all sea turtle species and weigh about 70 kilograms.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6. Flatback sea turtles.

<!-- image -->

## III. CURRENT CONSERVATION STATUS

The  status  of  the  sea  turtle  population,  despite  current conservation efforts can be observed to be mostly Endangered in Table 1. This serves as a barometer to identify focus areas and species. For this analysis, the reports from the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) [41] in its Red List of Threatened Species, and from the Environmental Conservation Online System  (ECOS) in accordance with the Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973 in the United States (elaborated in [42]) are considered.

Table 1. Lastest conservation status for all the Sea Turtles.

| Species  IUCN Status  ESA Status  Loggerhead  VU  [43]  E+T  [44-46]  Green Turtle  EN  [47]  E +T  [48,49]  Leatherback  VU  [50]  E  [51,52]  Hawksbill  CR  [53]  E  [54,55]  Kemp's Ridley  CR  [56]  E  [57,58]  Olive Ridley  VU  [59]  E+T  [60,61]  Flatback  DD  [62]  -   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

For reference, the IUCN divides species into 9 categories: Not Evaluated, Data Deficient, Least Concern, Near Threatened, Vulnerable, Endangered, Critically Endangered, Extinct in the Wild and Extinct. The ESA divides species into 5 categories: Endangered (E), Threatened (T), Candidate (C), Endangered or  Threatened  due  to  similarity  of  Appearance (E(S/A)  or  T(S/A)),  and  Experimental  Essential  or  NonEssential (XE or XN). More information about these categories  is  outside  the  scope  of  this  survey  but  can  be gleaned from [41,42].

In  Table  1,  some  species  have  multiple  ESA  protection statuses,  indicating  the  variation  in  status  across  distinct population segments (DPS) of the species around the globe. Leatherbacks, Hawksbills and Kemp's Ridleys are endangered across their range. Flatbacks have not yet been surveyed  extensively  under  the  ESA  standards  and  the remaining species of sea turtles are all endangered in some DPSs and threatened in the rest. The details about individual DPSs,  conservation  efforts  and  results  are  discussed  in  the status reports and 5 yearly reviews under ESA in Table 1.

## IV. FACTORS IMPACTING SEA TURTLES

Sea Turtles face a huge number of threats, which include but are not limited to illegal poaching of sea turtles for eggs, meat  and  more,  shell  trade,  commercial  fishing,  especially longline trawl and gillnet fisheries, ingestion and entanglement  in  marine  debris,  artificial  lighting,  coastal armoring,  beach  erosion,  and  various  beach  activities  like driving, putting up furniture, as well as predation by invasive species, marine pollution, oil spills and global warming. This section  will  examine  these  threats  and  their  impact  on  sea turtle population in detail.

Poaching, though illegal, is still very much a threat to sea turtles,  with  high  mortality  of  loggerheads  having  been reported in the coastal waters of Baja California Sur (BCS) [63]  due  to  bycatch,  human  consumption  and  stranding.  In another analysis [26] of 1945 carcasses in Bahia Magdalena, on the Pacific coast of BCS, human consumption constituted

95-100%  of  the  deaths  in  towns,  whereas  on  beaches,  76100%  were of  unknown causes, though circumstantial evidence suggested them being incidental bycatch. Incidental capture of sea turtles continue across the world, with a lot of reports and analysis from around Brazil [64,65], Canada [66], Peru [67], Chile (south-eastern Pacific) [68], tropical northeast Atlantic [69] and India [70].  The  Convention  on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) banned all international trade in marine turtles, and has massively helped global conservation efforts.

Plastic  is  known to cause massive menace to sea turtles and the entire marine ecosystem; however, researchers are yet making advances into understanding the various pathways of this  damage.  Previously  it  was  reported  that  sea  turtles consumed plastic bags due to their visual similarity to jellyfish [71-74], now it has also been suggested that in addition to the aforesaid interactions, odors from marine plastics also elicit foraging  behavior  in  [75],  which  means  that  turtles  would come  far  away  to  these  'olfactory  traps'  and  their  normal foraging strategies could be detrimental or even lethal.

The plastic threat however is more  widespread and also exists on sea beaches and includes fishing nylon lines, rope fragments and other anthropogenic products, rope fragments etc. In 2011, postmortem analysis of 23 specimens of 5 species in Brazil indicated 39% of them had consumed soft and hard plastic, polyethylene terephthalate (PET) bottle caps, human hair,  metal  fragments,  latex  condoms  and  tampons  [76]. Consumption and entanglement in plastic has been reported to cause  reduced  feeding,  movement,  reproduction,  injuries, ulcers and lacerations and ultimately death [77,78].

Artificial light is detrimental for sea turtles and hatchlings in  a  variety  of  ways.  A  lot  of  literature  including  [79,80] indicate that anthropogenic light pollution can cause sea turtle hatchlings to lose their sense of orientation on their journey towards the sea. [81] provided the first experimental evidence proving turtles spend more  time near-shore even after reaching water with beach lighting influences, with 88% of the trajectories oriented towards the light source. Their work took into account the current speeds and the observations held true even  when  current  direction  was  offshore.  This  behavior subjects the turtles to greater threats of predation. [82] studied green turtles, leatherbacks and loggerheads and found significant  negative  correlation  between  light  pollution  and nest density  for all the species  under  study, they also highlighted  that  this  anthropogenic  environmental  pressure was  most  pronounced  amongst  green  turtles,  followed  by leatherbacks and loggerheads in that order.

Oil spills are not the most significant threat to sea turtles and are comparatively rare occurrences but have a catastrophic impact on the population when they happen as indicated in [83-85], not only affecting the sea turtles directly, but also leading to massive habitat degradation. The Deepwater  Horizon  Oil  Spill  which  spewed  unprecedented amounts  of  oil  and  dispersants  into  hard  to  study  pelagic environments [86] was associated with the prevalence of 1.5 times more total and latestage deformities in Kemp's Ridley embryos,  with  the  most  common  being  craniofacial  and carapace deformities. In two areas under study in Texas, the number of documented nests also  decreased  after  the  spill, after an exponential rise starting from 1995 [87].

Global  warming  plays  a  very  important  role  in  the  lost term  sustainability  of  sea  turtle  populations  as  it  has  been extensively experimented [88] and well-documented [89,90] that  offspring  are  temperature-biased,  with  predominantly female offspring in warm climates and male offspring in cool climates. Warm temperatures are also associated with higher embryo  mortality  [91].  With  sea  turtle  ratios  continuing  to slide  towards  the  female  sex  with  global  warming,  [92] explores better managements techniques with strategic cooling of the eggs, helping long term species preservation.

Beach armoring [93-96] and nourishment have also been shown to be detrimental to nesting sea turtles and hatchlings. Beach nourishment can affect nesting success [97] by causing beach compaction, changing the nest-chamber geometry and concealment etc, and also the escarpments make it harder for females to reach nesting areas. Other beach activities [98] like beach driving and furniture can cause sand compaction, tire ruts can cause ridges hard to surmount for hatchlings while trying  to  reach  the  sea.  Vehicles,  furniture  and  mechanical cleaning of beaches can also crush existing eggs. Obstructions laid on the beach can make it harder for hatchlings to reach the sea and also increase predation rates. Additionally, litter and garbage draw non-native predators like raccoons, mongoose and dogs that eat eggs and hatchlings.

This section has covered the various factors that impact sea turtle populations across the globe, further discussion into the various anthropogenic pressures can be found in [99]. The following section will analyze how ML and Computer Vision play  an  important  role  in  bolstering  sea  turtle  conservation efforts through real time detection, identification and more.

## V. MACHINE INTELLIGENCE ADVANCES IN DETECTION AND IDENTIFICATION OF SEA TURTLES

Convolutional  Neural  Networks  (CNNs)  have  gained immense  popularity  in  computer  vision  research,  including but not limited to recognition and identification tasks. Liu et al. [100] demonstrated a turtle recognition and identification system based on CNNs  and Transfer Learning. After comparing various approaches in that domain, Indecption-V3 with Transfer  Learning was  reported to have  the best performance with a validation accuracy of 96.83%.

Drone  imagery  is  also  useful  in  conducting  safe,  costeffective and robust abundance assessments as demonstrated in this manual pilot study [101]. CNNs were also reported to have  been  efficient  in  identifying  turtles  in  drone  imagery from  Unoccupied  Aircraft  Systems  (UAS)  in  [102]  and exceeded  human  accuracy  by  a  difference  of  8.6%  on  the database introduced in [101].

Faster R-CNNs were used in detecting sea turtles in [103], using  images  from  either  static  cameras,  moving  robots  or airborne  drones  and  processing  them  in  the  cloud,  the processing  had  a  speed  of  3  frames  per  second.  [104] presented two algorithms for classification of two sea turtle species of the Mediterranean region, namely loggerhead and green  turtles.  The  first  method  involved  a  Bag-of-Words model with a Linear SVM achieving 69% accuracy, whereas the CNN classifier achieved 70.14% accuracy, after 20 epochs using  a  5x5  filter.  Deng  et  al.  [105]  proposed  an  energy efficient system to detect sea turtles in image and video feeds, targeted at fishing boats, with an aim to reduce bycatch.

Interestingly,  Computer  Vision  is  not  limited  to  just camera images and [106] presented an autonomous system for sea turtle detection using a multibeam sonar and CNNs, which is suitable for Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROV)  or Autonomous Underwater vehicles (AUV). The paper reported an average precision of 75%. Horimoto et al. [107] presented a way to track sea turtles under water and chase them with an AUV, using a CNN and multibeam sonar approach as well.

Photo-identification  (PID)  of  the  individuals  within  a species is an active research area. In 1973, Ekambaram and Kasturi  [108]  developed  a  PID  system  that  leveraged  SIFT feature detection and Cumulative Match  Characteristics (CMC)  curve,  capturing  the  identification  probability  of various ranks. The algorithm was tested with a gallery of 779 images and a probe of 114 images. They reported a matching image appearing in the top 10% of the gallery for 70% of the probe images and coverage increasing to 80% if top 20% of the gallery is considered.

Reisser et al. [109] were the first to use facial scute shapes and arrangement patterns to identify sea-turtles and report the viability  of  the  technique  for  a  period  of  a  minimum  1046 days. Schofield et al. [110] demonstrated the effectiveness of using natural markings occurring on the post-ocular regions of sea turtle faces and achieved 68-100% mean accuracy in all trials  on  a  Loggerhead  sea  turtle  population  exceeding  400 individuals. Further they noted its suitability for male turtles who  rarely  come  ashore,  rendering  conventional  slipper tagging unsuitable. Their research facilitated better assessment of adult sex ratios through broader identification.

Jean  et  al.  [111]  proposed  another  photo-identification method  for  green  and  hawksbill  turtles  based  on  the  facial profile and shape of the scutes. The primary shortcoming was maintaining  the  region  of  identified  scales,  even  minor variations to which would massively impact the identification rate. In 2014, Carter et al. [112] developed a PID system using artificial  neural  networks  called  MYDAS,  for  green  turtles (Chelonia mydas) and reported an accuracy greater than 95%, which was deployed on Lady Elliot island in the southern part of the great barrier reef aiding conservation efforts. Carpenter et  al.  [113]  validated facial  scutes based photoidentification techniques by reporting the stability of the facial scale patterns for periods upto 11 years, despite minor changes in pigmentation.

In  recent  times,  a  lot  more  work  has  been  done  in photoidentification  using  facial  scutes  like  [114]  for  green turtles, [115] for juvenile hawksbills, and assessments using the I3S software [116] (Interactive Individual Identification System  software)  for free  swimming  green  turtles and hawksbills  in  [117]  and  nesting  hawksbills  in  [118].  Photo identification of a dead green turtle was also reported in [119].

Rao et al. [120] proposed a PID system using map graphs of the scales on sea turtl es' faces. In 2021, Dunbar et al. [121] demonstrated  another  PID  system  called  HotSpotter,  for  a database of 2136 images of Hawksbill turtles and a set of 158 query  images,  it  had  a  top1  accuracy  of  80%  and  top-6 accuracy  of  91%  despite  varying  underwater  conditions, angles and image quality. HotSpotter was integrated into the Wildbook [122] based Internet of Turtles [123,124].

Gatto et al. [125] proposed a novel system of identifying sea turtles using the unique patterns on their front flippers with many added advantages, like the flippers having more scutes, not requiring to disturb the nesting females with bright light flashes and the ability to identify hatchlings both over a short and long term, which was not possible with facial patterns or conventional tagging . It was tested on green turtles and olive ridley turtles and reported an accuracy of 92.9% and 81.8% respectively. PID advances like these have a massive impact in the long-term capture-mark-recapture (CMR) studies which are  the  'gold  standard'  for  conservation [126],  providing robust population assessments and trend analysis.

Okuyama  et  al.  [127]  applied  template  matching  to analyze horizontal head movements in an underwater environment, they reported it being advantageous to sensors as no analysis was needed to acquire information. The method fails when the turtles head moves out of the camera's field of view which depends on the camera position and field of view. Despite its limitations, this is the first effective demonstration of bio-logging with computer vision for sea turtles and can give a new perspective to understanding turtle movements.

## VI. ONGOING RESEARCH

The author of this work is currently developing algorithms for  robust  and  scalable  sea  turtle  face  detection  in  diverse environments and is ranked third on the public leaderboard for the  international  challenge  on Zindi titled 'Local  Ocean Conservation -Sea Turtle Face Detection' [128].  The algorithm will soon be published for dissemination across the Wildlife Conservation and Computer Vision communities.

## VII. FUTURE RESEARCH AVENUES

This survey has threats and conservation status of the sea turtles and discussed the advances of ML and CV in various aspects  of  this  conservation  research.  One  avenue  with significant  scope  would  involve  running  these  autonomous systems  on  edge  devices  leveraging  TinyML,  which  has already proven to be useful [129] in other Computer Vision research  areas  like  face-mask  detection[130],  underwater marine life and plastic waste detection [131], American Sign Language  recognition  [132],  drone  based  detection  and tracking [133], and diabetic retinopathy prognosis [134] etc.

Drone imagery can massively improve the analysis and response  time,  and  has  proven  immensely  useful  in  many fields [135], an interesting research avenue can be building and maintaining high quality image and video databases for sea  turtles,  on  the  beaches  and  underwater,  helping  create robust CV applications for detecting and identifying turtles, while also analyzing DPS  population densities [136]. Research  could  also  be  done  in  the  development  of  better algorithms to  detect  and  identify  turtles  using  their  natural features and improving explainability of the systems.

## VIII. CONCLUSION

This survey comprehensively presents the current status of sea turtle conservation across species and geographies, their threats  and  remedies,  and  discusses  some  recent  Computer Vision advances aiding conservation efforts. It also presents some future research avenues, helping  conservation experts and Computer Vision researchers on a combined front to help rebuild sustainable sea turtle populations across the globe.

## PHOTO CREDITS AND ACKNOWLEDGMENT

A number of images were used as part of the analysis and critical  commentary  of  the  characteristics,  nesting  habits, threats and conservation of sea turtles, which constitutes fair use. The author gratefully acknowledges the image creators, in Table 2 below, listing the creators, titles and licenses per image; (a, b) represent the (left, right) images per figure.

Table 2. Image Source Atributions

| Fig  Author  Title  License  1a  U. Kanda  Loggerhead turtle  CC BY  2.0  1b  B. Gratwicke  Loggerhead Sea Turtle  (Caretta caretta)  CC BY  2.0  2a  P. Asman, J. Lenoble  Chelonia mydas Green Sea  Turtle  CC BY  2.0  2b  Maritime Aquarium at  Norwalk  Aquar.green sea turtle.7  CC BY-  ND 2.0  3a  R. David, USFWS  Dermochelys coriacea  CC0  3b  USFWS Southeast  Region  Leatherback sea turtle/ Tinglar,  USVI  CC BY  2.0  4a  prilfish  Hawksbill Sea Turtle  CC BY  2.0  4b  C. S. Rogers  Hawksbill Sea Turtle/ Carey  de Concha  CC0  5a  NER Sea Turtle  Stranding Network  Kemp Ridley's sea turtle  Public  Domain  5b  via pxhere.com  Kemp's Ridley  CC0  6a  B. Flickinger  Olive Ridley sea turtle after  laying eggs  CC BY  2.0  6b  S. Jurvetson  Releasing Baby Turtles to the  Sea  CC BY  2.0  7a  S. Long, AIMS  Turtle Hatchlings  CC BY  3.0 AU  7b  AIMS  A flatback turtle hatchling  CC BY  3.0 AU   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## REFERENCES

- [1] A. Rhodin et al. , 'Turtles of the World: Annotated Checklist and Atlas of Taxonomy, Synonymy, Distribution, and Conservation Status (8th Ed.),' 2017.
- [2] J. Hudgins, A. Mancini, and K. Ali, Marine turtles of the Maldives . 2017.
- [3] M. G. Lockley, H. C. Cawthra, J. C. De Vynck, C. W. Helm, R. T. McCrea, and R. Nel, 'New fossil sea turtle trackway morphotypes from the Pleistocene of South Africa highlight role of ichnology in turtle paleobiology,' Quat. Res. ,  vol.  92, no. 3, pp. 626 -640, 2019, doi: 10.1017/qua.2019.40.
- [4] M. L. McCallum, 'Turtle  biodiversity  losses  suggest  coming  sixth mass extinction,' Biodivers. Conserv. , vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1257 -1275, 2021, doi: 10.1007/s10531-021-02140-8.
- [5] B. J. Godley et al. , 'Reflections on sea turtle conservation,' Oryx , vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 287 -289, 2020, doi: 10.1017/S0030605320000162.
- [6] E. E. Seney  and J. A. Musick,  'Historical Diet Analysis of Loggerhead Sea Turtles (Caretta caretta) in Virginia,' Copeia , no. 2, pp. 478 -489, 2007, [Online]. Available: https://www.jstor.org/stable/25140651.
- [7] C. M. Molter et al. , 'Health and nutrition o f loggerhead sea turtles ( Caretta caretta ) in the southeastern United States,' J. Anim. Physiol. Anim. Nutr. (Berl). , p. jpn.13575, Jun. 2021, doi: 10.1111/jpn.13575.
- [8] L. Nester and W. M. Giuliano, 'Sea Turtle Identification and Viewing Guidelines,' EDIS , vol. 2006, no. 10, pp. 1 -4, 2006.
- [9] A. G. Osborne, E. R. Jacobson, M. J. Bresette, D. A. Singewald, R. A. Scarpino,  and  A.  B.  Bolten,  'Reference  intervals  and  relationships between  health  status,  carapace  length,  body  mass,  and  water temperature and  concentrations  of  plasma  total  protein  and  protein electrophoretogram  fractions  in  Atlantic  loggerhead  sea  turtles  and green turtles,' J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. , vol. 237, no. 5, pp. 561 -567, 2010, doi: 10.2460/javma.237.5.561.
- [10] J.  A.  Thomson,  D.  Burkholder,  M.  R.  Heithaus,  and  L.  M.  Dill, 'Validation of a rapid visual -assessment technique for categorizing the body condition of green turtles (Chelonia Mydas) in the field,' Copeia , no. 2, pp. 251 -255, 2009, doi: 10.1643/CE-07-227.
- [11] A. Carr, 'The Navigation of the Green Turtle,' Sci. Am. , vol. 212, no. 5, pp. 78 -87, 1965, [Online]. Available: https://www.jstor.org/stable/24931878.
- [12] I.  P.  Bell,  J.  Meager,  J.  P.  van  de  Merwe, and C.  A. Madden  Hof, 'Green  turtle  (Chelonia  mydas)  population  demographics at  three chemically distinct foraging areas in the northern Great Barrier Reef,' Sci. Total Environ. , vol. 652, pp. 1040 -1050, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.10.150.
- [13] A.  Mobaraki,  E.  RastegarPouyani,  H.  G.  Kami,  and  N.  Khorasani, 'Population stud y of foraging Green sea turtles (Chelonia mydas) in the Northern Persian Gulf and Oman Sea, Iran,' Reg. Stud. Mar. Sci. , vol. 39, p. 101433, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.rsma.2020.101433.
- [14] I. H. Chen, W. Yang, and M. A. Meyers, 'Leatherback sea turtle shell: A tough and flexible biological design,' Acta Biomater. , vol. 28, pp. 2 -12, 2015, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2015.09.023.
- [15] P. M. Magwene and J. J. Socha, 'Biomechanics of Turtle Shells: How Whole Shells Fail in Compression,' J. Exp. Zool. Part A Ecol. Genet. Physiol. , vol. 319, no. 2, pp. 86 -98, 2013, doi: 10.1002/jez.1773.
- [16] P. D. Moldowan, R. J. Brooks, and J. D. Litzgus, 'Turtles with 'teeth': beak morphology of Testudines with a focus on the tomiodonts of Painted Turtles (Chrysemys spp. ),' Zoomorphology , vol. 135, no. 1, pp. 121 -135, 2016, doi: 10.1007/s00435-015-0288-1.
- [17] I.  C.  Kaplan,  'A  risk  assessment  for  Pacific  leatherback  turtles (Dermochelys coriacea),' Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. , vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 1710 -1719, 2005, doi: 10.1139/f05-121.
- [18] J. R. Spotila, R. D. Reina, A. C. Steyermark, P. T. Plotkin, and F. V Paladino,  'Pacific  leatherback  turtles  face  extinction,' Nature ,  vol. 405, no. 6786, pp. 529 -530, 2000, doi: 10.1038/35014729.
- [19] T. T. Jones, M. D. Hastings, B. L. Bostrom, D. Pauly, and D. R. Jones, 'Growth of captive leatherback turtles, Dermochelys coriacea, with inferences on growth in the wild: Implications for population decline and recovery,' J.  Exp.  Mar.  Bio. Ecol. ,  vol.  399,  no.  1,  pp.  84 -92, 2011, doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.2011.01.007.
- [20] R.  F.  Tapilatu et  al. ,  'Long -term  decline  of  the  western  pacific leatherback,  dermochelys  coriacea:  A  globally  important  sea  turtle population,' Ecosphere , vol. 4, no. 2, pp.  1 -15, 2013, doi: 10.1890/ES12-00348.1.
- [21] J. M. Blumenthal et al. , 'Ecology of hawksbill turtles, Eretmochelys imbricata,  on  a  western  caribbean  foraging  ground,' Chelonian Conserv.  Biol. ,  vol.  8,  no.  1,  pp.  1 -10,  2009,  doi:  10.2744/CCB0758.1.
- [22] K. B.T. B. of S. Turtles and  undefined 2017, 'Foraging Ecology and Nutrition of Sea Turtles,' taylorfrancis.com , Accessed: Jun. 18, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/edit/10.1201/978020373708 8-8/foraging-ecology-nutrition-sea-turtles-karen-bjorndal.
- [23] 'Hawksbill sea turtle Fact Sheet | U S Fish &amp; Wildlife Service's North Florida ESO Jacksonville.' https://www.fws.gov/northflorida/seaturtles/turtle factsheets/hawksbill-sea-turtle.htm (accessed Jun. 20, 2021).
- [24] J.  J.  Parsons, The  hawksbill  turtle  and  the  tortoise  shell  trade .  De Gruyter Mouton, 2017.
- [25] D. R. Foran and R. L. Ray, 'Mitochondrial DNA Profiling of Illegal Tortoiseshell  Products  Derived  from  Hawksbill  Sea  Turtles,' J. Forensic Sci. , vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1062 -1066, 2016, doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/1556-4029.13062.
- [26] V. Koch, W. J. Nichols, H. Peckham, and V. De La Toba, 'Estimates of sea turtle mortality from poaching and bycatch in Bahía Magdalena, Baja California Sur, Mexico,' Biol. Conserv. , vol. 128, no. 3, pp. 327 -334, 2006, doi: 10.1016/j.biocon.2005.09.038.
- [27] E. F. Shattuck, 'Geographic origins of illegally harvested hawksbill sea turtle products ,' ProQuest Diss. Theses , p. 69, 2011, [Online]. Available: http://ucelinks.cdlib.org:8888/sfx\_local?url\_ver=Z39.882004&amp;rft\_val\_fmt=info:ofi/fmt:kev:mtx:dissertation&amp;genre=disserta tions+%26+theses&amp;sid=ProQ:ProQuest+Dissertations+%26+Theses +Global&amp;atitle=&amp;title=Geographic+origins+of+illegally+harvested+ hawksbill+s.
- [28] A.  Meylan  and  M.  Donnelly,  'Status  justification  for listing  the hawksbill turtle (Eretmochelys imbricata) as critically endangered on the 1996 IUCN Red List of Threatened Animals,' Chelonian Conserv. Biol. , vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 200 -224, 1999.
- [29] L. Boyd, 'Epibionts of Hawksbill Sea Turtles in Southeast Florida,' Florida Atlantic University, 2018.
- [30] K. A. Bjorndal and A. B. Bolten, 'Hawksbill sea turtles in seagrass
31. pastures: Success in a peripheral habitat,' Mar. Biol. , vol. 157, no. 1, pp. 135 -145, 2010, doi: 10.1007/s00227-009-1304-0.
- [31] D. J.  Shaver, 'Feeding Ecology of Wild and Head -Started Kemp's Ridley Sea Turtles in South Texas Waters,' J. Herpetol. , vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 327 -334, Jun. 1991, doi: 10.2307/1564592.
- [32] V. J. Burke, S. J. Morreale, and E. A. Standora, 'Diet of the Kemps ridley sea turtle , Lepidochelys kempii , in New York waters,' 1981.
- [33] M. Chaloupka and G. R. Zug, 'A polyphasic growth function for the endangered  Kemp's  ridley  sea  turtle,  Lepidochelys  kempii,' Fish. Bull. , vol. 95, no. 4, pp. 849 -856, 1997.
- [34] G. R . Zug, M. Chaloupka, and G. H. Balazs, 'Age and growth in olive ridley  seaturtles  (Lepidochelys  olivacea)  from  the  North-central Pacific: A skeletochronological analysis,' Mar. Ecol. , vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 263 -270, 2006, doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0485.2006.00109.x.
- [35] L. P. Colman, C. L. S. Sampaio, M. I. Weber, and J. C. De Castilhos, 'Diet of Olive ridley sea turtles, Lepidochelys olivacea, in the waters of Sergipe, Brazil,' Chelonian Conserv. Biol. , vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 266 -271, Dec. 2014, doi: 10.2744/CCB-1061.1.
- [36] M. A. Marcovaldi, 'Status and distribution of the olive ridley turtle, Lepidochelys olivacea, in the Western Atlantic Ocean,' Proc. Reg. Meet. , 1999, [Online]. Available: http://www.seaturtle.org/PDF/author/Marcovaldi\_2001\_WIDECAS T.pdf.
- [37] V.  S.  Bézy et  al. ,  'Mass -nesting  events  in  olive  ridley  sea  turtles: environmental predictors of timing and size,' Anim. Behav. , vol. 163, pp. 85 -94, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.anbehav.2020.03.002.
- [38] S. Richardson, 'Washington State Status Report for the Olive Rid ley Sea Turtle,' Washingt. Dep. Fish Wildl. , pp. 1 -14, 1997.
- [39] F.  Dipper,  'Marine  Reptiles,'  in The  Marine  World ,  Princeton University Press, 2021, pp. 402 -415.
- [40] J. L. Hounslow et al. , 'Animal -borne video from a sea turtle reveals novel  anti-predato r  behaviors,' Ecology ,  vol.  102,  no.  4,  pp.  1 -4, 2021, doi: 10.1002/ecy.3251.
- [41] IUCN, 'The IUCN  Red List of Threatened Species,' 2021. https://www.iucnredlist.org (accessed Jun. 15, 2021).
- [42] S.  E. L.  Society, The Endangered Species Act .  Stanford  University Press, 2001.
- [43] P. Casale and A. D. Tucker, 'Caretta caretta,' IUCN Red List Threat. Species , 2017, doi: 10.2305/IUCN.UK.20172.RLTS.T3897A119333622.en.
- [44] T.  A.  Conant et  al. ,  'Loggerhead  sea  turtle  (Caretta  caretta)  2009 status review under th e U.S. Endangered Species Act : Report of the Loggerhead Biological Review Team to the National Marine Fisheries Service,' p. 222 pages, 2009, [Online]. Available: https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/16204.
- [45] J.  Schultz  and  A.  M.  Lauritsen,  'L oggerhead  Sea  Turtle  (Caretta caretta)  North  Pacific  Ocean  DPS  5-Year  Review:  Summary  and Evaluation,' 2020. [Online]. Available: https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/dammigration/np\_loggerhead\_5yr\_review\_final.pdf.
- [46] ECOS - Environmental Conservation Onli ne System, 'Species Profile -Loggerhead sea turtle (Caretta caretta).' https://ecos.fws.gov/ecp0/profile/speciesProfile?sId=1110 (accessed Jun. 15, 2021).
- [47] J.  A.  Seminoff, 'Chelonia mydas,' IUCN Red List Threat. Species , 2004, doi: 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2004.RLTS.T4615A11037468.en.
- [48] J.  A.  (Jeffrey A. Seminoff et  al. ,  'Status review of the green turtle (Chelonia mydas) under the Engangered Species Act.' 2015, [Online]. Available: https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/4922.
- [49] ECOS Environmental Conservation Online System, 'Species Profile -Green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas).' https://ecos.fws.gov/ecp0/profile/speciesProfile?spcode=C00S#CurL istStatuses (accessed Jun. 15, 2021).
- [50] B. P. Wallace, M. Tiwari, and M. Girondot, 'Dermochelys coriacea,' IUCN Red List Threat. Species , 2015, doi: 10.2305/IUCN.UK.20132.RLTS.T6494A43526147.en.
- [51] National Marine Fisheries Service and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 'Endangered Species  Act  status  review  of  the  leatherback  turtle (Dermochelys  coriacea).  Report  to  the  National  Marine  Fisheries Service  Office  of  Protected  Resources  and  U.S.  Fish  and  Wildlife Service.' 2020, [Online]. Available:

https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/25629.

- [52] ECOS Environmental Conservation Online System, 'Species Profile -Leatherback sea turtle (Dermochelys coriacea).' https://ecos.fws.gov/ecp/species/1493 (accessed Jun. 15, 2021).
- [53] J.  A.  Mortimer  and  M.  Donnelly,  'Eretmochelys  imbricata,' 2008, doi: 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T8005A12881238.en.
- [54] National Marine Fisheries Service and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
4. 'Hawksbill  Sea  Turtle  (Eretmochelys  Imbricata)  5 -Year  Review : Summary and Evaluation,' 2013, [Online]. Available: https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/17041.
- [55] ECOS Environmental Conservation Online System, 'Species Profile -Hawksbill sea turtle (Eretmochelys imbricata).' https://ecos.fws.gov/ecp/species/3656 (accessed Jun. 15, 2021).
- [56] T.  Wibbels  and  E.  Bevan,  'Lepidochelys  kempii,' IUCN Red List Threat. Species , 2019, doi: 10.2305/IUCN.UK.20192.RLTS.T11533A155057916.en.
- [57] National Marine Fisheries Service and US Fish and Wildlife Service, 'Kemp'S Ridley Sea Turtle (Lepidochelys Kemp ii) 5-Year Review: Summary and Evaluation National Marine Fisheries Service Office of Protected  Resources  Silver  Spring,  Maryland  and  U.S.  Fish  and Wildlife  Service  Southwest  Region  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico,' 2015.
- [58] ECOS - Environmental Conservation Onl ine System, 'Species Profile -Kemp's ridley sea turtle (Lepidochelys kempii).' https://ecos.fws.gov/ecp0/profile/speciesProfile?spcode=C00O (accessed Jun. 15, 2021).
- [59] A. AbreuGrobois and P. (IUCN S. M. T. S. G. Plotkin, 'Lepidochelys olivacea,' IUCN Red List Threat. Species , 2008, [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T11534A3292503.e n.
- [60] T. Conant, A. Somma, A. M. Lauritsen, K. Bibb, and E. Possardt, Olive  Ridley  Sea  Turtle  (Lepidochelys  Olivacea)  5Year  Review : Summary and Evaluation . 2014.
- [61] ECOS Environmental Conservation Online System, 'Species Profile -Olive ridley sea turtle (Lepidochelys olivacea).' https://ecos.fws.gov/ecp0/profile/speciesProfile?spcode=C00V (accessed Jun. 15, 2021).
- [62] Red List Standards &amp; Petitions Subcommittee, 'Natator depressus,' IUCN Red List Threat. Species , 1996, doi: 10.2305/IUCN.UK.1996.RLTS.T14363A4435952.en.
- [63] S.  H.  Peckham et  al. ,  'High  mortality  of  loggerhead  turtles  due  to bycatch, human consumption and strandings at Baja California Sur, Mexico, 2003 to 2007,' Endanger. Species Res. , vol. 5, no. 2 -3, pp. 171 -183, 2008, doi: 10.3354/esr00123.
- [64] A. B. Tagliolatto, B. Giffoni, S. Guimarães, M. H. Godfrey, and C. MonteiroNeto, 'Incidental capture and mortality of sea turtl es in the industrial  double-rig-bottom  trawl  fishery  in  southeastern  Brazil,' Aquat. Conserv. Mar. Freshw. Ecosyst. , vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 351 -363, 2020, doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/aqc.3252.
- [65] D. R. Awabdi, I. A. Pestana, A. C. Vigliar Bondioli, C. A. Zappes, and A. P. Madeira Di Beneditto, 'Incidental capture of sea turtles in southeast Brazil: Assessment of the perceptions of artisanal fishers,' Ocean Coast. Manag. , vol. 210, p. 105696, 2021, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2021.105696.
- [66] K.  M.  Hamelin,  K.  Martin,  M.  C.  James,  W.  Ledwell,  and  J. Huntington,  'Incidental  capture  of  leatherback  sea  turtles  in  fixed fishing  gear  off  Atlantic  Canada,'  no.  September  2016,  pp.  112, 2017, doi: 10.1002/aqc.2733.
- [67] S.  Pingo,  A.  Jiménez,  J.  Alfaro-shigueto,  J.  C.  Mangel,  F.  D.  B. Marina,  and  U.  Científica,  'Incidental  capture  of  sea  turtles  in  the artisanal gillnet fishery in Sechura,' vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 606614, 2017, doi: 10.3856/vol45-issue3-fulltext-10.
- [68] M.  Donoso  and  P.  H.  Dutton,  'Sea  tu rtle  bycatch  in  the  Chilean pelagic longline fishery in the southeastern Pacific: Opportunities for conservation,' Biol. Conserv. , vol. 143, no. 11, pp. 2672 -2684, 2010, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2010.07.011.
- [69] R.  Coelho,  M.  N.  Santos,  J.  Fernandez-Carvalho,  and  S.  Amorim, 'Effects  of  hook  and  bait  in  a  tropical  northeast  Atlantic  pelagic longline fishery: Part I -Incidental sea turtle bycatch,' Fish. Res. , vol. 164, pp. 302 -311, 2015, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2014.11.008.
- [70] K .  Chandrasekar  and  M.  Srinivasan,  'Sea  turtle  exploitation  from Tamil Nadu , Southeast coast of India Sea turtle exploitation  from Tamil Nadu , Southeast coast of India,' no. November 2013, 2014.
- [71] C. Martin, 'Plastic world,' Dairy Ind. Int. , vol. 70, no. 12, pp. 33 -35, 2005, doi: 10.2307/1310704.
- [72] N. Mrosovsky, G. D. Ryan, and M. C. James, 'Leatherback turtles: The menace of plastic,' Mar. Pollut. Bull. ,  vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 287 -289, 2009, doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2008.10.018.
- [73] Q. Schuyler, B. D. Hardesty, C. Wilcox, and K. Townsend, 'To Eat or  Not  to  Eat?  Debris  Selectivity  by  Marine  Turtles,'  2012,  doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040884.
- [74] R. G. Santos, R. Andrades, L. M. Fardim, and A. S. Martins, 'Marine debris ingestion and Thayer's law - The i mportance of plastic color,' Environ. Pollut. , vol. 214, pp. 585 -588, 2016, doi:
25. 10.1016/j.envpol.2016.04.024.
- [75] J.  B.  Pfaller,  K.  M.  Goforth,  M.  A.  Gil,  M.  S.  Savoca,  and  K.  J. Lohmann, 'Odors from marine plastic debris elicit foraging behavior in sea turtles,' Curr. Biol. , vol. 30, no. 5, pp. R213 -R214, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2020.01.071.
- [76] R.  H.  de  Carvalho et  al. ,  'Marine  debris  ingestion  by  sea  turtles (Testudines) on the Brazilian coast: An underestimated threat?,' Mar. Pollut. Bull. , vol. 101, no. 2, pp. 746 -749, 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2015.10.002.
- [77] J. G. B. Derraik, 'The pollution of the marin e environment by plastic debris:  A  review,' Mar. Pollut.  Bull. ,  vol.  44,  no.  9,  pp.  842 -852, 2002, doi: 10.1016/S0025-326X(02)00220-5.
- [78] C. Wabnitz and W. J. Nichols, 'Editorial: Plastic Pollution: An Ocean Emergency,' Mar.  Turt.  Newsl. ,  no.  129,  pp.  1 -4,  2010,  [Online]. Available:

http://search.proquest.com/docview/924334169?accountid=27795.

- [79] J. K. Lorne and M. Salmon, 'Effects of exposure to artificial lighting on orientation of hatchling sea turtles on the beach and in the ocean,' vol. 3, no. June, pp. 23 -30, 2007.
- [80] S.  M.  Tuxbury and M. Salmon, 'Competitive interactions between artificial  lighting  and  natural  cues  during  seafinding  by  hatchling marine turtles,' Biol. Conserv. ,  vol. 121, no. 2, pp. 311 -316, 2005, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2004.04.022.
- [81] Y.  Hetzel et  al. ,  'Artificial  light  on  water  attracts  turtle  hatchlings during  their  near  shore  transit  Subject  Category :  Subject  Areas :,' 2016.
- [82] Z. Hu, H. Hu, and Y. Huang, 'Association between nighttime artificial light  pollution  and  sea  turtle  nest  density  along  Florida  coast:  A geospatial study using VIIRS remote sensing data,' Environ. Pollut. , vol. 239, pp. 30 -42, 2018, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.04.021.
- [83] S. Milton, P. Lutz, and G. Shigenaka, ' Oil toxicity and impacts on sea turtles,' Oil Sea Turtles  -  Biol.  planning,  response ,  pp.  35 -47, 2003.
- [84] R. A. Yender and A. J. Mearns, 'Case studies of spills that threaten sea  tu rtles,' Oil  Sea  Turtles  Biol.  Planning,  Response ,  pp.  69 -86, 2003, [Online]. Available: http://ww2.surfrider.org/treasurecoast/Documents/Campaign docs/Oil Drilling/Oil Spills and trutles\_chapter61.pdf.
- [85] B. P. Wallace et al. , 'Oil spills and sea turtles : Documented effects and considerations for response and assessment efforts,' Endanger. Species Res. , vol. 41, pp. 17 -37, 2020, doi: 10.3354/ESR01009.
- [86] K.  E.  Frasier,  A.  Solsona-Berga,  L.  Stokes,  and  J.  A.  Hildebrand, 'Impacts of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill on Marine Mammals and Sea Turtles BT  Deep Oil Spills: Facts, Fate, and Effects,' S. A. Murawski, C. H. Ainsworth, S. Gilbert, D. J. Hollander, C. B. Paris, M.  Schlüter,  and  D.  L.  Wetzel,  Eds.  Cham:  Springer  International Publishing, 2020, pp. 431 -462.
- [87] D. J. Shaver et al. , 'Embryo deformities and nesting trends in Kemp's ridley sea turtles Lepidochelys kempii before and after the Deepwater Horizon  oil  spill,' Endanger.  Species  Res. ,  vol.  44,  pp.  277 -289, 2021, doi: 10.3354/ESR01107.
- [88] M. M.  P.  B.  Fuentes,  J.  A.  Maynard,  M.  Guinea,  I.  P.  Bell,  P.  J. Werdell, and M. Hamann, 'Proxy indicators of sand temperature help project impacts  of global warming  on  sea  turtles  in northern Australia,' Endanger. Species Res. , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 33 -40, 2009, doi: 10.3354/esr00224.
- [89] N. Mrosovsky and J. Provancha, 'Sex ratio of hatchling loggerhead sea turtles: data and estimates from a 5year study,' Can. J. Zool. , vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 530 -538, 1992, doi: 10.1139/z92-080.
- [90] J.  Davenport,  'Temperature  a nd  the  life-history  strategies  of  sea turtles,' J.  Therm.  Biol. ,  vol.  22,  no.  6,  pp.  479 -488,  1997,  doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0306-4565(97)00066-1.
- [91] A. S. Maurer, J. A. Seminoff, C. A. Layman, S. P. Stapleton, M. H. Godfrey, and M. O. B. Reiskind, 'Population Viability of Sea Turtles in the Context of Global Warming,' Bioscience , 2021, doi: 10.1093/biosci/biab028.
- [92] E. Porter, D. T. Booth, and C. J. Limpus, 'Influence of short -term temperature drops on sexdetermination in sea turtles,' 2021, [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.29.437634.
- [93] G. G. Lopez, E. de C. Saliés, P. H. Lara, F. Tognin, M. A. Marcovaldi, and T. Z. Serafini, 'Coastal development at sea turtles nesting ground: Efforts  to  establish  a  tool  for  supporting  conservation  and  coastal management in northeastern Brazil,' Ocean Coast. Manag. , vol. 116, pp. 270 -276, 2015, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2015.07.027.
- [94] M. K. Hill, M. C. Monroe, T. T. Ankersen, R. R. Carthy, and T. A. Kay, 'Coastal Armoring and Sea Turtles: Beachfront Homeowners'
17. Opinions and Intent,' Coast.  Manag. ,  vol.  47,  no.  6,  pp.  594 -610, 2019, doi: 10.1080/08920753.2019.1669102.
- [95] A. E. Mosier and B. E. Witherington, 'Documented effects of coastal armoring  structures  on  sea  turtle  ne sting  behavior,' Proc.  Twent. Annu. Symp. Sea Turt. Biol. Conserv. , pp. 304 -306, 2002.
- [96] J.  E.  Dugan  and  D.  M.  Hubbard,  'Ecological  effects  of  coastal armoring: a summary of recent results for exposed sandy beaches in southern California,' Puget Sound Shorelines Impacts Armor. - Proc. a State Sci. Work. May 2009 U.S. Geol. Surv. Sci. Investig. Rep. 2010 , no. September, pp. 187 -194, 2010.
- [97] D.  A.  Crain,  A.  B.  Bolten,  and  K.  A.  Bjorndal,  'Effects  of  Beach Nourishment  on  Sea  Turtles:  Review  and  Research  Initiatives,' Restor. Ecol. ,  vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 95 -104, 1995, doi: 10.1111/j.1526100X.1995.tb00082.x.
- [98] G.Y.  Choi  and  K.  L.  Eckert,  'Manual  of  Best  Practices for Safeguarding Sea Turtle Nesting Beaches,' Wider Caribb. Sea Turt. Conserv. Netw. Tech. Rep. No. 9 , no. 9, p. 86 pp, 2009.
- [99] M. E. Lutcavage, P. Plotkin, B. Witherington, and P. L .  Lutz,  '15 human impacts on sea turtle survival,' Biol Sea Turtles , vol. 1, p. 45, 2017.
- [100] J. Liu, M. Wang, L. Bao, X. Li, J. Sun, and Y. Ming, 'Classification and  Recognition  of  Turtle  Images  Based  on  Convolutional  Neural Network,' IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. , vol. 782, no. 5, 2020, doi: 10.1088/1757-899X/782/5/052044.
- [101]  S. T. Sykora-Bodie, V. Bezy, D. W. Johnston, E. Newton, and K. J. Lohmann, 'Quantifying Nearshore Sea Turtle Densities: Applications of Unmanned Aerial Systems for Population Assessments,' Sci. Rep. , vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1 -7, 2017, doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-17719-x.
- [102]  P. C. Gray et al. , 'A convolutional neural network for detecting sea turtles in drone imagery,' Methods Ecol. Evol. , vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 345 -355, 2019, doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.13132.
- [103] M. Badawy and C. Direkoglu, 'Sea Turtle Detection Using Faster R -CNN for Conservation Purpose,' in 10th International Conference on Theory and Application of Soft Computing, Computing with Words and Perceptions - ICSCCW-2019 , 2020, pp. 535 -541.
- [104] Z.  Attal  and  C.  Direkoglu,  'Sea  Turtle  Species  Classification  for Environmental  Research  and  Conservation,'  in 10th  International Conference on Theory and Application of Soft Computing, Computing with Words and Perceptions - ICSCCW-2019 , 2020, pp. 580 -587.
- [105]  E.  Deng,  S.  Ozev,  J.  Blain  Christen,  E.  E.  Program,  and  T.  H.  C. Barrett,  'Energy -Efficient  Electoral  System  for  Underwater  Sea Turtle  Image  Recognition,' Energy-Efficient  Electoral  System  for Underwater  Sea  Turtle  Image  Recognition .  [Online].  Available: http://hdl.handle.net/2286/R.I.53370.
- [106] H. Horimoto, T. Maki, K. Kofuji, and T. Ishihara, 'Autonomous Sea Turtle Detection Using Multi-beam Imaging Sonar: Toward Autonomous Tracking,' AUV 2018 - 2018 IEEE/OES Auton. Underw. Veh. Work. Proc. , pp. 32 -35, 2018, doi: 10.1109/AUV.2018.8729723.
- [107] T. Maki, H. Horimoto, T. Ishihara, and K. Kofuji, 'Tracking a Sea Turtle by an AUV with a Multibeam Imaging Sonar: Toward Robotic Observation of Marine Life,' Int. J. Control. Autom. Syst. , vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 597 -604, 2020, doi: 10.1007/s12555-019-0690-4.
- [108] R. Ekambaram and R. Kasturi, 'Sea Turtle Identification by Matching Their Scale Patterns,' 1973.
- [109] J.  Reisser,  M.  Proietti,  P.  Kinas,  and  I.  Sazima,  'Photographic identification of sea turtles: Method description and validation, with an estimati on of tag loss,' Endanger. Species Res. , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 73 -82, 2008, doi: 10.3354/esr00113.
- [110]  G.  Schofield,  K.  A.  Katselidis,  P.  Dimopoulos,  and  J.  D.  Pantis, 'Investigating the viability of photo -identification as an objective tool to study endang ered sea turtle populations,' J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol. , vol. 360, no. 2, pp. 103 -108, 2008, doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.2008.04.005.
- [111] C. Jean, S. Ciccione, E. Talma, K. Ballorain, and J. Bourjea, 'Photo -identification  method  for  green  and  hawksbill  turtles-First  results from Reunion,' Indian Ocean Turt. Newsl. , vol. 11, pp. 8 -13, 2010.
- [112] S. J. B. Carter, I. P. Bell, J. J. Miller, and P. P. Gash, 'Automated marine turtle photograph identification using artificial neural networks, with application to green t urtles,' J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol. , vol. 452, pp. 105 -110, 2014, doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.2013.12.010.
- [113]  A. S. Carpentier, C. Jean, M. Barret, A. Chassagneux, and S. Ciccione, 'Stability of facial scale patterns on green sea turtles Chelonia mydas over time: A validation for the use of a photoidentification method,' J.  Exp.  Mar.  Bio.  Ecol. ,  vol.  476,  pp.  15 -21,  Mar.  2016,  doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.2015.12.003.
- [114] C. M. Su, C. T. Huang, and I. J. Cheng, 'Applying a fast, effective and reliable photographic identification system for green turtles in the waters near Luichiu Island, Taiwan,' J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol. , vol. 467, pp. 115 -120, 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.2015.03.003.
- [115]  S.  G.  Dunbar,  H.  E.  Ito,  K.  Bahjri,  S.  Dehom,  and  L.  Salinas, 'Recognition of juve nile hawksbills Eretmochelys imbricata through face scale digitization and automated searching,' Endanger. Species Res. , vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 137 -146, 2014, doi: 10.3354/esr00637.
- [116] J. Hartog and R. Reijns, 'Interactive individual identification system (I3S),' Boston, Reijns Free Softw. Found. Inc , 2007.
- [117]  B. Calmanovici, D. Waayers, J. Reisser, J. Clifton, and M. Proietti, 'I3S Pattern as a mark?recapture tool to identify captured and free -swimming sea turtles: An assessment,' Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. ,  vol. 589, no. February, pp. 263 -268, 2018, doi: 10.3354/meps12483.
- [118] K. Steinmetz, I. Webster, D. Rowat, and J. K. Bluemel, 'Evaluating the Software I3S Pattern for Photo-Identification of Nesting Hawksbill Turtles (Eretmochelys imbricata),' Mar. Turt. Newsl. , vol. 155, no. October, pp. 15 -19, 2018.
- [119]  S. L. Long, 'Identification of a Dead Green Turtle (Chelonia mydas) Using Photographic Identification,' Mar. Turt. Newsl. , no. 150, pp. 9 -11, 2016.
- [120]  K. K. Rao, L. C. Grabow, J. P. Munoz-Perez, D. Alarcon-Ruales, and R. B. R. Azevedo, 'Sea Turtle Facial R ecognition Using Map Graphs of Scales,' bioRxiv , 2021, doi: 10.1101/2021.06.03.446936.
- [121]  S. G. Dunbar et al. , 'HotSpotter: Using a computer -driven photo-id application to identify sea turtles,' J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol. , vol. 535, no. September 2020, p. 151490, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.2020.151490.
- [122]  T.  Y.  Berger-Wolf et  al. ,  'Wildbook:  Crowdsourcing,  computer vision, and data science for conservation,' 2017, [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1710.08880.
- [123]  B.  A.  Leslie et  al. ,  'The  Internet  of  Turtles,' State  World's  Sea Turtles , no. 11, p. 13, 2016.
- [124] 'Internet  of  Turtles.'  https://iot.wildbook.org  (accessed  Jun.  20, 2021).
- [125] C. R. Gatto, A. Rotger, N. J. Robinson, and P. Santidrián Tomillo, 'A novel  method  for  photo-identification  of  sea  turtles  using  scale patterns on the front flippers,' J. Exp. Mar. Bio. Ecol. , vol. 506, no. March, pp. 18 -24, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.2018.05.007.
- [126] SWOT Scientific Advisory Board, 'The state of the world's sea turtles (SWOT) Minimum Data Standards for Nesting Beach Monitoring,' 2011.
- [127]  J.  Okuyama et  al. ,  'Application  of  a  computer vision technique to animal-borne video data: extraction of head movement to understand sea turtles' visual assessment of surroundings,' Anim. Biotelemetry , vol. 3, no. 1, p. 35, 2015, doi: 10.1186/s40317-015-0079-y.
- [128] 'Local  Ocean  Conservation -  Sea  Turtle  Face  Detection  Zindi.' https://zindi.africa/competitions/local-ocean-conservation-sea-turtleface-detection/ (accessed Jun. 20, 2021).
- [129]  S.  Nazir and  M.  Kaleem,  'Advances  in  image  acquisition  and processing  technologies  transforming  animal  ecological  studies,' Ecol. Inform. , vol. 61, no. January, p. 101212, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.ecoinf.2021.101212.
- [130] P. Mohan, A. J. Paul, and A. Chirania, 'A Tiny CNN Architecture for Medical Face Mask Detection for ResourceConstrained Endpoints,' in Innovations in Electrical and Electronic Engineering ,  2021, vol. 756, pp. 657 -670, doi: 10.1007/978-981-16-0749-3\_52.
- [131]  R. Hegde, S. Patel, R. G. Naik, S. N. Nayak, K. S. Shivaprakasha, and R. Bhandarkar, 'Underwater Marine Life and Plastic Waste Detection Using Deep Learning and Raspberry Pi,' Adv. VLSI, Signal Process. Power Electron. IoT, Commun. Embed. Syst. Sel. Proc. VSPICE 2020 , vol. 752, p. 263, 2021.
- [132] A. J. Paul, P. Mohan, and S. Sehgal, 'Rethinking Generalization in American Sign Language Prediction for Edge Devices with Extremely Low Memory Footprint,' 2020 IEEE Recent Adv. Intell. Comput. Syst. RAICS 2020 , pp. 147 -152, 2020, doi: 10.1109/RAICS51191.2020.9332480.
- [133] T. Q. Khoi, N. A. Quang, and N. K. Hieu, 'Object detection for drones on Raspberry Pi potentials and challenges,' IOP Conf. Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. , vol. 1109, no. 1, p. 012033,  2021,  doi: 10.1088/1757899x/1109/1/012033.
- [134] A. J. Paul, 'Advances  in Classifying the Stages of Diabetic Retinopathy Using Convolutional Neural Networks in Low Memory Edge Devices,' 2021, [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.01739.
- [135]  Y.  Akbari,  N.  Almaadeed,  S.  Al-maadeed,  and  O.  Elharrouss, Applications,  databases  and  open  computer  vision  research  from drone  videos  and  images:  a  survey , vol. 54, no. 5. Springer Netherlands, 2021.
- [136]  J.  C.  Hodgson et  al. ,  'Drones  count  wildlife  more  accurately  a nd precisely than humans,' Methods Ecol. Evol. , vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 1160 -1167, 2018, doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.12974.