## SN 2006bp: Probing the Shock Breakout of a Type II-P Supernova 1

Robert M. Quimby 2 , J. Craig Wheeler 2 , Peter H¨ oflich 3 , Carl W. Akerlof 4 , Peter J. Brown 5 , and Eli S. Rykoff 4

## ABSTRACT

HET optical spectroscopy and unfiltered ROTSE-III photometry spanning the first 11 months since explosion of the Type II-P SN 2006bp are presented. Flux limits from the days before discovery combined with the initial rapid brightening suggest the supernova was first detected just hours after shock breakout. Optical spectra obtained about 2 days after breakout exhibit narrow emission lines corresponding to He II λ 4200, He II λ 4686, and C IV λλ 5805 in the rest frame, and these features persist in a second observation obtained 5 hours later; however, these emission lines are not detected the following night nor in subsequent observations. We suggest that these lines emanate from material close to the explosion site, possibly in the outer layers of the progenitor that have been ionized by the high energy photons released at shock breakout. A P-Cygni profile is observed around 4450 ˚ A in the +2 and +3 day spectra. Previous studies have attributed this feature to high velocity H β , but we discuss the possibility that this profile is instead due to He II λ 4687. Further HET observations (14 nights in total) covering the spectral evolution across the photometric plateau up to 73 days after breakout and during the nebular phase around day +340 are presented, and expansion velocities are derived for key features. The ROTSE-III light curve shows that the plateau phase lasted until about day +80 and the exponential decay phase began around 110 days after breakout. The measured decay slope for the unfiltered light curve is 0 . 0073 ± 0 . 0004 mag day -1 between days +121 and +335, which is significantly slower than the decay of rate 56 Co. We combine our HET measurements with published X-ray, UV, and optical data to obtain a quasi-bolometric light curve through day +60. We see a slow cooling over the first 25 days, but no sign of an early sharp peak; any such feature from the shock breakout must have lasted less than ∼ 1 day.

1 Based on observations obtained with the Hobby-Eberly Telescope, which is a joint project of the University of Texas at Austin, the Pennsylvania State University, Stanford University, Ludwig-MaximiliansUniversit¨ at M¨ unchen, and Georg-August-Universit¨ at G¨ ottingen.

2 Department of Astronomy, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA

3 Department of Physics, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32312, USA

4 University of Michigan, 2477 Randall Laboratory, 450 Church St., Ann Arbor, MI, 48104, USA

5 Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics Department, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA

Subject headings: Supernovae, Type II-P, SN 2006bp

## 1. Introduction

Type II supernovae (SNe II) are explosions marking the deaths of massive stars with significant amounts of hydrogen still intact. They do not typically obtain the high peak luminosities nor the uniformity exhibited therein by their thermonuclear cousins, the Type Ia events; however, what SNe II lack as intrinsic standard candles is compensated for by their relative limpidity: SNe II are easier to model as the explosions do not involve steep chemical gradients, and the progenitors of a few events have been identified (see Li et al. 2007 for a recent example). SNe II hold the promise of serving as independent and perhaps absolute distance indicators (Kirshner &amp; Kwan 1974; Shaviv et al. 1985; Hoflich 1991; Schmidt et al. 1994; Hamuy &amp; Pinto 2002; Baron et al. 2004; Nugent et al. 2006). In recent years, several Type II-P supernovae (SNe II-P), where the 'P' indicates a plateau phase in the light curve, that were discovered at early times have been observed and modeled in detail (SN 1999em; Baron et al. 2000; Hamuy et al. 2001; Leonard et al. 2002a; Elmhamdi et al. 2003; Baron et al. 2004; Baklanov et al. 2005; Dessart &amp; Hillier 2006; SN 1999gi; Schlegel 2001; Leonard et al. 2002b; SN 2005cs; Pastorello et al. 2006; Tsvetkov et al. 2006; Brown et al. 2006; Baron et al. 2007). Polarization observations of SNeII-P have shown the outer, Hydrogenrich envelope to be rather spherical and that the polarization increases at late times, which can be understood in terms of asymmetric excitation (Leonard et al. 2003; H¨ oflich et al. 2001).

SNe II-P are thought to result from stars massive enough to ignite Carbon ( &gt; 7-8 M ⊙ ; Eldridge &amp; Tout 2004), but light enough to avoid envelope-stripping winds ( &lt; 25 M ⊙ ; Heger et al. 2003). These explosions begin after the energy release from nuclear activity in the core ceases to provide sufficient pressure to support the stellar interior, and the core collapses under its own weight, most likely forming a neutron star. The processes by which the energy released in the collapse subsequently unbinds the envelope are still a matter of debate (Khokhlov et al. 1999), but neutrino interactions (Janka et al. 2006), shock instabilities (Blondin &amp; Mezzacappa 2006), acoustic instabilities (Burrows et al. 2006), and magneto-rotational effects (Akiyama et al. 2003) may each play a role.

Gravitational waves are emitted during the bounce back phase and neutrinos escape moments later, but the electromagnetic signal is initially swallowed by the envelope. An outside observer would not detect any change in the light output by the star until the hydrodynamic front or the light front reached the photosphere, which could be up to 3 days after the explosion depending on the extent of the progenitor's envelope. The ensuing phase is known as the shock breakout and it is manifest by a sudden, rapid increase in the radiated luminosity. The emergent spectrum will have its peak energy in the X-ray to UV bands, and this hard emission may ionize any circumstellar material or recent wind. The bolometric light curve will peak hours to days after breakout before decreasing in an adiabatic free expansion phase to the plateau stage. During the plateau, a cooling recombination wave recedes (in the mass frame) through the ejecta layers, and the balance of a slowly increasing photospheric radius with an effective temperature tied closely to the recombination temperature will conspire to maintain the nearly constant plateau luminosity. After the photosphere has swept through the bulk of the envelope, a nebular phase ensues and the light curve fades exponentially, now powered predominantly by the decay of 56 Co.

The generic observational consequences of a shock breakout were laid out by Falk &amp; Arnett (1977). Thus far the only observations acquired during the breakout phase were for SN 1987A (a peculiar Type II), SN 1993J (a peculiar Type II/Ib hybrid), and SN 2006aj (a peculiar Type Ic related to GRB 060218), and the bulk of light curve modeling in the past two decades has been focused on SN 1987A or models without extended photospheres or winds (Litvinova &amp; Nadezhin 1985; Arnett 1989; Woosley 1988; Hoflich 1991; Ensman &amp; Burrows 1992; Eastman et al. 1994; Blinnikov et al. 2000). While there is now good agreement found for the observations and models of the shock breaking out of SN 1987A's compact progenitor, little progress has been made in the expected properties of breakout in an extended envelope as expected for common SNeII-P. In particular, detailed, high resolution calculations of the shock breakout including the hydrodynamical, ionization, and light fronts expected in red supergiant atmospheres are still missing (Mair et al. 1992; Chieffi et al. 2003). Polarization observations indicate that differential runtime effects within the extended progenitor envelope are likely to be small (i.e. the shock front reaches the photosphere at a uniform time; Leonard et al. 2003; H¨ oflich et al. 2001). As illustrated by Falk &amp; Arnett (1977), the properties of the breakout peak depend on the envelope mass and especially the density structure of the outer layers. We may therefore gain a better understanding of the envelope structure of massive stars in their final years by studying the early time light curves and spectra of SNeII-P.

An astute amateur astronomer, Koichi Itagaki of Yamagata, Japan, first identified SN 2006bp on unfiltered images of NGC 3953 taken with an 0.60-m f/5.7 reflector around April 9.60 UT (Itagaki et al. 2006). Mr. Itagaki observed the SN to brighten rapidly (about

0.9 mag in 4 hours), and he quickly made the discovery public via IAU Circular 8700 (submitted by S. Nakano). The host galaxy was observed frequently in the days prior to discovery by our Texas Supernova Search (Quimby et al. in prep.), resulting in pre-discovery detections and stringent limits. Observations by the Swift satellite beginning April 10.54 revealed a fading X-ray source coincident with the explosion site, while observations by the VLA put an upper limit to the 22.46 GHz flux of &lt; 0 . 4 mJy on April 11.97 (Immler &amp; Brown 2006; Kelley et al. 2006; Immler et al. 2007). We obtained an optical spectrum with the HobbyEberly Telescope (HET) on April 11.11, which showed SN 2006bp to be an early Type II event (Quimby et al. 2006).

In this paper we present photometric and spectroscopic observations and analysis of SN 2006bp. We begin with a description of the unfiltered optical ROTSE-III (Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment) observations in § 2 including flux upper-limits in the days leading up to shock breakout. The complete light curve is presented and analyzed in § 2.1 leading to an estimate of the shock breakout date. The spectral observations from the HET are detailed in section 3. Data from the first two nights are discussed in § 3.1, and the full spectral evolution is considered in § 3.2. We give an approximate reconstruction of the early-time quasi-bolometric light curve in § 4. Discussion and conclusions are presented in § 5.

## 2. Photometry

We detected SN 2006bp as part of the Texas Supernova Search's nightly monitoring of the Ursa Major Galaxy Cluster (Quimby et al. in prep.) with the 0.45-m f/1.9 ROTSE-IIIb telescope (Akerlof et al. 2003) at the McDonald Observatory. The ROTSE-III telescopes gather unfiltered optical light; the approximate spectral response is given in Table 1. The SN is located in the overlap of three of our search fields, and typically two of these fields were covered in the nights leading up to the discovery. On April 9.15, the SN was formally detected by the image subtraction pipeline at the 4 . 8 σ level in both of the fields covered that night, but these detections were still below the 5 σ threshold employed by the automatic candidate filtering procedure used to limit spurious events, and so the SN was not identified as a possible supernova until the following night. Beginning on April 11, we obtained additional unfiltered images centered on SN 2006bp with both ROTSE-IIIb and ROTSE-IIId, which is located at the Turkish National Observatory at Bakirlitepe, Turkey. All images were flat fielded and dark subtracted by the standard ROTSE-III image processing pipeline (Rykoff 2005). The ROTSE-III instruments have a 1 . ◦ 85 × 1 . ◦ 85 field of view; however, the PSF varies significantly across the frame, and the instrumental zeropoint can as well under non- photometric conditions. We therefore selected 30 ′ × 30 ′ sub-frames centered on the SN for the final photometry.

Although we have a number of reference images taken prior to the explosion of SN 2006bp in each of the three search fields, in each case the location of the SN appears near the edge of the field where the image quality is at its worst, and there is very little overlap between the fields. Lacking a quality reference image, we decided to construct a reference template using the best post-explosion images available following the general procedure of Li et al. (2003). Briefly, we co-added 44 ROTSE-IIIb images acquired at various phases of the explosion, empirically measured the PSF, and then subtracted the scaled PSF to remove the SN light. We were able to test the resulting template by subtracting it from the images taken prior to the SN explosion. No significant positive or negative residual was found on these subtracted frames, which validates the template (hereafter 'REF'). Because the PSF on the REF is superior (much sharper) than is obtained from the pre-explosion images, this greatly improves our ability to convolve the template to match the delivered PSF on a given night, and we are able to use the same template for all of the available images. This allows for better and more consistent measurements of the SN flux on the template subtracted frames. The template is shown in Figure 1.

To determine the flux evolution of SN 2006bp, we first made separate co-additions for each unique night/field/telescope combination. In doing so, we only used the best images available, defined to be those images with detections for at least 80% of all the objects found on the deepest frame in that set. We median filtered the individual images and masked bad pixels to create the coadded image (hereafter 'NEW'). If any of the pixels within 1-FWHM of the SN position were masked, the image was removed from the NEW.

We performed PSF matched image subtraction of the REF from the NEWs using a modified version of the Supernova Cosmology Project's code. A selection of isolated, pointlike objects were chosen to serve as field standards (REFSTARS). The local PSF was first measured empirically on the REF and on each NEW using the REFSTARS, and this template was then fit to each REFSTAR to determine the PSF-fit flux and later the scaling between the REF and the NEWs. The local sky bias was found in annuli of 2-6 times the FWHM and removed prior to PSF-fitting with the DAOPHOT routines (Stetson 1987; ported to IDL by Landsman 1989). We calibrated the magnitude scale on the REF, and thereby all the data, via the USNO-B1.0 R2 magnitudes for the REFSTARS. The convolved REF was subtracted from the scaled NEWs to generate subtracted frames (SUBs), and the PSF template measured on the NEWs were then fit on the SUBs to find the SN flux. Although we only considered a 30 ′ × 30 ′ region centered on the SN, some variation in the PSF was noted across the subframes and we decided to use a spatially varying kernel as described by Alard (2000), which did render improved results. Limiting magnitudes were calculated for a 1 FWHM radius aperture from the noise measured in the sky-annuli. The photometric observations and calculated magnitudes are detailed in Table 2.

As we first registered the individual images in the NEWs to the REF, after the image subtraction we obtained multiple, semi-independent measurements of the SN position on the REF. To determine the equatorial position of the SN, we matched the REFSTARS to the USNO-B1.0 and solved for the transformation coefficients. SN 2006bp is located at α = 11 h 53 m 55 . s 74, δ = +52 ◦ 21 ′ 09 . ′′ 7 (J2000.0), with an estimated error of 0 . ′′ 2 in each coordinate. We found the location of the SN on a pre-explosion SDSS r-band frame by directly matching it to the REF and then transforming the SN position to the SDSS frame. As shown in Figure 1, the SN was found coincident with a red knot in an outer spiral arm of NGC 3953, and just to the north of a possible H II region.

## 2.1. ROTSE-III Light Curve

The unfiltered light curve of SN 2006bp is shown in Figure 2. ROTSE-III data are plotted as filled circles, and open squares are used to mark the discovery photometry from Mr. Itagaki. Because this object is located in the overlap of three of our search fields, we typically have at least 2 observations per night covering the position of SN 2006bp in the weeks leading up to its discovery. We can therefore rule out any bright optical emission prior to our first detection as might be expected from the ejecta colliding with a dense stellar wind, energy released from the shock breakout, or a thermal wave precursor (see Nadyozhin 2003 and references therein).

The PSF-fit flux and 4σ upper limits of SN 2006bp between 2006 March 20 and April 29 are shown relative to the peak flux in Figure 3. Given the initial rapid increase in flux, it is safe to assume SN 2006bp was detected soon after the explosion shock emerged from the progenitor envelope; however, detailed modeling tuned to the observations is required to accurately pinpoint the moment of core collapse and the subsequent shock breakout. Here we estimate the date of shock breakout from the early ROTSE-III flux upper limits and the detections on the first two nights. We modeled the early light curve as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and performed a least squares fit to determine the date of shock breakout, t 0 . The fit is plotted as the curve in Figure 3 (note we fit the model to the flux measured in 1 FWHM

circular apertures instead of the PSF-fit fluxes which are not statistically accurate for low significance or non-detections, although the PSF-fit detections are shown in the figure). Under the simplistic assumption of a quadratic rise, the best fit date for the shock breakout is 2006 April 8.7. The figure shows an inflection point in the data around April 10, and extending the fitting range beyond this date results in an unacceptably large χ 2 , which indicates the model assumptions are not valid over longer periods. Lacking the true functional form for the shock breakout light curve in our unfiltered band pass, we have chosen to reference all phases in this work relative to 2006 April 9.0 for convenience. It is important also to note that the actual core collapse can occur 1-3 days before the shock breakout depending on the progenitor radius.

The ROTSE-III light curve of SN 2006bp rises 3.0 mag from the first detection on April 9.1 to reach a peak unfiltered magnitude of 14.7 mag on April 16.5 (day +7.5; estimated from a 3 rd order polynomial fit to the data). The light curve then fades by about 0.2 mag before possibly rising to a second maximum on April 25 (day +16), although the coverage flanking this point is incomplete. There is otherwise little ( &lt; 0 . 1 mag) evolution between days +12 and +33, after which there is a slight decline of 0.016 mag day -1 until day +42. The average decay rate from day +38 to day +61 is 0.006 mag day -1 , and this rate then increases to 0.013 mag day -1 through day +82. The plateau phase finally comes to an end around day +80, and SN 2006bp fades by about 2 magnitudes before entering an exponential decay phase on day +110.

Rejecting a single outlier, the late-time ROTSE-III light curve shows an average linear decline of 0 . 0073 ± 0 . 0004 mag day -1 between days +121 and +335, which is significantly slower than the 0.0098 mag day -1 decline expected from the decay of 56 Co into 56 Fe (e-folding time τ Co = 111 d ). The late-time quasi-bolometric and V -band light curves of most CCSNe have been shown to follow the decay of 56 Co, although the U - and B -band flux drops more slowly and the R - and I -band light curves show departures as well (see Hamuy &amp; Suntzeff 1990 for example). The ROTSE-III data are unfiltered, but the peak response is in the V - and R - bands (see Table 1). The higher energy bands contribute little to the measured signal as shown by the low flux observed at early times when the spectral peak lies in the UV (see § 4). It is unclear how the low level U - and B -band fluxes at late times (see § 3 for the spectra) could dictate the light curve behavior 1 . It is possible that our reference template, which was constructed by removing the SN light from post-explosion data, may not accurately reflect the background signal around the SN; however, in such case we would expect the light curve to flatten out or drop quickly once the discrepancy is larger than the SN flux, but the data show a smooth linear decline. It is therefore worth considering the possibility of an additional source of energy production sustaining the luminosity, such as an ejecta-wind interaction as proposed by Chugai (1991) to explain the slower than expected decline in the H α line flux for three SNe II at late times.

1 For comparison, the Type II-P SN 2004et faded by 0.0064 mag day -1 in the B -band in the nebular phase while the V RI rates were all &gt; 0 . 01 mag day -1 (Sahu et al. 2006).

## 3. Spectroscopy

We observed SN 2006bp with the Low Resolution Spectrograph (LRS; Hill et al. 1998) on the Hobby-Eberly Telescope (HET; Ramsey et al. 1998), located at the McDonald Observatory, 13 nights between 2006 April 11 and June 21, and again on 2007 March 14 and 16. The HET can rotate freely in the azimuthal plane, but it is fixed at 55 degrees in elevation (airmass ∼ 1 . 22), and it uses an Arecibo-type tracker to follow targets as they rise through the observable altitude window in the east, or set through it in the west. The HET has an effective aperture of 9.2-m, although the pupil can vary along a given track (e.g. the effective mirror size drops toward the track limits). We used the g1 grism on LRS, which covers 4050 ˚ A to 11000 ˚ A with a resolving power of R ∼ 300 in a 2.0 ′′ slit. To avoid order overlap, we observed SN 2006bp each night with both the GG385 and the OG590 order sorting filters. The spectroscopic observing log is detailed in Table 3.

Dome flats and arc lamp calibration data were obtained on all nights with each observing setup; however, standard stars were only observed on 7 of the first 13 nights. Drawing on past experience with the LRS that shows the instrument to be quite stable from night to night, we decided to combine all the available calibration data and use them to uniformly process the target spectra from each night. We constructed master flats from all the data available and compared this to the nightly flats to verify the stability. For the GG385 data, which we trim to 4100-9200 ˚ A, the flats vary by less than 1% from night to night. We noticed significant variation in the OG590 setup near the cutoff frequency, however, which seems to correlate with the ambient (filter) temperature. We trimmed the OG590 data to the 6270-10820 ˚ A range, which keeps the nightly variations below 1%.

The target spectra were trimmed, bias subtracted, and flat corrected in the usual manner with IRAF scripts 2 . We used the routine LACosmic (van Dokkum 2001) to remove particle events, and then combined the frames from each night in each filter prior to extraction with APALL. We used spectral observations of the standard stars BD+17 4708, BD+26 2606, and Wolf 1346 to derive a relative spectrophotometric correction for the data. After grey shifting, the different standards taken on different nights agree out to 10000 ˚ A to typically better than 0.05 mag.

2 IRAF is distributed by the National Optical Astronomy Observatories, which are operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., under cooperative agreement with the National Science Foundation.

We removed strong telluric absorption features using the averaged BD+26 2606 spectrum as reference. The atmospheric conditions varied significantly over the course of observations, and the relative strengths of different telluric features changed from night to night, so we separately removed features predominantly caused by O I before correcting for the H 2 O lines. We note the H 2 O line profiles change somewhat as the individual transitions move in and out of saturation, and removal of the strong H 2 O absorption band between 8900 ˚ A and 9800 ˚ A is imperfect.

From the H I maps of Verheijen &amp; Sancisi (2001), we find a recession velocity of 1,280 km s -1 at the location of SN 2006bp, which we adopt as the rest frame velocity. To combine the two channels, we first scaled the OG590 data by a constant and re-sampled it to match the GG385 spectra in the overlap region. The nightly data are de-redshifted into the heliocentric rest frame and combined with a weighted average to produce the final spectra. To ensure a smooth transition, the weights drop exponentially toward the end of each component spectrum in the overlap region. For example, the weight of the GG385 spectra drops from 50% at 7700 ˚ A to zero at 9200 ˚ A. On the first night of observations, we obtained spectra in both the east and west tracks. We separately analyze each spectrum as well as the combined spectrum. The fully processed spectra are plotted in Figures 4 and 5. Figures 6-9 show the spectral evolution on expanded scales to emphasize the evolution of individual spectral lines.

## 3.1. Early Spectra

The HET data from 2006 April 11 and April 12 (about 2 and 3 days after shock breakout) not only rank among the earliest of supernova observations, but to our knowledge they represent the earliest spectra of any normal supernova to date (i.e. excluding the peculiar SN 1987A). On top of the largely featureless +2 day spectra are narrow emission lines corresponding to restframe He II λ 4200, He II λ 4686, H β , C IV λλ 5805, and H α that are each detected in both the east and west tracks. Table 4 gives the measured equivelent widths and line fluxes for the combined day +2 data. Note the He II λ 4200 line appears broader than the λ 4686 line, which may indicate a blend. Other intermediate lines from the Pickering series are not detected. In the day +3 spectra, H α is clearly detected, although the broad H α P-Cygni emission has increased such that the line is less pronounced, and the H β line is similarly lost in the broad H β P-Cygni emission, but the He II and C IV lines have disappeared despite little change or even a decrease in the local continua. The narrow H α emission is further detected at later phases but the high ionization lines are not. One possible explanation for this behavior is that all the narrow lines originate from circumstellar gas or within a wind blown off the progenitor, although given the location of the SN in a spiral arm and the proximity to several possible H II regions, it is likely the narrow H α emission originates in a physically distinct region. The narrow He II and C IV emission lines, however, require high temperatures or an ionizing flux, which implies they are local to the SN explosion. Their disappearance by day +3 suggests either rapid recombination at densities larger than ≈ 10 9 particles cm -3 , which is characteristic of extended red supergiant atmospheres, or that the material has been swept up by the shock (the low velocities exclude the SN ejecta as a source for these narrow lines).

In addition to the narrow emission lines, the day +2 and +3 spectra also exhibit a limited number of broad absorption features. Figure 10 shows these early spectra plotted in velocity space relative to H α . A P-Cygni profile is seen in each case extending out to beyond 20,000 km s -1 , and the absorption and emission components both strengthen in the latter spectra. Near the broad emission peak, there are apparent absorption or emission features in addition to the narrow rest frame H α line. Most prominent among these is a notch extending from 4,000 to 6,500 km s -1 . Heeding the cautionary tale of Matheson et al. (2000), we checked the high resolution atmospheric transmission atlas from Hinkle et al. (2003) and find that uncorrected telluric lines are likely responsible.

Perhaps the most distinct feature in the day +2 spectra is a P-Cygni profile around 4450 ˚ A (Figures 4 and 6). The feature is also present in the day +3 spectra, which is similar to a spectrum of SN 1999gi taken one day after discovery (Leonard et al. 2002b). Leonard et al. (2002b) tentatively associate this feature to high velocity H β , although they caution that no corresponding high velocity H α profile is observed. In our early spectra of SN 2006bp we similarly do not identify P-Cygni profiles from any other species in the same velocity range (see Figure 10). If this feature does in fact arise from H β , then the absorption wing extends out to about 35,000 km s -1 . This P-Cygni profile taken together with the narrow He II λ 4686 emission line is rather evocative of the H α P-Cygni profile and the narrow H α emission line (Figure 10). Noting this similarity, we suggest the 4450 ˚ A P-Cygni profile may alternatively arise from He II λ 4686. This would require high ionization in the outer ejecta layers, which is plausible given the recent passage of the breakout shock. Following the modeling of SN 1999em by Baron et al. (2000), Leonard et al. (2002b) also identify a broad absorption trough around 5450 ˚ A from high velocity He I λ 5876 in their early spectra of SN 1999gi. While this absorption also appears in our +3 day spectra of SN 2006bp, it is absent in the +2 day data (top of Figure 7; around 24,000 km s -1 relative to He I λ 5876 in Figure 10). If the 5450 ˚ A absorption trough is caused by He I λ 5876, then its appearance on day +3 in concert with the fading of the proposed He II λ 4686 P-Cygni line would be consistent with recombination of Helium. Dessart &amp; Hillier (2005) suggest photospheric Ni II lines can simultaneously fit the features blue of both He I λ 5876 and H β in spectra of SN 1999em taken around 5 days after shock breakout (see also Baron et al. 2000). Detailed modeling is encouraged to accurately identify these features.

## 3.2. Line Evolution

We compared the HET spectra of SN 2006bp to a spectral atlas of the Type II-P SN 1999em to identify the line features (Leonard et al. 2002a; their Figure 10 and Table 4). For this work we have chosen to focus on the strongest features as well as select lines useful for EPM studies. To determine the wavelength of maximum absorption for each feature, we first smoothed the spectra with a Fourier Transform and divided by the local continuum estimated from a linear extrapolation to the neighboring peaks. We then interpolated the data into 0.01 ˚ A bins with a spline function and selected the flux minima. These wavelengths are then converted into expansion velocities using the rest wavelength (or gf weighted rest wavelength for blends) and the relativistic Doppler transformation. Derived values for the 20 lines chosen are reported in Table 5 and plotted in Figure 11.

Figure 6 shows a detail of the spectral evolution between 4100 and 5300 ˚ A. The top portion shows the +2 day to +8 day spectra on an expanded scale, and the +8 to +73 day spectra are plotted below. Only the combined (east and west tracks) spectrum is shown for day +2. The FT smoothed minima of key line features are circled and labeled. We identify the absorption around 4450 ˚ A in the +2 day data as a signature of He II λ 4686 P-Cygni as described above. By day +8 this feature is almost completely lost in the continuum, which indicates why this may not have been previously identified in spectra of other SNe II-P that were less promptly observed. H β is weakly detected in the day +3 and +6 spectra, but it is blended with the P-Cygni emission from He II λ 4686, which dilutes the feature and may shift the minimum to the red. By day +73 H β is the strongest feature in this range. Note the kink in the blue wing of H β that first becomes distinct in the +33 day spectrum and persists through day +73. Fe II lines begin to emerge 2-3 weeks after shock breakout, and Sc II λ 4670 is detected beginning around day +57. H γ is likely blended with Fe II , Sr II , and Sc II lines. Features left unidentified, such as the absorption around 4500 ˚ A in the later spectra, are mostly due to blended metal lines including Fe II , Sc II , Ba II , and Ti II .

The spectral evolution of SN 2006bp between 5300 and 6300 ˚ A is shown in Figure 7. There is interstellar Na I absorption present at all phases, suggesting some degree of reddening along the line of sight. A linear fit to the equivelent width of this feature over time indicates a 0.005 ˚ A day -1 decrease from a starting value of ≈ 1 . 3 ˚ A on April 9.0. The earliest spectra show a weak He I λ 5876 P-Cygni profile that strengthens through day +10. On day +12 this line shows a clear double minimum in the absorption trough. The blue component to the pair strengthens and dominates the other, weakening minimum in the day +21 spectrum. The redder component then strengthens on day +25, clearly becomes the stronger of the two starting on day +33, and subsequently develops into the Na I D P-Cygni feature that dominates this wavelength range in the latter phases. We have labeled this red component as Na I λ 5892 from day +12 through day +73, although this feature is likely blended with He I λ 5876 throughout, and He I λ 5876 may even be the stronger component prior to day +21. We further labeled the minimum around 5700 ˚ A as He I λ 5876, although this requires velocities much higher than the other photospheric lines. Interestingly, this line does drift to the red with time, but considerably more slowly than the neighboring Sc II λ 5533 and Fe II λ 5666 lines. We note that the absorption around 5700 ˚ A is much stronger for SN 2006bp then was seen for SN 1999em, and which Leonard et al. (2002a) identify as high velocity Na I . Detailed modeling is required to accurately determine the source of the 5700 ˚ A absorption, be it high velocity He I λ 5876 or Na I λ 5892, N II λ 5679, a combination of these, or something else. The unmarked absorption features around 6100 ˚ A and 6200 ˚ A are due to Fe II , Sc II , and Ba II blends.

Figure 8 shows the spectral evolution of SN 2006bp between 6000 and 7000 ˚ A including the H α P-Cygni profile. The day +2 to day +6 spectra are shown on an expanded scale at the top of the figure. H α is detected over all epochs. There is a kink along the blue wing of the absorption around 6350 ˚ A that clearly becomes visible in the last 3 epochs. There is also a notch around 6280 ˚ A in the +57 and +73 day spectra which may be traced back to day +16. Leonard et al. (2002a) identify a similar feature in SN 1999em as high velocity H α and Chugai et al. (2007) argue that such absorption features observed in the spectra of SNe 1999em and 2004dj result from eject-wind interactions. Si II λ 6533 absorption is detected between days +12 and +25, and there is formally a minimum found near this line in the +10 day spectra, but given the large jump in velocities between the +10 and +12 day minima, the identification with Si II is dubious (see however § 5).

Fringing becomes a problem in the HET spectra to the red of about 8000 ˚ A as shown in Figure 9. No lines are detected in the 6800 to 10300 ˚ A range until day +8. Likely due to their limited wavelength coverage, the only feature listed by Leonard et al. (2002a) to the red of H α is the Ca II IR triplet. This feature is weakly detected in the +16 day spectra, and it quickly grows in strength to dominate this wavelength range. In the later phases shown in the figure, there is a distinct double minimum as the two bluer lines blend into Ca II λ 8520, but the redder component, Ca II λ 8662, remains distinct. This complicated blend and pronounced emission make for a difficult continuum estimation, and the Ca II λ 8662 line is particularly impacted. The components are not clearly split in the +16 day spectrum, and we have associated the absorption only with Ca II λ 8520 in the figure, although the 8662 ˚ A line is likely blended in as well and pulls the minimum to the red as a result. We identify the P-Cygni feature that becomes clearly visible around 7700 ˚ A in the later phases in our HET spectra of SN 2006bp as the O I 7773 ˚ A triplet. An alternative identification is a blend of Fe II lines at 7690, 7705, and 7732 ˚ A (Branch et al. 2004). With either identification or a combination of both, this feature can be seen as early as day +8. Note in the +10 day spectrum the absorption profile is asymmetric with the red wing extending much further from the minimum than the blue wing. On day +21, there is an extended blue wing next to the deepening absorption core. A P-Cygni profile from Paschen δ also becomes apparent in the latter spectra. Several notches are seen in the +73 day spectra and these may also be present in the +42 and +57 day spectra, although fringing and night sky line subtraction errors distort these features. Fassia et al. (1998) identify three of these lines in the Type II-P SN 1995V at a similar phase as C I λ 9088, Sc II λ 9236, and C I λ 9405. A possibly distinct set of P-Cygni features are seen between +21 and +33 days.

As shown in Figure 4, the HET spectra extend to almost 10800 ˚ A in the restframe, although the signal to noise per pixel can be low beyond ∼ 10300 ˚ A. There is, however, a clear absorption dip seen in the +8 and +10 day spectra with a minimum at about 10400 ˚ A. Infrared spectra of SN 1999em also show such a dip at a similar phase, and Hamuy et al. (2001) identify this feature as He I λ 10830. At later phases (about 25 and 35 days after breakout), Hamuy et al. (2001) find multiple absorption and emission features in the 10000 to 11000 ˚ A range with possible contributions from Sr II λ 10327, Fe II λ 10547, and C I λ 10695 (see also Fassia et al. 1998). Another possible contributor to the absorption in this range is high velocity He I λ 10830 (Chugai et al. 2007).

## 4. Bolometric Light Curve Approximation

Our ROTSE-III photometry are invaluable in determining the shock breakout date, but at early times the unfiltered optical response is insensitive to the bulk of the flux, which is emitted at higher frequencies. In this section we attempt to reconstruct the quasibolometric light curve of SN 2006bp using the X-ray, Ultra-violet, and optical observations of Immler et al. (2007) and our HET spectroscopy.

We begin by interpolating the Swift UVOTmeasurements in the UVW2, UVM2, UVW1, U, B, and V filters presented by Immler et al. (2007) onto a grid spaced regularly in time. We fit 4 th order polynomials to the light curves over the first 2-5 weeks and 1 st to 2 nd order fits to the data after days +10 to +20 as the coverage allows, and smoothly averaged the fits in the overlap. We then convert the measured magnitudes into flux densities using the conversion factors available from the Swift calibration database 3 . We calibrated our HET spectra by normalizing the flux densities to the Swift V -band measurements. We then proceeded to interpolate the flux densities in each wavelength bin to the same regular time grid using a similar method of smoothly connected polynomial fits across the early (3 rd order) and late (2 nd order) phases. The HET spectra obtained under non-spectroscopic conditions on day +6 were excluded from the fits. For the Swift XRT and XMM data (Immler et al. 2007), we simply perform a linear fit to the three epochs of declining flux.

To approximate the bolometric light curve, we then integrate the 1600-5500 ˚ A flux densities from the Swift photometry and our HET flux densities between 5500-10000 ˚ A, and then add in the X-ray flux, for each time bin. The results are plotted in Figure 12. As shown by Immler et al. (2007), the spectral energy distribution (SED) at early-times rises from the optical to the UV (their Figure 5). Because the 0.2-10 keV X-ray flux is much lower, we can deduce the peak lies between the X-ray and UVW2 bands on day 1, but lacking constraint on the SED in this range, we have not attempted to interpolate the flux densities over the coverage gap. The early-time bolometric fluxes are therefore somewhat underestimated. As constructed, the bolometric light curve reaches its peak about 3 days after shock breakout and slowly declines up to day +25 before leveling off on the plateau.

## 5. Discussion and Conclusions

We have presented the ROTSE-III unfiltered light curve and HET optical spectroscopy for the Type II-P SN 2006bp. Because of our frequent coverage of the explosion site in the days leading up to shock breakout, and with the rapid increase in flux observed on 2006 April 9 and 10, we can set the most stringent observational limits ever for the shock breakout date of a SNe II-P. A simple quadratic fit to the early limits and the detections on the first two nights gives an estimate of 2006 April 8.7 as the date of shock breakout, which is just 11 hours prior to our first detection, although proper modeling of the light curve with a realistic density structure of the outer layers is required to accurately determine the breakout epoch. The flux does increase rapidly between the first two epochs, but the rate of brightening decreases over the next few nights before reaching a maximum of 14.7 mag around April 16.5. No distinct breakout peak is seen in ROTSE-III's unfiltered band pass, and our limits rule out any such bright optical emission in the 3 days before our first detection.

[3 http://swift.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/heasarc/caldb/swift/docs/uvot/](http://swift.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/heasarc/caldb/swift/docs/uvot/)

Swift began observations of SN 2006bp on 2006 April 10.54 in the optical, UV, and X-ray bands (Immler et al. 2007). Over the first few nights, the U, B, and V band curves all rise slightly, and no breakout peak or rapid decay from such is seen, consistent with the ROTSEIII data. This behavior excludes the models from Falk &amp; Arnett (1977) with extended, low density shells exterior to the progenitor envelope (i.e. their models B, E, and F), as such a configuration leads to a pronounced, 10-15 day peak in visible wavelengths. Further the UVW2, UVM2, and UVW1 light curves decline slowly and do not show any signs of a distinct, 1-2 day breakout peak as expected for models A and D from Falk &amp; Arnett (1977). The bolometric light curve approximated in § 4 shows a 3 day rise followed by a 22 day decline to a plateau phase. Although the early peak flux may be somewhat underestimated, this asymmetric peak rises just a factor of ∼ 2 above the plateau. Any sharp jump in luminosity associated with the arrival of the shock at the progenitor's photosphere must have lasted less than one day.

The HET spectra are unprecedented not only for the early response, but also for the broad (4100-10800 ˚ A), uniform coverage across all epochs. We employed the same instrument and setups for all observations from early through late times in contrast to the hodge podge of observations typically collected. The spectra obtained on April 11, just two days after the derived date of shock breakout, represent the earliest spectroscopic observations of a Type IIP, took place at a similar phase to the first observations of SN 1993J (Lewis et al. 1994), and are the earliest of any supernova other than SN 1987A. The most intriguing features in these early spectra are narrow emission lines corresponding to the high ionization species He II λ 4686, C IV λλ 5805, and possibly He II λ 4200 as well. These features all appear in our first two epochs of data separated by ∼ 5 hours, but they have vanished by the following night. The coincidence of these narrow lines in both space and time with SN 2006bp, their rapid evolution, and the high temperatures or bright ionizing flux required to produce them all suggest the emitting region is located close to the explosion site, although their low velocities and narrow profiles imply this region is positioned beyond the hydrodynamic front two days after breakout. The sudden disappearance of the narrow He II and C IV emission lines by day +3 requires either rapid recombination or disruption of the emission region through direct interaction with the SN ejecta. Given the lack of narrow emission lines from lower ionization species on subsequent nights (e.g. He I or C III ), we favor the latter interpretation. We can then determine the distance from the progenitor's photosphere at the moment of shock breakout to the emitting region using the observed velocities from H α P-Cygni in the day +2 spectra (15,000 km s -1 measured from the absorption minimum, or 21,000 km s -1 as measured from the blue limit of the absorption). The material responsible for the narrow emission lines in the day +2 data must lie beyond 3 × 10 14 cm, but within 5 × 10 14 cm of the progenitor's surface. If this material were cast off the progenitor during a stellar eruption and traveled at 10 km s -1 , then this occurred just 10-20 years prior to the explosion.

After the narrow emission lines, the most pronounced feature in the April 11 spectra is the P-Cygni profile at around 4450 ˚ A. Other studies of SNe II-P with early spectra have noted absorption in this range and associated it with high velocity H β , but our earlier data clearly show such an interpretation requires significant material at velocities up to 35,000 km s -1 . A mechanism to suppress H α at similar velocities whilst allowing an H α P-Cygni profile to form at slower velocities would further be required. We find the identification of this P-Cygni profile with He II λ 4686 to be more compelling, and modeling to directly test this possibility is encouraged. Only weak He I λ 5876 absorption at velocities consistent with the H α P-Cygni absorption is found in the day +2 spectra, but by day +3 a distinct absorption profile appears to the blue of He I λ 5876 as well. We hypothesize that this second minimum may form as He II in the outer ejecta recombines to He I , although much of the corresponding velocity range for the presumed high velocity He I λ 5876 absorption is higher than the He II λ 4686 velocity limit observed in the day +2 spectrum, so the observed absorption regions cannot map directly from one line to the other. This scenario then predicts He II λ 4686 absorption at earlier phases in the appropriate velocity range. Contributions from photospheric metal lines such as N II should be considered as well (Baron et al. 2000; Dessart &amp; Hillier 2005; Baron et al. 2007).

In the later phases, enhanced absorption appears in the blue wings of the H β (by at least day +33) and Na I λ 5892 (day +12) P-Cygni absorption troughs, and in the case of H α there are two such notches (day +16 and day +42). A possible explanation for these features are unidentified metal blends, although for the absorption to the blue of the H α minimum and for the absorption blue of Na I λ 5892 (labeled He I λ 5876 in Figure 7), the weak absorption minima do not shift to longer wavelengths with time in a manner consistent with the photospheric evolution. A second possibility is that these lines originate in higher velocity layers above the photosphere. We find anecdotal evidence for such a line forming region when considering 1) the three of these features that appear at about 10,000 km s -1 relative to H β , He I λ 5876, and H α , and 2) the Fe II λ 5018, Fe II λ 5169, Si II λ 6533, and O I λ 7773 lines that all initially appear at substantially higher velocities than would be predicted from backward extrapolation of later phase measurements (see Figure 11). More intriguing still, the velocities of these lines upon entrance (days +8 to +10) match the egress velocity of the proposed He II λ 4686 line (day +8). SN 2006bp may very well have had a line forming region exterior to the photosphere, perhaps formed from the interaction of the progenitor wind as suggested by Chugai et al. (2007). The initial emergence of certain species in these high velocity layers could then imply this region cools faster than the photospheric layers, perhaps signaling a source of heating such as outward mixing of 56 Ni in the lower line forming region (Fassia et al. 1998). In this rough picture, the ongoing ejecta/wind interaction could supply additional energy at late times and thus help explain the slow, 0 . 0073 ± 0 . 0004 mag day -1 decline derived from the ROTSE-III photometry in the nebular phase.

Finally, we would like to comment on the confusion of the terms 'shock breakout' and 'explosion,' which appears to occur quite frequently in the literature. For Type II supernovae, the explosion date should be referenced to the moment at which the core reverses its collapse. The shock breakout, on the other hand, is the first electromagnetic signal of the explosion and should be referenced to the moment at which the stellar flux begins its rapid ascent to super-Eddington luminosities and beyond. This epoch will be delayed relative to the core collapse as the signal must first reach the surface of the progenitor. Depending on the extent of the envelope, this delay may be hours (e.g. SN 1987A), or up to a few days for super-redgiant envelopes ( ∼ 5000 R ⊙ ). Of particular importance are dates derived from the expanding photosphere method, where an equation analogous to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is solved via least squares fits to give t 0 and the radius of the emitting photosphere, R . The initial radius, R 0 , is typically assumed to be negligible, and in that same vein, t 0 is often referred to as the explosion date; however, it is clear from equation 2 that t 0 is actually the epoch at which the photospheric radius begins to grow and properly refers to the shock breakout date. As electromagnetic studies push toward earlier and earlier epochs, and with gravitational wave detectors soon to join the neutrino experiments as complimentary probes into the deaths of stars, it is important that we exercise diligence in our use of these separate terms.

We would like to thank the staff of the Hobby-Eberly Telescope and McDonald Observatory for their support. We give specific thanks to S. Rostopchin, J. Caldwell, M. Shetrone, F. Deglman, S. Odewahn, V. Riley, and E. Terrazas for their observations with the HET, and to F. Castro, P. Mondol, and M. Sellers for their efforts in screening potential SN candidates. This work made use of the SUSPECT on-line database of SNe spectra ( http://bruford.nhn.ou.edu/$\sim$suspect/index1.html ). This research is supported, in part, by NASA grant NAG 5-7937 (PH) and NSF grants AST0307312 (PH) and AST0406740 (RQ &amp; JCW).

## REFERENCES

- Akerlof, C. W., Kehoe, R. L., McKay, T. A., et al. 2003, PASP, 115, 132
- Akiyama, S., Wheeler, J. C., Meier, D. L., &amp; Lichtenstadt, I. 2003, ApJ, 584, 954
- Alard, C. 2000, A&amp;AS, 144, 363
- Arnett, D. 1989, ApJ, 343, 834
- Baklanov, P. V., Blinnikov, S. I., &amp; Pavlyuk, N. N. 2005, Astronomy Letters, 31, 429
- Baron, E., Branch, D., &amp; Hauschildt, P. H. 2007, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
- Baron, E., Branch, D., Hauschildt, P. H., et al. 2000, ApJ, 545, 444
- Baron, E., Nugent, P. E., Branch, D., &amp; Hauschildt, P. H. 2004, ApJ, 616, L91
- Blinnikov, S., Lundqvist, P., Bartunov, O., Nomoto, K., &amp; Iwamoto, K. 2000, ApJ, 532, 1132
- Blondin, J. M. &amp; Mezzacappa, A. 2006, ApJ, 642, 401
- Branch, D., Baron, E., Thomas, R. C., et al. 2004, PASP, 116, 903
- Brown, P. J., Dessart, L., Holland, S. T., et al. 2006, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
- Burrows, A., Livne, E., Dessart, L., Ott, C. D., &amp; Murphy, J. 2006, New Astronomy Review, 50, 487
- Chieffi, A., Dom´ ınguez, I., H¨ oflich, P., Limongi, M., &amp; Straniero, O. 2003, MNRAS, 345, 111
- Chugai, N. N. 1991, MNRAS, 250, 513
- Chugai, N. N., Chevalier, R. A., &amp; Utrobin, V. P. 2007
- Dessart, L. &amp; Hillier, D. J. 2005, A&amp;A, 437, 667
- -. 2006, A&amp;A, 447, 691
- Eastman, R. G., Woosley, S. E., Weaver, T. A., &amp; Pinto, P. A. 1994, ApJ, 430, 300
- Eldridge, J. J. &amp; Tout, C. A. 2004, MNRAS, 353, 87
- Elmhamdi, A., Danziger, I. J., Chugai, N., et al. 2003, MNRAS, 338, 939
- Ensman, L. &amp; Burrows, A. 1992, ApJ, 393, 742

- Falk, S. W. &amp; Arnett, W. D. 1977, ApJS, 33, 515
- Fassia, A., Meikle, W. P. S., Geballe, T. R., et al. 1998, MNRAS, 299, 150
- Hamuy, M. &amp; Pinto, P. A. 2002, ApJ, 566, L63
- Hamuy, M., Pinto, P. A., Maza, J., et al. 2001, ApJ, 558, 615
- Hamuy, M. &amp; Suntzeff, N. B. 1990, AJ, 99, 1146
- Heger, A., Fryer, C. L., Woosley, S. E., Langer, N., &amp; Hartmann, D. H. 2003, ApJ, 591, 288
- Hill, G. J., Nicklas, H. E., MacQueen, P. J., et al. 1998, in Proc. SPIE Vol. 3355, p. 375-386, Optical Astronomical Instrumentation, Sandro D'Odorico; Ed., 375-386
- Hinkle, K. H., Wallace, L., &amp; Livingston, W. 2003, in Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, 1260-+
- Hoflich, P. 1991, in Supernovae. The Tenth Santa Cruz Workshop in Astronomy and Astrophysics, held July 9-21, 1989, Lick Observatory. Editor, S.E. Woosley; Publisher, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1991. LC # QB856 .S26 1989. ISBN # 0387970711. P.415, 1991, ed. S. E. Woosley, 415-+
- H¨ oflich, P., Khokhlov, A., &amp; Wang, L. 2001, in American Institute of Physics Conference Series, Vol. 586, 20th Texas Symposium on relativistic astrophysics, ed. J. C. Wheeler &amp; H. Martel, 459-+
- Immler, S. &amp; Brown, P. J. 2006, The Astronomer's Telegram, 793, 1
- Immler, S., Brown, P. J., Milne, P., et al. 2007, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
- Itagaki, K., Nakano, S., Contreras, C., et al. 2006, IAU Circ., 8736, 1
- Janka, H. ., Langanke, K., Marek, A., Martinez-Pinedo, G., &amp; Mueller, B. 2006, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
- Kelley, M. T., Stockdale, C. J., Sramek, R. A., et al. 2006, Central Bureau Electronic Telegrams, 495, 1
- Khokhlov, A. M., H¨ oflich, P. A., Oran, E. S., et al. 1999, ApJ, 524, L107
- Kirshner, R. P. &amp; Kwan, J. 1974, ApJ, 193, 27
- Landsman, W. B. 1989, BAAS, 21, 784

- Leonard, D. C., Filippenko, A. V., Gates, E. L., et al. 2002a, PASP, 114, 35
- Leonard, D. C., Filippenko, A. V., Li, W., et al. 2002b, AJ, 124, 2490
- Leonard, D. C., Kanbur, S. M., Ngeow, C. C., &amp; Tanvir, N. R. 2003, ApJ, 594, 247
- Lewis, J. R., Walton, N. A., Meikle, W. P. S., et al. 1994, MNRAS, 266, L27+
- Li, W., Filippenko, A. V., Chornock, R., et al. 2003, PASP, 115, 453
- Li, W., Wang, X., Van Dyk, S. D., et al. 2007, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
- Litvinova, I. Y. &amp; Nadezhin, D. K. 1985, Soviet Astronomy Letters, 11, 145
- Mair, G., Hillebrandt, W., Hoeflich, P., &amp; Dorfi, A. 1992, A&amp;A, 266, 266
- Matheson, T., Filippenko, A. V., Ho, L. C., Barth, A. J., &amp; Leonard, D. C. 2000, AJ, 120, 1499
- Nadyozhin, D. K. 2003, MNRAS, 346, 97
- Nugent, P., Sullivan, M., Ellis, R., et al. 2006, ApJ, 645, 841
- Pastorello, A., Sauer, D., Taubenberger, S., et al. 2006, MNRAS, 370, 1752
- Quimby, R., Brown, P., Caldwell, J., &amp; Rostopchin, S. 2006, Central Bureau Electronic Telegrams, 471, 1
- Ramsey, L. W., Adams, M. T., Barnes, T. G., et al. 1998, in Proc. SPIE Vol. 3352, p. 34-42, Advanced Technology Optical/IR Telescopes VI, Larry M. Stepp; Ed., 34-42
- Rykoff, E. S. 2005, PhD thesis, University of Michigan, United States - Michigan
- Sahu, D. K., Anupama, G. C., Srividya, S., &amp; Muneer, S. 2006, MNRAS, 372, 1315
- Schlegel, E. M. 2001, ApJ, 556, L25
- Schmidt, B. P., Kirshner, R. P., Eastman, R. G., et al. 1994, AJ, 107, 1444
- Shaviv, G., Wehrse, R., &amp; Wagoner, R. V. 1985, ApJ, 289, 198
- Stetson, P. B. 1987, PASP, 99, 191
- Tsvetkov, D. Y., Volnova, A. A., Shulga, A. P., et al. 2006, A&amp;A, 460, 769
- van Dokkum, P. G. 2001

Verheijen, M. A. W. &amp; Sancisi, R. 2001, A&amp;A, 370, 765

- Woosley, S. E. 1988, in Lecture Notes in Physics, Berlin Springer Verlag, Vol. 305, Atmospheric Diagnostics of Stellar Evolution, ed. K. Nomoto, 361-+

This preprint was prepared with the AAS L A T E X macros v5.2.

Table 1. ROTSE-III Sensitivity

| Wavelength ( ˚  A)  Efficiency  3000  0.00  3500  0.09  4000  0.45  4500  0.67  5000  0.83  5500  0.84  6000  0.84  6500  0.82  7000  0.78  7500  0.71  8000  0.57  8500  0.40  9000  0.28  9500  0.16  10000  0.07   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Note. - Approximate spectral response for ROTSE-III not including atmospheric losses. The values have not been empericly measured, but were instead calculated based on the typical CCD and optical element efficiencies. Additional losses due to degredation of the optical elements over time are not taken into account.

Table 2. ROTSE-III Observations of SN 2006bp

| Inst.  a  Phase  b  Date  Exp. (s)  C  R  σ  C  R  Limit  c  3b  -18.8  2006 Mar 21.152  3x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.37  3b  -18.8  Mar 21.154  4x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.54  3b  -17.9  Mar 22.148  3x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.75  3b  -15.6  Mar 24.396  4x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.06  3b  -14.9  Mar 25.135  4x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.37  3b  -14.9  Mar 25.142  4x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.44  3b  -13.9  Mar 26.134  4x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.72  3b  -9.9  Mar 30.132  3x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.03  3b  -9.9  Mar 30.137  2x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.60  3b  -8.7  Mar 31.295  4x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.44  3b  -2.6  Apr 6.373  4x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.80  3b  -2.6  Apr 6.382  2x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.08  3b  -1.6  Apr 7.370  1x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.43  3b  -1.6  Apr 7.379  4x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.10  3b  -0.8  Apr 8.176  1x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.49  3b  -0.8  Apr 8.177  2x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.19  3b  0.1  Apr 9.147  4x20  17.75  0.19  17.97  3b  0.2  Apr 9.151  4x20  17.50  0.18  17.69  3b  1.1  Apr 10.149  4x20  15.44  0.03  17.65  3b  1.2  Apr 10.152  4x20  15.44  0.05  17.47  3d  2.1  Apr 11.058  5x20  15.29  0.07  17.43  3b  2.1  Apr 11.115  3x20  15.14  0.04  17.72  3b  2.1  Apr 11.134  4x20  15.14  0.05  17.40  3d  2.8  Apr 11.751  4x20  15.11  0.06  16.97  3b  4.1  Apr 13.116  3x20  14.88  0.03  17.65  3b  6.1  Apr 15.139  6x20  14.75  0.03  18.24  3b  7.2  Apr 16.202  3x20  14.73  0.02  17.71  3d  7.8  Apr 16.808  4x60  14.74  0.02  18.50  3d  8.8  Apr 17.798  3x60  14.76  0.03  17.47  3b  9.1  Apr 18.120  3x20  14.69  0.03  18.34  3d  11.8  Apr 20.822  8x60  14.82  0.03  19.14  3d  12.8  Apr 21.792  5x60  14.87  0.02  18.80  3d  14.1  Apr 23.103  7x60  14.85  0.04  18.14  3b  16.1  Apr 25.124  3x20  14.73  0.03  18.51  3d  17.8  Apr 26.785  8x60  14.82  0.02  18.67  3b  21.2  Apr 30.190  9x20  14.77  0.02  19.12  3b  22.2  May 1.231  6x20  14.78  0.02  18.89  3d  23.1  May 2.074  5x60  14.81  0.04  18.74  3d  26.0  May 4.994  6x60  14.82  0.02  18.67  3b  26.2  May 5.152  6x20  14.79  0.03  18.59  3b  27.2  May 6.153  6x20  14.80  0.02  18.46  3d  27.9  May 6.905  1x60  14.92  0.07  16.44  3b  28.3  May 7.253  3x20  14.75  0.03  17.77  3b  29.2  May 8.181  3x20  14.78  0.03  17.20  3b  30.2  May 9.170  6x20  14.85  0.04  18.29  3d  30.8  May 9.837  8x20  14.86  0.03  17.85   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2-Continued

| Inst.  a  Phase  b  Date  Exp. (s)  C  R  σ  C  R  Limit  c  3b  31.2  May 10.150  5x20  14.79  0.03  17.85  3b  32.2  May 11.176  5x20  14.79  0.03  17.65  3b  33.1  May 12.135  3x20  14.81  0.03  17.65  3b  34.2  May 13.238  3x20  14.85  0.04  17.53  3d  34.9  May 13.874  8x20  14.91  0.04  17.92  3b  35.2  May 14.195  2x20  14.77  0.05  16.66  3d  35.8  May 14.833  12x20  14.88  0.03  18.30  3d  36.8  May 15.793  4x60  14.96  0.03  18.78  3b  38.2  May 17.160  6x20  14.91  0.03  18.87  3d  38.9  May 17.869  8x60  14.92  0.02  18.79  3b  39.2  May 18.160  6x20  14.93  0.03  19.07  3d  40.0  May 18.950  4x60  14.98  0.04  18.28  3b  40.1  May 19.140  3x20  14.99  0.02  18.48  3d  40.8  May 19.823  11x60  14.94  0.03  18.96  3b  41.2  May 20.162  6x20  14.99  0.04  18.98  3d  41.8  May 20.827  12x60  14.95  0.02  18.85  3b  42.2  May 21.184  3x20  14.98  0.04  18.74  3d  42.9  May 21.921  7x60  14.97  0.02  18.91  3b  43.2  May 22.152  4x20  14.94  0.04  18.56  3d  43.9  May 22.852  7x60  14.94  0.02  18.82  3b  44.2  May 23.194  5x20  14.97  0.02  18.73  3d  44.9  May 23.927  8x60  14.92  0.02  18.62  3b  45.2  May 24.174  5x20  14.97  0.03  18.85  3d  45.8  May 24.830  12x60  14.97  0.02  19.02  3b  46.2  May 25.185  3x20  15.01  0.03  18.61  3d  46.8  May 25.845  9x60  14.99  0.03  18.84  3b  48.2  May 27.209  2x20  14.99  0.09  16.19  3b  49.1  May 28.145  3x20  14.99  0.04  18.25  3d  49.9  May 28.920  12x60  15.01  0.03  19.17  3b  50.2  May 29.229  5x20  14.96  0.04  18.61  3d  50.8  May 29.835  12x60  15.01  0.03  19.02  3b  51.2  May 30.178  4x20  14.95  0.03  18.42  3d  51.8  May 30.836  11x60  15.04  0.04  19.00  3b  52.2  May 31.168  4x20  15.01  0.04  18.56  3d  52.8  May 31.836  12x60  15.07  0.02  19.04  3b  53.2  Jun 1.247  3x20  14.99  0.03  18.15  3d  53.9  Jun 1.890  6x60  15.03  0.02  18.64  3b  54.2  Jun 2.169  6x20  15.03  0.04  18.60  3d  54.8  Jun 2.841  11x60  15.05  0.05  18.74  3b  55.2  Jun 3.188  6x20  15.03  0.03  18.57  3b  56.2  Jun 4.178  4x20  15.07  0.03  18.40  3b  57.2  Jun 5.170  6x20  15.08  0.03  18.46  3b  58.2  Jun 6.170  6x20  15.07  0.02  18.38  3d  58.9  Jun 6.852  9x20  15.00  0.03  18.14  3d  59.8  Jun 7.847  10x20  15.04  0.03  18.06  3b  60.2  Jun 8.170  4x20  15.02  0.03  17.96   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2-Continued

| Inst.  a  Phase  b  Date  Exp. (s)  C  R  σ  C  R  Limit  c  3d  60.8  Jun 8.831  10x20  15.05  0.03  17.88  3b  61.2  Jun 9.166  5x20  15.05  0.04  18.05  3b  63.2  Jun 11.171  3x20  15.06  0.04  17.56  3d  63.9  Jun 11.886  8x20  15.03  0.04  17.22  3b  64.2  Jun 12.152  2x20  15.13  0.03  17.66  3d  64.8  Jun 12.841  12x20  15.09  0.05  18.04  3b  65.2  Jun 13.163  4x20  15.10  0.02  18.26  3b  66.2  Jun 14.152  3x20  15.09  0.04  18.45  3d  66.8  Jun 14.843  4x60  15.14  0.03  18.26  3b  67.2  Jun 15.178  5x20  15.15  0.03  18.63  3b  68.2  Jun 16.174  6x20  15.14  0.04  18.79  3d  68.8  Jun 16.831  5x60  15.15  0.02  18.45  3b  69.2  Jun 17.165  4x20  15.11  0.02  18.27  3d  69.9  Jun 17.902  4x60  15.15  0.04  18.28  3b  70.2  Jun 18.165  4x20  15.19  0.03  18.61  3d  70.8  Jun 18.818  5x60  15.15  0.02  18.40  3b  71.2  Jun 19.175  6x20  15.22  0.03  18.66  3d  71.8  Jun 19.850  8x60  15.16  0.03  18.68  3b  72.2  Jun 20.182  3x20  15.22  0.03  18.54  3d  72.8  Jun 20.844  12x60  15.26  0.04  19.01  3b  73.2  Jun 21.176  6x20  15.20  0.03  18.83  3d  73.8  Jun 21.841  11x60  15.22  0.03  18.85  3d  74.9  Jun 22.873  8x60  15.23  0.03  18.61  3d  75.9  Jun 23.893  4x60  15.25  0.03  18.23  3d  76.9  Jun 24.858  8x60  15.29  0.04  18.64  3d  79.8  Jun 27.802  4x60  15.26  0.04  18.26  3b  82.2  Jun 30.230  3x20  15.34  0.05  18.31  3b  83.2  Jul 1.198  3x20  15.45  0.04  17.92  3d  83.8  Jul 1.802  4x60  15.70  0.07  16.93  3b  84.2  Jul 2.181  6x20  15.52  0.05  18.46  3d  84.8  Jul 2.836  4x60  15.52  0.05  17.41  3b  85.2  Jul 3.176  6x20  15.50  0.04  18.32  3d  85.8  Jul 3.823  8x60  15.46  0.04  18.18  3b  86.2  Jul 4.176  6x20  15.64  0.06  18.31  3b  87.2  Jul 5.165  4x20  15.62  0.03  18.00  3b  90.2  Jul 8.197  3x20  15.79  0.09  16.97  3b  91.2  Jul 9.170  5x20  15.78  0.12  16.85  3d  92.8  Jul 10.820  8x20  15.75  0.08  17.41  3d  93.8  Jul 11.816  7x20  15.90  0.08  17.28  3d  94.8  Jul 12.819  8x20  16.02  0.07  17.29  3d  95.8  Jul 13.798  4x60  16.02  0.06  18.20  3d  97.8  Jul 15.833  4x60  16.14  0.05  18.10  3b  98.2  Jul 16.171  3x20  16.19  0.05  17.40  3b  101.1  Jul 19.146  3x20  16.58  0.06  18.15  3b  102.2  Jul 20.155  12x20  16.68  0.07  18.94  3d  102.8  Jul 20.808  3x60  16.86  0.05  18.05   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2-Continued

| Inst.  a  Phase  b  Date  Exp. (s)  C  R  σ  C  R  Limit  c  3b  103.2  Jul 21.155  12x20  16.75  0.05  18.92  3d  103.8  Jul 21.793  4x60  16.76  0.08  18.09  3b  104.2  Jul 22.161  8x20  16.88  0.09  18.45  3d  104.8  Jul 22.792  3x60  17.06  0.17  18.07  3b  105.1  Jul 23.147  6x20  16.69  0.09  17.47  3b  106.2  Jul 24.153  12x20  16.95  0.06  18.74  3d  106.8  Jul 24.791  3x60  16.69  0.10  17.72  3b  107.2  Jul 25.165  3x20  16.95  0.08  18.16  3b  108.2  Jul 26.152  12x20  17.04  0.06  18.86  3b  109.1  Jul 27.150  9x20  17.00  0.06  18.79  3d  109.8  Jul 27.788  3x60  17.32  0.19  17.92  3d  110.8  Jul 28.787  4x60  17.21  0.13  18.42  3b  112.1  Jul 30.146  2x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.94  3d  117.8  Aug 4.780  2x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.07  3b  120.2  Aug 7.156  2x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.98  3d  120.8  Aug 7.816  10x20  16.86  0.17  17.43  3b  121.1  Aug 8.119  16x20  17.32  0.16  17.96  3b  122.1  Aug 9.118  10x20  17.47  0.18  17.64  3b  123.1  Aug 10.117  17x20  17.49  0.16  18.12  3b  124.1  Aug 11.114  11x20  17.15  0.14  18.19  3b  126.1  Aug 13.111  12x20  17.11  0.16  17.65  3b  187.5  Oct 13.505  12x20  17.32  0.24  17.33  3b  194.5  Oct 20.493  33x20  17.94  0.16  19.12  3b  195.5  Oct 21.485  9x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.78  3b  197.5  Oct 23.504  1x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.02  3b  200.5  Oct 26.482  32x20  17.95  0.15  19.21  3b  201.5  Oct 27.480  7x20  17.77  0.13  18.29  3b  202.5  Oct 28.477  32x20  17.96  0.19  19.22  3b  203.5  Oct 29.471  24x20  17.77  0.08  19.25  3d  204.1  Oct 30.108  4x60  17.74  0.19  18.10  3b  204.5  Oct 30.472  16x20  17.77  0.18  19.09  3b  205.5  Oct 31.478  24x20  17.94  0.18  19.12  3b  206.5  Nov 1.476  24x20  17.87  0.18  19.07  3b  210.5  Nov 5.464  23x20  17.66  0.18  18.39  3b  211.5  Nov 6.460  23x20  18.12  0.21  18.52  3b  212.5  Nov 7.458  24x20  18.15  0.24  18.65  3b  213.5  Nov 8.469  2x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.45  3b  214.5  Nov 9.455  7x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.76  3d  215.1  Nov 10.072  4x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.11  3b  215.5  Nov 10.501  7x20  17.32  0.11  17.97  3d  216.1  Nov 11.084  4x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.74  3b  216.5  Nov 11.453  18x20  17.81  0.12  18.51  3d  217.1  Nov 12.066  1x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.01  3b  218.4  Nov 13.442  23x20  17.91  0.13  18.98  3b  219.4  Nov 14.427  7x20  17.72  0.13  18.29  3b  220.5  Nov 15.457  4x20  17.73  0.14  18.08   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2-Continued

| Inst.  a  Phase  b  Date  Exp. (s)  C  R  σ  C  R  Limit  c  3b  221.4  Nov 16.433  24x20  18.04  0.21  19.13  3b  222.4  Nov 17.428  9x20  17.91  0.15  18.34  3d  223.1  Nov 18.078  8x60  17.95  0.24  18.61  3b  223.4  Nov 18.430  24x20  17.91  0.15  18.95  3d  224.1  Nov 19.097  4x60  17.78  0.12  18.38  3b  224.4  Nov 19.428  24x20  18.18  0.15  19.08  3d  225.1  Nov 20.051  4x60  17.91  0.17  18.28  3d  226.1  Nov 21.076  4x60  17.78  0.14  18.25  3b  226.4  Nov 21.414  15x20  18.23  0.10  18.83  3b  227.4  Nov 22.420  24x20  18.11  0.17  19.18  3b  228.4  Nov 23.417  24x20  17.96  0.15  19.04  3b  229.4  Nov 24.413  24x20  18.09  0.14  19.15  3d  230.1  Nov 25.063  12x60  18.11  0.22  18.78  3b  230.4  Nov 25.411  21x20  18.11  0.13  19.09  3d  231.1  Nov 26.056  8x60  18.01  0.23  18.65  3d  232.0  Nov 27.031  4x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.33  3b  232.4  Nov 27.404  23x20  18.30  0.22  19.12  3d  233.1  Nov 28.090  8x60  17.96  0.14  18.53  3b  233.4  Nov 28.401  15x20  18.03  0.09  18.95  3d  234.0  Nov 29.049  8x60  17.94  0.23  18.65  3b  234.4  Nov 29.399  22x20  18.01  0.12  19.04  3d  235.0  Nov 30.046  8x60  18.05  0.18  18.67  3d  236.1  Dec 1.064  3x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.05  3b  236.4  Dec 1.402  5x20  17.87  0.20  17.93  3d  237.1  Dec 2.081  3x60  17.67  0.19  17.94  3b  237.4  Dec 2.389  24x20  18.40  0.25  18.69  3d  238.0  Dec 3.034  8x20  17.81  0.25  17.83  3b  239.4  Dec 4.397  3x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.23  3b  240.4  Dec 5.422  2x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.00  3b  245.4  Dec 10.378  8x60  18.29  0.20  18.61  3b  246.4  Dec 11.375  8x60  18.18  0.19  18.77  3b  247.4  Dec 12.367  7x60  18.07  0.17  18.49  3d  248.1  Dec 13.065  8x60  18.35  0.27  18.48  3b  248.4  Dec 13.379  6x60  18.54  0.19  18.70  3d  249.0  Dec 14.014  6x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.74  3b  249.4  Dec 14.358  3x60  18.15  0.22  18.37  3d  250.0  Dec 15.025  4x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.13  3b  250.3  Dec 15.344  3x60  · · ·  · · ·  16.66  3d  251.0  Dec 15.988  3x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.70  3b  251.4  Dec 16.363  6x60  18.25  0.11  18.88  3d  252.0  Dec 16.979  4x60  17.95  0.19  18.37  3b  252.3  Dec 17.328  2x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.97  3b  253.4  Dec 18.378  5x60  18.27  0.26  18.82  3b  256.5  Dec 21.505  6x60  18.29  0.10  19.30  3d  257.0  Dec 21.963  4x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.46  3b  257.4  Dec 22.413  4x60  18.02  0.12  18.79   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2-Continued

| Inst.  a  Phase  b  Date  Exp. (s)  C  R  σ  C  R  Limit  c  3b  258.3  Dec 23.313  1x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.68  3d  259.0  Dec 23.980  8x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.57  3d  261.0  Dec 25.974  8x60  18.33  0.25  18.46  3b  261.4  Dec 26.393  2x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.07  3b  262.3  Dec 27.334  7x60  18.27  0.08  19.31  3d  263.1  Dec 28.086  3x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.37  3b  263.3  Dec 28.342  1x60  17.93  0.20  18.16  3d  265.0  Dec 29.961  8x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.89  3d  272.9  2007 Jan 6.939  8x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.33  3d  274.0  Jan 7.990  9x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.50  3d  274.9  Jan 8.934  8x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.69  3b  275.3  Jan 9.295  8x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.00  3d  275.9  Jan 9.933  8x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.26  3b  276.3  Jan 10.291  6x60  18.34  0.20  18.44  3d  276.9  Jan 10.942  10x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.55  3b  277.3  Jan 11.330  2x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.15  3d  277.9  Jan 11.939  5x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.29  3b  278.4  Jan 12.416  2x60  · · ·  · · ·  16.57  3b  279.5  Jan 13.455  4x60  18.40  0.20  18.53  3b  280.3  Jan 14.273  2x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.15  3d  280.9  Jan 14.920  8x60  18.43  0.18  18.64  3b  281.4  Jan 15.360  2x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.37  3d  282.1  Jan 16.148  1x60  · · ·  · · ·  16.55  3d  283.9  Jan 17.916  5x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.01  3d  287.9  Jan 21.899  8x60  18.31  0.14  18.67  3d  289.1  Jan 23.077  8x60  18.38  0.16  18.75  3b  293.3  Jan 27.346  1x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.56  3b  294.3  Jan 28.312  8x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.49  3b  295.2  Jan 29.240  4x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.68  3b  296.3  Jan 30.269  1x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.67  3d  297.9  Jan 31.927  7x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.93  3b  302.2  Feb 5.222  8x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.14  3b  303.2  Feb 6.219  8x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.29  3b  304.2  Feb 7.185  2x60  18.47  0.27  18.48  3b  305.2  Feb 8.215  4x40  · · ·  · · ·  18.48  3b  306.2  Feb 9.216  5x60  18.41  0.19  19.06  3d  307.0  Feb 10.041  3x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.14  3b  307.2  Feb 10.211  8x60  18.53  0.17  19.18  3d  307.8  Feb 10.848  7x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.09  3b  308.2  Feb 11.209  7x60  18.51  0.21  19.16  3b  309.2  Feb 12.215  2x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.20  3b  310.2  Feb 13.203  4x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.30  3b  312.3  Feb 15.265  4x60  18.68  0.23  18.81  3b  313.2  Feb 16.195  8x60  18.55  0.22  19.12  3b  314.2  Feb 17.159  2x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.22  3b  315.2  Feb 18.188  8x60  18.69  0.16  19.31   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2-Continued

| Inst.  a  Phase  b  Date  Exp. (s)  C  R  σ  C  R  Limit  c  3b  316.5  Feb 19.454  7x60  18.94  0.19  19.25  3d  316.8  Feb 19.824  4x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.41  3b  317.4  Feb 20.422  5x60  18.39  0.15  19.00  3b  318.2  Feb 21.197  4x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.94  3d  318.9  Feb 21.936  4x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.42  3b  319.2  Feb 22.179  8x60  18.88  0.23  19.19  3d  319.8  Feb 22.791  4x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.43  3b  320.5  Feb 23.453  6x60  18.64  0.22  19.16  3d  320.9  Feb 23.935  3x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.02  3b  321.2  Feb 24.211  4x60  18.55  0.15  18.66  3b  324.2  Feb 27.162  8x20  · · ·  · · ·  18.34  3b  325.2  Feb 28.164  7x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.92  3b  326.3  Mar 1.326  1x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.04  3b  327.1  Mar 2.139  5x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.65  3b  328.1  Mar 3.134  3x20  · · ·  · · ·  16.52  3b  329.1  Mar 4.138  6x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.32  3b  330.1  Mar 5.145  8x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.86  3d  332.1  Mar 7.101  8x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.47  3b  332.1  Mar 7.131  4x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.79  3d  332.8  Mar 7.786  7x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.31  3b  333.2  Mar 8.165  3x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.66  3d  333.9  Mar 8.911  8x20  · · ·  · · ·  17.95  3b  334.2  Mar 9.163  6x60  18.83  0.26  19.13  3d  334.8  Mar 9.804  5x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.99  3b  335.1  Mar 10.134  8x60  18.98  0.21  19.24  3d  335.8  Mar 10.771  4x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.79  3b  336.2  Mar 11.208  2x60  · · ·  · · ·  17.40  3d  336.9  Mar 11.854  8x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.75  3d  337.8  Mar 12.762  8x60  · · ·  · · ·  18.38   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

a Instrument responsible for the observation, abbreviated '3b' for ROTSE-IIIb in west Texas and '3d' for ROTSE-IIId in Turkey.

b Relative to 2006 April 9.0.

c 4σ limiting magnitude.

Table 3. Observing Log for HET Spectra of SN 2006bp

| Date (UT)  JD-2400000.5  Phase  a  (day)  Exp. (s)  Filter  Notes  b  2006 Apr 11.11  53836.11  2  2x300  GG385  S  2006 Apr 11.12  53836.12  2  1x500  OG590  S, cloudy  2006 Apr 11.31  53836.31  2  3x360  GG385  N, cloudy  2006 Apr 11.33  53836.33  2  2x550  OG590  N, cloudy  2006 Apr 12.35  53837.35  3  1x600  GG385  N, cloudy  2006 Apr 12.36  53837.36  3  1x900  OG590  S, cloudy  2006 Apr 15.30  53840.30  6  1x600  GG385  N, cloudy  2006 Apr 15.31  53840.31  6  572,900  OG590  N, cloudy  2006 Apr 17.10  53842.10  8  2x200  GG385  S  2006 Apr 17.11  53842.11  8  2x450  OG590  S  2006 Apr 19.10  53844.10  10  2x200  GG385  S  2006 Apr 19.11  53844.11  10  2x450  OG590  S  2006 Apr 21.12  53846.12  12  2x200  GG385  P  2006 Apr 21.13  53846.13  12  400,500  OG590  P  2006 Apr 25.10  53850.10  16  2x400  GG385  N, cloudy  2006 Apr 25.11  53850.11  16  540,421  OG590  S  2006 Apr 30.28  53855.28  21  2x200  GG385  S  2006 Apr 30.29  53855.29  21  2x450  OG590  S  2006 May 4.26  53859.26  25  2x200  GG385  P  2006 May 4.27  53859.27  25  2x450  OG590  P  2006 May 12.26  53867.26  33  2x200  GG385  S  2006 May 12.27  53867.27  33  500,550  OG590  S  2006 May 21.21  53876.21  42  2x400  GG385  S  2006 May 21.23  53876.23  42  2x600  OG590  S  2006 Jun 5.19  53891.19  57  2x200  GG385  S  2006 Jun 5.20  53891.20  57  2x450  OG590  S  2006 Jun 21.14  53907.14  73  2x200  GG385  P  2006 Jun 21.14  53907.14  73  2x450  OG590  P  2007 Mar 14.21  54173.21  339  2x900,875  OG590  S  2007 Mar 16.17  54175.17  341  650,2x600  GG385  P   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Note. - All observations were taken through a 2 ′′ slit oriented along the paralactic angle.

a Relative to 2006 April 9.0 and rounded off to the nearest day.

b Sky conditions at the time of observation (P=photometric, S=spectroscopic, N=nonspectroscopic)

Table 4. Narrow Emission Lines on Day +2

| EW  Flux  a  Line  (  -  ˚  A)  (10  -  15  erg cm  -  2  s  -  1  )  He  II  λ  4200  2  .  6  ±  0  .  8  6  .  8  ±  2  .  0  He  II  λ  4686  1  .  2  ±  0  .  1  3  .  0  ±  0  .  3  H  β λ  4861  0  .  7  ±  0  .  2  1  .  6  ±  0  .  4  C  IV  λλ  5805  2  .  3  ±  0  .  2  3  .  8  ±  0  .  3  H  α λ  6563  3  .  1  ±  0  .  1  4  .  3  ±  0  .  1   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Note. - Equivelent widths and line fluxes measured via gaussian fits to the continuum subtracted HET spectra on day +2 (combined east and west tracks). Error estimates do not include systematics.

a The flux scale was calibrated using the Swift V -band photometry.

Table 5. Measured Line Minima Velocities

| Phase (days)  Line  2.1  3.4  6.3  8.1  10.1  12.1  16.1  21.3  25.3  33.3  42.2  57.2  73.1  H  γ λ  4340  · · ·  13.91  12.19  12.19  12.46  11.28  9.36  9.89  8.57  7.41  7.39  6.29  6.27  Fe  II  λ  4629  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  4.58  3.91  3.27  Sc  II  λ  4670  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  3.89  3.43  He  II  λ  4686  18.33  16.71  13.53  12.59  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  H  β λ  4861  · · ·  13.12  11.16  11.66  10.76  10.61  10.21  9.42  8.17  6.50  6.04  5.61  5.28  Fe  II  λ  4924  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  7.95  6.61  5.59  4.78  4.04  3.40  Fe  II  λ  5018  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  10.23  7.80  6.83  5.94  4.89  4.19  3.62  Fe  II  λ  5169  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  12.20  11.13  9.77  8.04  6.86  5.60  5.00  4.40  3.95  Fe  II  λ  5276  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  3.70  3.36  Fe  II  λ  5318  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  8.13  6.74  5.57  4.62  3.94  3.20  Sc  II  λ  5533  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  7.75  6.84  6.02  4.96  4.00  3.43  Fe  II  λ  5666  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  7.22  6.80  5.68  4.94  3.94  3.55  He  I  λ  5876  15.77  13.93  11.41  11.63  10.53  12.15  11.34  10.91  10.46  10.20  10.07  9.91  9.81  Na  I  λ  5892  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  9.36  8.15  6.67  6.57  5.90  5.25  4.98  5.11  Si  II  λ  6355  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  11.89  8.85  7.67  6.76  6.04  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  H  α λ  6563  15.38  14.48  12.77  11.40  11.01  10.65  10.38  9.87  9.23  8.45  7.74  6.95  6.82  O  I  λ  7773  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  13.00  12.71  9.69  9.04  7.32  6.35  5.51  4.64  3.90  3.40  Ca  II  λ  8520  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  7.91  8.30  7.93  7.09  6.65  6.05  5.61  Ca  II  λ  8662  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  8.87  7.69  6.45  5.87  5.10  4.61  P  δ λ  10049  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  · · ·  5.69  5.01  4.06   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Note. - Velocities measured from the FT smoothed minima of selected absorption features in units of 10 3 km s -1 . Phases are relative to 2006 April 9.0

Fig. 1.- Finding chart for SN 2006bp. The middle image shows the ROTSE-III reference template, which was constructed from post-explosion data as explained in the text. The box marks the overlap with the detail of the SDSS r-band data shown in the left image. The location of the SN is marked with an 'X'. The image on the right shows the SN as it appeared in ROTSE-IIIb data from May 23 (near the middle of the plateau). North is up and east is to the left in each image.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 2.- ROTSE-III unfiltered light curve of SN 2006bp. Detections are plotted with filled circles and arrows mark the 4σ upper limits (for clarity, only limits fainter that 17 are shown after day 150). Open squares mark the observations of Mr. Itagaki (Itagaki et al. 2006). The dashed line shows the best fit linear decay of 0 . 0073 ± 0 . 0004 mag day -1 between days +121 and +335, and the dotted line shows the decay rate for an arbitrary mass of 56 Co. The S's along the abscissa mark the spectral observation epochs.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 3.- Early-time light curve of SN 2006bp in flux space relative to the 2006 April 16.5 maximum. Arrows mark the 4σ fl ux limits for the null-detections (see text). The curve shows the simplistic F ∝ ( t -t 0 ) 2 model fit, where t 0 =April 8.7.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 4.- Spectral Evolution of SN 2006bp through day +73. The top portion of the figure shows each spectrum scaled by an arbitrary factor for clarity and arranged with the earliest spectra on top and the latest on the bottom. Portions of the spectra suffering from low signal to noise have been smoothed for display purposes (thin lines). Phases relative to 2006 April 9.0, a convenient epoch close to our estimated date of shock breakout, and rounded to the nearest day are given to the left of each spectrum. For the observations on the first night (day +2), the spectra from both the east and west tracks are plotted and the combined data are shown in between. Note the +6 day spectra were obtained under non-spectroscopic conditions, which may explain the abrupt departure in the continuum slope as compared to days +3 and +8. The bottom of the figure shows each spectrum normalized around 7000 ˚ A to emphasize the evolution of the line features and the general reddening with time.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5.- HET/LRS spectra of SN 2006bp in the nebular phase (top). Plotted is the combined spectrum from the 2007 March 14 (OG590) and March 16 (GG385) data. For reference, a spectrum of SN 1999em taken around 333 days after discovery ( ∼ 338 days after shock breakout; Leonard et al. 2002a) is shown below and a few of the strongest emission lines are labeled.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 6.- Spectral Evolution of SN 2006bp between 4100 and 5300 ˚ A. The spectra have been arbitrarily scaled for clarity. The top plot shows the combined +2 day spectra along with days +3, +6, and +8 on an expanded vertical scale to emphasize the subtle line features. Narrow emission features in the +2 day spectra are marked with the letters 'A' and 'B.' We identify B with restframe He II λ 4686. Feature A may in part be due to He II λ 4200, although it is considerably broader than the He II λ 4686 line and may be blended with another feature. By day +3 feature B has disappeared and feature A is not clearly detected. The +8 day spectrum is repeated in the lower plot along with additional HET spectra through day +73 (phases are labeled along the right of the figure). The FT smoothed minima for key features found as described in § 3.2 are circled, and dotted lines connect a given minimum through all epochs to guide the eye.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 7.- Same as figure 6 except covering the 5300 to 6300 ˚ A range and only showing the first 3 nights in the top plot. The letter 'C' marks a narrow emission feature in the day +2 spectra which we identify as the restframe C IV λλ 5805 doublet. This line is not seen in the day +3 spectrum nor in subsequent observations. Over days +8 to +12 an absorption line appears around 5700 ˚ A, which we have labeled as He I λ 5876; however, the photospheric He I λ 5876 is likely blended with the Na I λ 5892 feature. The 5700 ˚ A absorption may actually be due to high velocity He I or Na I , or to photospheric N II (see text). The narrow absorption at 5892 ˚ A is due to restframe Na I D.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 8.- Same as figure 7 except covering the 6000 to 7000 ˚ A range. Note the narrow H α emission line seen clearly in the +2 day spectrum and which persists atop the broad H α P-Cygni emission peak into the later phases. The absorption notch at 6450 ˚ A seen in days +2 and +3 is likely due to uncorrected telluric absorption.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 9.- Same as figure 6 except for the 6800 to 10300 ˚ A range and with all spectra plotted on the same scale (see figure 4 for coverage above 10300 ˚ A). P-Cygni profiles from P δ λ 10049 can be seen clearly in day +73 spectra and earlier.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 10.- Day +2 (combined) and day +3 spectra of SN 2006bp plotted in velocity space for (top to bottom) H α λ 6563, He II λ 4686, H β λ 4861, and He I λ 5876 in the adopted 1,280 km s -1 restframe. Notice the narrow emission features appear biased to the blue, and it is ambiguous if this shift is caused by an incorrect restframe velocity for the SN, or of these lines emanate from gas moving relative to the SN frame. The narrow absorption line seen to the red of rest He I λ 5876 is Na I D in the NGC 3953 rest frame. The narrow emission feature in the day +2 spectrum blueshifted by ∼ 3500 km s -1 relative to He I λ 5876 is C IV λλ 5805.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 11.- Velocities derived from the FT smoothed minima of selected line features. Symbols mark the measurements and the lines are intended only to guide the eye.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 12.- Approximate quasi-bolometric light curve (thick black line) constructed from the X-ray, UV, and optical observations of Immler et al. (2007) and our HET spectra as described in the text. The 0.2-10 keV X-ray contribution included is negligable and the light curve falls below the plotted range. Note the gap in coverage between the X-ray and UV bands; at early times the SED peaks in this range, but we have not attempted to interpolate the flux densities over this gap, so the early bolometric flux is likely underestimated. The dots mark the ROTSE-III observations arbitrarily scaled to match the synthetic HET flux after day +40.

<!-- image -->