## Did we observe the supernova shock breakout in GRB 060218?

G. Ghisellini 1 ⋆ , G. Ghirlanda 1 and F. Tavecchio 1

1 Osservatorio Astronomico di Brera, via E.Bianchi 46, I-23807 Merate, Italy

24 October 2018

## 1 INTRODUCTION

The observations of GRB 060218 by the Swift satellite (Gehrels et al. 2004) have prompted Campana et al. (2006, hereafter C06) to interpret the presence of a thermal, black-body, component in the soft X-ray band as the signature of the shock breakout of the associated supernova (SN) 2006aj (e.g. Modjaz et al. 2006, Mazzali et al. 2006). The low redshift ( z = 0 . 033 , Mirabal et al. 2004), together with an unusually long prompt emission of GRB 060218, allowed an unprecedented coverage by all of the three Swift instruments (UVOT, XRT and BAT), providing simultaneous data from the optical to the soft γ -ray range. In the optical-UV band, the data in the different UVOT/Swift filters showed a hard spectrum, which can be made consistent with a Rayleigh-Jeans F ( ν ) ∝ ν 2 law by invoking a Small Magellanic Cloud (SMC) extinction law for the host absorption with E ( B -V ) = 0 . 2 plus a galactic E ( B -V ) = 0 . 14 (C06). In the 0.2-10 keV energy range the prompt spectrum can be fitted by the sum of a kT ∼ 0 . 1 -0.2 keV black-body plus a cutoff power-law, also consistent with the BAT 15-150 keV data. A fit of the combined XRT and BAT spectrum [0.2-150 keV], integrated over ∼ 3000 s, returns a peak energy E peak ∼ 5 keV, for which GRB 060218 is consistent with the relation between the time integrated bolometric isotropic energy E iso and the peak energy E peak (Amati et al. 2002; Amati et al. 2007). GRB 060218 was underluminous, with E iso slightly less than 10 50 erg, and in this respect it resembles GRB 980425 (associated with SN 1998bw; Galama et

⋆ E-mail: gabriele.ghisellini@brera.inaf.it

## ABSTRACT

The early optical data of GRB 060218 (first 10 5 s after the trigger) have been interpreted as black-body emission associated with the shock breakout of the associated supernova. If so, it is possible to infer lower limits to the bolometric luminosity and energetics of such a black-body component. These limits, which are rather independent of the emissivity time dependence, are tighter for the very early data and correspond to energetics ∼ 10 51 erg, too large to be produced by the breakout of a supernova shock. A further problem of the above interpretation concerns the luminosity of the observed X-ray black-body component. It should be produced, in the shock breakout interpretation, as a black-body emission of approximately constant temperature from a surface area only slowly increasing with time. Although it has been suggested that, assuming anisotropy, the long duration of the X-ray black-body component is consistent with a supernova shock breakout, the nearly constant size of the emitting surface requires some fine tuning. These difficulties support an alternative interpretation, according to which the emission follows the late dissipation of the fireball bulk kinetic energy. This in turn requires a small value of the bulk Lorentz factor.

Key words: gamma rays: bursts; radiation mechanisms: thermal, non-thermal.

al. 1998) 1 , GRB 031203 (associated with SN 2003lw; Malesani et al. 2004), and GRB 030329 (associated with SN 2003dh; Stanek et al. 2003). From the temporal point of view, the time lag between hard and soft emission is consistent (Liang et al. 2006) with the lag-luminosity relation (Norris et al. 2000).

Two peaks are clearly observed in the optical-UV light curve of GRB 060218: an initial flux increase lasting 3 × 10 4 s is followed by a fast decay until t ∼ 1 . 5 × 10 5 s after the trigger; a second peak at ∼ 10 days shows the typical spectral signatures of the underlying SN (Ferrero et al. 2006; Mirabal et al. 2006; Modjaz et al. 2006; Sollerman et al. 2006). Spectroscopic observations indicated a time dependent expansion velocity: 2 × 10 4 km s -1 at day 3, ∼ 1.8 × 10 4 kms -1 at day 10 and a more rapid deceleration between day 10 and day 15 after explosion (see Fig. 2 in Pian et al. 2006). Polarization was detected a few days after trigger (Gorosabel et al. 2006) at a level of a few per cent, indicating some asymmetry of the emitting zone.

In the radio band, the flux between 2 and 22 days showed a typical power-law decay ( ∝ t -0 . 8 , Soderberg et al. 2006).

The X-ray (0.3-10 keV) light curve presented a smooth long lasting ( ∼ 3000 s) peak followed by a fast decay. At 10 4 s the flux began a shallower decreasing phase ( ∝ t -1 . 2 ) lasting several days. The spectrum of such phase is very soft, corresponding to an energy spectral index α ∼ 2 . 3 (Cusumano et al. 2006).

The complex behavior of GRB 060218 is summarized in Fig.

1 Note however that SN 2006aj is one order of magnitude weaker than SN 1998bw (Mazzali et al. 2006; Pian et al. 2006).

1, which reports the available information on the light curves detected by all of the three Swift instruments. The top panel shows the light curve in the 15-150 keV band, as detected by BAT and analyzed by Toma et al. (2007). The middle panel represents the 0.3-10 keV light curve as detected by XRT, and, separately, the light curve corresponding to the black-body component only (as shown by C06 and W07 too). The time dependent flux corresponding to the bolometric black-body component is also plotted to show that its behavior reproduces that of the 0.3-10 keV black-body light curve. Note that the black-body flux slightly increases with time until t ∼ 3000 s, and that at 7000 s the absolute black-body flux has decreased but its relative contribution to the total flux has increased. The bottom panel reports the light curve in the opticalUV filters of UVOT. Note that in C06 and in Waxman, Meszaros &amp; Campana (2007, W07 hereafter), no absorption correction has been applied and the light curves refer to specific fluxes multiplied by the FWHM of the different UVOT filters [ F = F ( λ )∆ λ ]. Here we converted F into the quantity νF ν ( νF ν = λF ( λ ) ), and dereddened the fluxes adopting, following C06, E ( B -V ) = 0 . 14 (galactic) plus E ( B -V ) = 0 . 2 (host, with a SMC extinction law).

C06 interpreted the thermal X-ray spectral component, evolving towards cooler temperatures and shifting into the optical/UV band, as emission following the break out of a shock, driven by a mildly relativistic shell, into the dense wind surrounding the progenitor. Li (2007) modeled numerically the corresponding transient emission specifically for Type-Ibc SNae produced by the core collapse of WR stars surrounded by dense winds. However, for the case of GRB 060218/SN2006aj such a model required an unrealistically large core radius of a WR progenitor star (but see W07).

The interpretation of the observational properties of GRB 060218 appeared therefore puzzling. Ghisellini et al. (2007, hereafter paper I) discussed the alternative possibility that the opticalto-X-ray radiation is non-thermal emission produced in a fireball moving with a moderate bulk Lorentz factor ( Γ ∼ 5 ), and the thermal X-ray component is due to some dissipation occurring within the jet (possibly just below its photosphere).

Recently W07 fiercely argued against alternative interpretations by presenting the details of the shock break out hypothesis in as anisotropic SN explosion. According to W07, the anisotropy of the explosion easily accounts for the long lasting X-ray thermal emission.

In this letter we re-examine some aspect of the scenario proposed by W07. In particular, following their interpretation, both for the optical and the X-ray black-body components, we derive consequences which we see as its major problems, as severe as to require alternative explanations. In Sec. 2 we point out that, if the optical-UV emission belongs to a black-body component, the evolution of the energy and temperature of the black-body, as inferred from the available Swift/UVOT optical observations implies too large energetics for the early phases.

It is then shown (Sec. 3) that the rather slow increase of the surface emitting the X-ray black-body is not a natural consequence of the anisotropic shock breakout scenario, but rather favors an alternative interpretation, where the emitting surface is associated with the transparency radius of a relatively long lived, mildly relativistic ( Γ ∼ a few) jet. Indeed, if the X-ray black-body is produced following a funnel/jet shear instability (according to the ideas put forward by Thompson 2006 and Thompson, Meszaros &amp; Rees 2007), then the presence of the black-body component requires a small value of Γ , of order 1 /θ j , where θ j is the jet opening angle.

Figure 1. Top panel: light curves of the total [0.3-10 keV] X-ray flux of GRB060218 (small red dots), the black-body flux in the same energy range (green dots) and the bolometric flux of the black-body component (blue dots). Data from C06 and W07. Bottom panel: the light curve in the three UVOT/Swift optical-UV filters, de-reddened assuming a galactic extinction E ( B -V ) = 0 . 14 plus a host galaxy extinction E ( B -V ) = 0 . 2 (for a Small Magellanic Cloud extinction curve for the latter). cgs units are adopted for all quantities.

<!-- image -->

## 2 BLACK-BODY OPTICAL EMISSION?

Weassume that the optical-UV emission up to 10 5 s corresponds to the Rayleigh-Jeans part of a black-body component, as suggested by C06 and W07. For any assumed expansion law, it is then possible to estimate the time dependence of the emitting surface. Also the optical-UV observations constrain the temperature dependence on time. Thus it is possible to infer the bolometric luminosity and energetics.

Consider the surface emitting as a black-body expanding with a velocity v , starting from an initial radius R 0 . In general, the expansion velocity of the photosphere will decrease with time. The model adopted by W07 postulates that the photospheric radius expands as R ∝ t 4 / 5 , at least for R &gt; R 0 . Adopting the same dependence, the Eq. 18 in W07 can be re-written as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This implies a photospheric expansion speed v ∝ t -1 / 5 , corresponding to the observed velocities (derived from spectral modelling) 2-3 days after the explosion (i.e. Eq. 1 gives v = 2 . 38 × 10 4 km s -1 after 3 days, in agreement with the measurements reported by Pian et al. 2006).

We then assume that for t &lt; 1 . 2 × 10 5 s the optical-UV

spectrum corresponds to the Rayleigh-Jeans part of a black-body spectrum:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the distance d = 145 Mpc. This in turn defines the temporal dependence of the black-body temperature:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As the temperature decreases with time, the assumption that the emission is in the Rayleigh-Jeans regime of the black-body spectrum is appropriate, especially for the early data which set the most severe constraints to the total energetics. Within the W07's scenario, the black-body peak is entering into the UVOT band at t ∼ 10 5 s, and this implies that the temperature estimates at 1880 ˚ A is slightly less than that estimated at all other wavelengths (see Fig. 2).

Fig. 2 summarizes our results, showing (from top to bottom), the time profile of the assumed black-body radius (i.e. Eq. 1), temperature and bolometric black-body luminosity. In the bottom panel it is also reported an estimate of the black-body energetics, obtained by multiplying the luminosity by the exposure time ∆ t corresponding to each flux measurement. The quantity E BB = L BB ∆ t thus provides a proxy of the implied black-body energetics.

The implied black-body luminosities are very large in the early phases, being of the order of 10 48 -10 49 erg s -1 , implying black-body energetics ∼ 10 51 erg (bottom panel). This is comparable to the entire kinetic energy of SN2006aj, estimated to be ∼ 2 × 10 51 erg by Mazzali et al. (2006).

We have considered different expansion laws, clearly bound by the condition v &lt; c , and other (reasonable) values for R 0 . The result does not change: at early times, i.e. for the smallest photospheric radii, the observed flux requires high temperatures, and thus large black-body luminosities.

The resulting energetics are too large to originate as blackbody emission from the heated SN envelope. Therefore the observed flux is not black-body radiation, though it might correspond to the absorbed (Rayleigh-Jeans) portion of a spectrum becoming transparent below the shortest observed wavelengths. Note that the F ( ν ) ∝ ν 2 dependence somehow relies on the assumed host extinction: less extinction implies a softer slope. Indeed, Sollerman et al. (2006) argued for values E ( B -V ) Gal = 0 . 127 and E ( B -V ) host = 0 . 042 , significantly smaller than those adopted by C06 (who required that the de-reddened optical-UV data follow a F ( ν ) ∝ ν 2 law). Assuming the E ( B -V ) proposed by Sollerman et al. (2006) we showed (in Paper I) that the optical-UV emission can still be part of a synchrotron spectrum, partially self-absorbed, connecting the optical-UV to the non-thermal X-ray flux. Alternatively the optical-UV and X-ray fluxes could belong to two unrelated components: in this case the optical-UV and X-ray spectra should cut-off below 1880 ˚ A and ∼ 0 . 3 keV, respectively. Both interpretations minimize the required energetics.

## 3 THE LONG LASTING X-RAY BLACK-BODY

The fluxes corresponding to the X-ray black-body component reported in C06 and W07 increase until t ∼ 3000 s. Such a component, albeit fainter, is still detected at about t ∼ 7000 s. In Fig. 1 we report the X-ray light curve as presented in C06 and W07 together with the light curve inferred for the bolometric black-body flux to show that they follow the same trend, namely F BB ∝ t 2 / 3 . The radius R of the (projected) emitting surface can be derived directly from the fitting of the X-ray data, since the temperature of the Xray black-body is determined and the distance of GRB 060218 is known. The temporal behavior of R scales approximately as R ∼ a + bt ∼ 5 × 10 11 +3 × 10 8 t cm (see Fig. 3 in C06), giving a rather modest expansion velocity, v ∼ 3 × 10 8 cm s -1 ∼ 0 . 01 c . As the projected emitting surface scales as

Figure 2. From top to bottom: radius of the black-body emitting surface, R = R 0 +3 . 6 × 10 10 t 4 / 5 with R 0 = 7 . 5 × 10 12 cm, as suggested by W07; temperature of the black-body derived by assuming that the whole spectrum belong to the Rayleigh-Jeans part of the black-body component; the corresponding black-body bolometric luminosity; black-body energetics, estimated as E BB = ∆ tL BB , where ∆ t is the exposure time of each flux measurement. Different colors refer to observations in different filters.

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the temporal dependence of the black-body temperature follows T ∝ t 1 / 6 / [5 × 10 11 +3 × 10 8 t ] 1 / 2 ≈ constant.

As mentioned, the puzzling properties of the X-ray blackbody component, if interpreted as produced by the SN shock breakout, are: i) the long duration; ii) the large luminosity and energetics and iii) the slowly increasing emitting surface. Li (2007) numerically examined the relevant characteristics of shock breakouts in Wolf-Rayet stars with strong winds, finding that although the presence of the wind allows to radiate more efficiently, the resulting luminosities are still insufficient to account for that observed from GRB 060218. Also the predicted total duration of the event ( ∼ 35 s) is much shorter than observed ( ∼ 3000-7000 s): indeed it is argued that possible anisotropies - although can partially increase the power generated - cannot change the duration.

W07 instead claimed that the wind opacity, by leading to a photospheric radius significantly exceeding the star radius, is the key ingredient to explain the large luminosity. Furthermore, they state that the long event duration is evidence for anisotropy, whose origin however is different from that considered by Li (2007). According to W07, because of the asymmetry the SN shock surface reaches transparency at different times, depending on the direction, thus accounting for the long lasting emission. Since the black-body luminosity increases with time, in this scenario the shock should radiate more sideways than along the polar axis. Although this interpretation is certainly possible, its realization requires some fine tuning, as illustrated by the following simple example.

Assume for simplicity that the anisotropy concerns only the dependence of the shock velocity on the angle θ from the polar axis and that the whole emitting surface reaches transparency at the same radius R from the stellar center. The projected area at time t is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The time derivative of Eq. 4 leads to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

whose solution for θ is:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For a = 5 × 10 11 cm and b = 3 × 10 8 cm s -1 the condition sin θ &lt; 1 at 7000 s implies R &gt; 5 . 1 × 10 12 cm. Since the blackbody emission lasts much longer than the characteristic light crossing time R/c , light travel time effects can be neglected. Thus the elapsed time t since the beginning of the black-body emission is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v 0 ≡ v ( θ = 0) . Substituting Eq. 7 in Eq. 8 results in an almost constant velocity at small angles, decreasing as 1 / sin 2 θ for larger θ .

Different velocity profiles (or a dependence of the transparency radius on θ ) would produce a different behavior of the measured emitting surface. Also, the observed increase of the blackbody luminosity with time requires a specific profile in θ for the energy released by the shock.

We propose that the nearly constancy of the black-body emitting surface supports an alternative scenario, in which most of the emission is produced at the transparency radius of a 'GRB' jet. Models along these lines have already been proposed by Thompson (2006) and Thompson, Meszaros &amp; Rees (2007) in a different context: they suggest that the black-body component originates following shear instabilities between the jet and the funnel of the progenitor star and is of course released when the fireball becomes transparent. According to Daigne &amp; Mochkovitch (2002) this occurs at a radius

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where L k is the fireball kinetic power. The relevant radius for the black-body emission is then min[ θ j , 1 / Γ] R ph , which is compara- ble to the radii inferred from observations if the jet is not highly collimated and/or the bulk Lorentz factor is small. The resulting isotropic black-body luminosity

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

accounts for the observed one.

Following these lines, in paper I we estimated the energy requirements posed by assuming that either the black-body represents the 'fossil' radiation that accelerated the fireball in the first place, or it is produced at larger radii, following some dissipation event. The latter option was clearly favored: indeed in this case the photon energies do not degrade significantly due to expansion between the dissipation and the transparency radii, lowering the required energetics.

One possible origin of late dissipation is the process quoted above, proposed by Thompson (2006) and Thompson, Meszaros &amp; Rees (2007), namely shear instability between the fireball and the star funnel. The resulting energy peak of the black-body spectrum was then associated with the peak of the (time integrated) spectrum of the prompt emission, and this allowed them to account for the Amati relation in terms of black-body emission. Note that GRB 060218 obeys the Amati relation, but only if the peak energy of the overall X-ray spectrum is considered (i.e. not the black-body peak energy)

Recently, by analyzing the sample of GRBs observed both by BATSE onboard CGRO and by the Wide Field Camera onboard Beppo SAX, Ghirlanda et al. (2007) found that the presence of a dominating black-body component faces severe problems. Note that all of the GRBs considered follow the Amati relation. Therefore the fireball/funnel instability, if occurs, may not be responsible for the peak of the prompt spectrum, i.e. the bulk of the emission. We clearly cannot exclude that it is responsible for black-body emission with lower temperature and luminosity, as observed in GRB 060218.

In all of the scenarios proposed to explain the peculiar properties of GRB 060218, it is assumed a bulk Lorentz factor of order unity, i.e. a factor ∼ 100 smaller than the 'canonical' value. The detection of the X-ray black-body might thus be associated with a small Γ factor. Indeed, a key point in the scenario by Thompson et al. (2007) concerns the value of Γ required for efficient dissipation: this has to be of the order of ∼ 1 /θ j . This may be the clue to understand why black-body emission has been detected only in the spectrum of GRB 060218: for smallΓ fi reballs the shear instability may be efficient enough to reveal itself through the presence of a black-body component, while for GRB fireballs with Γ ≫ 1 /θ j this should not be detectable.

GRB 980425 is another event possibly characterized by a small Γ fi reball. Thus it is a likely candidate to show observable black-body emission in the soft X-rays 2 , although it would have been impossible to reveal it with the detectors in 1998.

2 The possibility that the prompt spectrum of GRB 980425 could have been similar to that of GRB 060218 has been discussed by Ghisellini et al. (2006).

## 4 SUMMARYAND CONCLUSIONS

We have re-examined the possibility that the thermal components detected in the early phases of the optical and X-ray emission of GRB 060218 are due to the shock breakout of the associated SN 2006aj.

We have found that if the optical-UV radiation corresponds to the Rayleigh-Jeans part of a black-body spectrum, the data imply very large black-body luminosities, especially at early times (i.e. the first few thousands seconds after the trigger). The derived values cannot be accounted for as emission by material in the envelope/wind of the star heated by the shock crossing.

Instead, the proposed interpretation that the optical-UV-toX-ray spectrum originates as non-thermal synchrotron emission appears tenable and has two major advantages: (i) the optical-UV spectrum can be softer than ν 2 (allowing a smaller optical extinction, as indicated by Sollerman et al. 2006) and (ii) the energy requirement is significantly reduced with respect to the shock breakout scenario.

The black-body spectrum detected in the X-ray band constrains the emitting surface to depend only weakly on time. The long total duration, which largely exceeds the light crossing time, led W07 to propose that the persistence of the black-body component is due to anisotropy, namely the fact that transparency is reached at different times by different parts of the shock surface, because either the shock velocity or the photospheric radius are functions of the polar angle. Although this is a viable possibility, we have pointed out that only a specific dependence on the polar angle give rise to the observed behavior: in general, anisotropy implies that the resulting observed (projected) surface changes with time.

Instead, the almost constant X-ray emitting surface supports a scenario in which the X-ray black-body emission is produced inside a jet, before transparency is reached. The transparency radius corresponds to that inferred from observations if the bulk Lorentz factor is small, of the order of a few. This is also the condition to develop efficient shear instability modes between the jet and the funnel, and explains why the X-ray black-body component can be rarely observable (i.e. only when the bulk Lorentz factor is of the order of the inverse of the jet opening angle).

We noted that GRB 060218 obeys the E peak -E iso (Amati) relation only if the entire (non-thermal?) X and γ -ray emission component, which peaks at ∼ 5 keV, is considered (the X-ray thermal emission peaks at too low energies). If this is not a coincidence, it implies that the physical process underlying the Amati relation is robust and independent of the bulk Lorentz factor. Similar considerations hold for the lag-luminosity relation, which GRB 060218 obeys as well.

The bottom line of this re-analysis is that we are still puzzled about the self-consistency of the SN shock breakout interpretation of the optical, UV and thermal X-ray emission of GRB 060218.

On the other hand, this bursts is associated with SN 2006aj, and therefore some signs of the associated shock breakout should be present. Why should we not observe it? The simplest answer is that the emission associated with the shock break out is weaker than other spectral components.

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work has been partially funded by a 2005 INAF grant. We thank the anonymous referee for useful criticism. We are grateful to Annalisa Celotti for comments and discussion.

## REFERENCES

- Amati, L., Frontera, F., Tavani, M., et al., 2002, A&amp;A, 390, 81
- Amati, L., Della Valle, M., Frontera, F., Malesani, D., Guidorzi, C., Montanari, E. &amp; Pian, E., 2007, A&amp;A, 463, 913
- Campana, S., Mangano, V., Blustin, A.J., et al., 2006, Nature, 442, 1008 (C06)
- Cusumano, G., Moretti, A., Tagliaferri, G., Kennea, J., Burrows, D., 2006, GCN 4786
- Daigne, F. &amp; Mochkovitch, R., 2002, MNRAS, 336, 1271
- Ferrero, P., Kann, D.A., Zeh, A., et al., 2006, A&amp;A, 457, 857
- Galama, T., Vreeswijk, P.M., van Paradijs, J. et al. 1998, Nature 395, 670
- Gehrels, N., Chincarini, G., Giommi, P., et al., 2004, 2004, ApJ, 611, 1005
- Ghirlanda, G., Bosnjak, Z., Ghisellini, G., Tavecchio F., Firmani C., 2007, MNRAS, 379, 73
- Ghisellini, G., Ghirlanda, G. &amp; Tavecchio, F., 2007, MNRAS, 375, L36 (Paper I)
- Ghisellini, G., Ghirlanda, Mereghetti, S., Bosnjak, Z., Tavecchio, F. &amp; Firmani, C., 2006, MNRAS, 372, 1699
- Gorosabel, J., Larionov, V., Castro-Tirado, A.J., et al., 2006, A&amp;A, 495, L33
- Li, L-X. 2007, MNRAS, 375, 240
- Liang, E., Zhang, B., Zhang, B., Dai, Q.G., Norris, J., Stamatikos, M. &amp; Gehrels, N., 2006, ApJ, 653, L81
- Malesani, D., Tagliaferri, G., Chincarini, G., et al. 2004, ApJ, 609, L5
- Mazzali, P., Deng, J., Nomoto, K., Pian, E., Tominaga, N., Tanaka, M. &amp; Maeda, K., 2006, Nature, 442, 1018
- Mirabal, N., Halpern, J.P., An, D., Thorstensen, J.R. &amp; Terndrup, D.M., 2006, ApJ, 643, L99
- Modjaz, M., Stanek, K.Z., Garnavich, P.M., et al., 2006, ApJ, 645, L21

Norris, J.P., Marani, G.F. &amp; Bonnel, J.T., 2000, ApJ, 534, 248

Pian, E., Mazzali, P.A., Masetti, N., et al., 2006, Nature, 442, 1011

Soderberg, A.M., Kulkarni, S.R., Nakar, E., et al, 2006, Nature, 442, 1014

Sollerman, J., Jaunsen, O.A., Fynbo, J.P.U., et al., 2006, A&amp;A, 454, 503

Stanek, K.Z., Matheson, T., Garnavich, P.M., et al., 2003, ApJ, 591, L17

- Toma, K., Ioka, K., Sakamoto, T. &amp; Nakamura, N., 2007, ApJ, 659, 1420
- Thompson, C., 2006, ApJ, 651, 333
- Thompson, C., Meszaros, P. &amp; Rees, M.J., 2007, ApJ, 664, in press (astro-ph/0608282)
- Waxman, E., Meszaros, P. &amp; Campana, S., 2007, ApJ, in press (astro-ph/0702450) (W07)