## CNO 'Breakout' and Nucleosynthesis in Classical Novae

S. Ami Glasner

Racah Institute of Physics, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel

James W. Truran

Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Enrico Fermi Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA, and Physics Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Argonne, IL 60439, USA

Accepted for publication by the ApJL

Received

;

accepted

## ABSTRACT

For very slow white dwarf accretors in CV's Townsley and Bildsten (2004) found a relation between the accretion rate ˙ M and the central temperature of the white dwarf T c . According to this relation for ˙ M less than 10 -10 M ⊙ yr -1 T c is much lower than 10 7 K. Motivated by this study we follow the thermonuclear runaway on massive white dwarfs ( M WD = 1 . 25 -1 . 40 M ⊙ ) with T c lower than 10 7 K, accreting matter of solar composition. We demonstrate that in that range of the relevant parameter space ( Tc, M WD and ˙ M ) the slope of the relation between the peak temperatures achieved during the runaway and T c becomes much steeper than its value for T c above 10 7 K. The peak temperatures we derive can lead to nuclear breakout from the conventional 'hot carbon-nitrogen-oxygen' cycle. When breakout conditions are achieved the heavy element abundances can show a much wider variety than what is possible with the common enrichment mechanisms.

Subject headings: binaries:close-novae,cataclysmic variables, nucleosynthesis, abundances - stars:white dwarfs

## 1. Introduction

Classical nova explosions are a consequence of the unstable ignition of hydrogen in accreted envelopes on white dwarfs in close binary systems. Peak temperatures in the range ≈ 200 -350 million K achieved in the ensuing thermonuclear runaway yield burning of hydrogen to helium by means of the hot CNO cycles, with the associated nuclear energy release ≈ 5 × 10 18 erg g -1 powering the outburst. One dimensional numerical simulations Starrfield et.al 1974, Starrfield et.al 1985, MacDonald 1980, MacDonald 1983, Nariai et. al. 1980, Prialnik et.al 1978, Prialnik 1986, Iben 1982, Truran 1982, Jose &amp; Hernanz 1998 have established that many features of classical novae in outburst can be understood on this model, for representative choices of white dwarf mass ( M WD ≈ M ⊙ ) and accretion rate ( ˙ M ≈ 10 -10 -10 -9 M ⊙ yr -1 ). More details can be found in a review by Starrfield 2002.

Observational studies of novae reveal that, while the composition of the accreted matter is consistent with Solar abundances, the ejecta are characterized by high concentrations of heavy elements (e.g. C, N, O, Ne, Mg) relative to solar abundances Gehrz et.al 1998. For most nova models, numerical simulations predict that peak temperatures achieved in the runaways do not exceed the critical value (T crit of ≈ 4 × 10 8 K) at which 'breakout' from the hot CNO cycles can occur Wiescher et.al 1986, Yaron et.al. 2005. This has led to the conclusion accepted by most nova theorists that the observed enhancements reflect the effects of 'dredge-up' of CO- or ONeMg-rich matter from the underlying white dwarf star Livio &amp; Truran 1990. We show here that in a restricted, and therefore rare, region of the relevant parameter space ( Tc, M WD and ˙ M ) breakout burning can lead to heavy element enrichment caused only by breakout burning.

In a recent exploration of the thermal state of accreting white dwarfs experiencing classical nova explosions, Townsley and Bildsten (2004) have demonstrated that there exists a population of massive white dwarfs ( M &gt; 1 . 2 M ⊙ ) accreting at rates as low as

≈ 10 -11 M ⊙ yr -1 , with central temperatures T c of ≈ 5 × 10 6 K. The combination of cold white dwarfs with low accretion rates leads to novae runaways with massive envelopes and exceptionally high peak temperatures. We show here that for a significant part of the relevant parameter space ( Tc, M WD and ˙ M ) the peak temperature at runaway, T peak is well above the minimum value for CNO 'Breakout'.

In section II we briefly describe the hydro solver and the reaction network. Section III presents the main results of our models. We conclude with a discussion of the possible observational consequence of our results and of their consistency with previously published models.

## 2. The hydrodynamic solver

The accretion process and the runaway are studied with a 1D Lagrangian implicit code that integrates the equations of momentum and energy conservation assuming spherical symmetry. The energy transfer includes a radiative term and a convective term. The radiative component is a diffusive flux. The radiative diffusion coefficient is determined according to the Iglasias &amp; Rogers opacity tables Iglasias &amp; Rogers 1996 for temperatures above Log ( T ) = 3 . 75 Kelvin and according to the Alexander fit for lower temperatures. Electron conductive opacities are computed according to the Itoh fit Itoh et. al. 1983. The convective energy flux is computed according to the mixing length theory Spiegel 1963. Within a convective zone the matter is mixed using a diffusion coefficient that takes into account both the local convective velocity and the mixing length (which is taken to be two pressure scale heights):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where D c is the diffusion coefficient, v c is the 1D convective velocity, derived from the mixing length theory and l is the effective mixing length.

In the present survey we ignore element settlement by diffusion and undershoot mixing. The equation of state employed to derive the energy and pressure for given temperature density and chemical abundances is an ideal gas for the ions and involves a table fit for the numerical integration of the Fermi integrals for the electrons (and positrons). The rate of nuclear energy production and the abundance changes are calculated with a 160 nuclei network. The proton-proton reaction rate in the PeP channel take into account the extra electron density term due to the electron capture Bahcall &amp; May 1969. The chemical elements included in the network were chosen in a proper way to provide an accurate history of the proton-rich composition of the accreted envelope.

Accreted material is added each time step to the outermost zone as dictated by the accretion rate and the size of the time step. The outermost zone in the numerical grid is divided into two grid zones whenever the mass of the zone is greater than a specified value (taken to be twice the specified mass resolution in the envelope). The mass is added with the instantaneous thermodynamic properties of the outermost grid zone. The same 1D solver was used in order to produce the initial models for all our 2D novae studies Glasner &amp; Livne 1995, Glasner et al. 1997, Glasner et al. 2006. More details about the solver and its abilities will be given in a forthcoming paper.

## 3. The main results

In this study we follow the accretion process and the ensuing runaway for cold massive white dwarfs accreting at very low rates. Under such conditions the peak temperature achieved in the runaway is expected to be quite high. In order to trace the nucleosynthesis history, we solve the hydrodynamic equations coupled with a nuclear reaction network that includes 160 nuclei up to 64 Ni . As we noted in the introduction, our interest in this poorly explored region of the nova parameter space was motivated by the results published by Townsley &amp; Bildsten 2004. In our survey, we include white dwarf cores in the mass range 1.2 M ⊙ to 1.4 M ⊙ accreting matter of solar composition Anders &amp; Grevesse 1989 at rates ranging from 10 -11 M ⊙ yr -1 to 10 -10 M ⊙ yr -1 . The initial models are cold white dwarf cores in hydrostatic and thermal equilibrium characterized by their central temperature (T c ) with values ranging from T c = 4 × 10 6 K to T c = 2 × 10 7 K.

The combination of very low central temperatures T c and very slow accretion rates, which demands the use of a greatly expanded nuclear reaction network, is the unique feature of this survey. In this short initial report we therefore focus on the main outcome: the extremely high peak temperatures achieved in the runaway and the induced nucleosynthesis. The main features of the time history of the total burning rate, the bolometric luminosity, and the peak temperature at the base of the envelope are quite similar for all studies models.

Prior to the runaway, some of the considered models accrete exceptionally high envelope masses δM ignite . The ensuing thermonuclear runaways are characterized by very high peak temperatures, T peak . In Figure 1 we present the relation between T peak and T c for white dwarf masses and accretion rates ( ˙ M ) that are relevant to this work; in Figure 2 we show the dependence of δM ignite on the same variables. The common feature for all the considered models is the increase of T peak with decreasing T c : T peak is greater than T crit only for very cool white dwarfs ( T c ≤ 5 -7 × 10 6 ).

The high temperature and high density at the bottom of the accreted envelope and the comparatively long timescale for which these conditions prevail, defined as δt break , allow a significant epoch of explosive hydrogen burning. In Table I we present the main input parameters of our models M WD , T c , and ˙ M - together with the major hydrodynamic outcome quantities that are relevant to the burning: δM ignite , T peak and δt break .

As expected, hydrogen burning under such extreme conditions yields 'breakout' from the conventional 'hot carbon-nitrogen-oxygen' cycle. During most of the time that the temperature stays above T crit the envelope is fully convective. Therefore, the nuclei produced in the burning are spread homogeneously over the entire envelope. Once the shell temperature falls below T crit the overall abundance of heavy nuclei is not expected to change during the later stages of the runaway. We selected one representative model from Table I (s135u for M=1.35 M ⊙ ) and present its initial and final abundance patterns as a function of mass number (A) in Figure 3. We note that both the mass of heavy elements ejected and their distribution depend on the details of the mass ejection mechanism; we will present a study of the ejection phase in a forthcoming paper.

## 4. Discussion

There is a well established consensus in the nova research community that the relevant parameters that define the thermonuclear runaway are the white dwarf mass ( M WD ), the central temperature (T c ), and the accretion rate ( ˙ M ), together with the composition of both the cold white dwarf and the accreted matter. This parameter space has been well explored by many researchers. Most of the previous studies were concerned with the range of central temperature above approximately T c = 10 7 K. But, in a recent study, Townsley and Bildsten (2004) demonstrate that for very slow accretors there exists a steady state that determines a relation between ˙ M and T c . For ˙ M less than 10 -10 M ⊙ yr -1 , they find that T c according is much smaller than 10 7 K. We therefore focused our study on massive white dwarfs with T c much below T c =10 7 K and very slow accretion rates.

Since the expected temperatures at the runaway are above T crit , the nuclear energetics and associated nucleosynthesis in our models were calculated with the use of an extended nuclear reaction network that included 160 nuclei up to 64 Ni . Our results are generally consistent with those of the 1.3 M ⊙ model of Nariai et al. (1980), as is evident from our Table I. For T c =10 7 K, both the accreted mass we obtain and the peak temperature T peak achieved during the runaway are consistent with the 1.35 M ⊙ model of Jose and Hernanz (1998) and with the 1.25 M ⊙ and 1.40 M ⊙ models of Yaron et al. (2005). For the conditions of central temperature and accretion rate we took from the results of Townsley and Bildsten (2004), the ignition mass we obtained is fully consistent with their stated results (compare our model s125y in Table I with their Figure 8).

Considering the dynamical aspects of our survey, we find a very steep dependence of the accreted mass and peak temperature at runaway on the central temperature T c below T c =10 7 K. In contrast, the dependence in the more commonly studied region above T c =10 7 K is very shallow. This behavior can be understood on the basis of the well known dependence of the burning rates on the temperature during the accretion stage. For the accreted matter of assumed solar composition, the slope of the logarithmic derivative of the burning rate changes in the vicinity of a temperature 10 7 from 4 (PP cycle) to about 18 (CNO cycle). At central temperatures T c = 4 × 10 6 K, relevant to cataclysmic variables below the period gap Townsley &amp; Bildsten 2004, the accreted envelope mass required to initiate runaway can be 4 to 5 times greater than for T c = 10 7 K (Table I). This result confirms that once the core of the white dwarf is sufficiently cool, massive hydrogen-rich accreted envelopes can exist at runaway even for very massive white dwarfs. Therefore, observational evidence for nova outbursts with massive accreted envelopes in the range of a few times 10 -4 M ⊙ cannot exclude very massive white dwarfs as the underlying core.

Most significant are the results we obtain for the nucleosynthesis occurring in our models. The high temperatures, much above T crit , that can prevail for thousands of seconds lead to a very interesting path of nuclear burning up to the iron peak region. In order to identify the pattern of enrichment of iron group elements, we divided the elements included in our models into five groups: (1) Hydrogen; (2) Helium; (3) all the CNO cycle elements up to fluorine; (4) the elements from neon to calcium (the intermediate mass elements); and (5) the iron group elements from titanium to nickel. For all the models reported in Table I, the peak temperature in the runaway exceeds T crit and produces large concentrations of iron group elements. The concentrations of freshly synthesized iron group elements (relative to the original solar amounts) range from an increase by a factor of 1.75 for the less massive models (model s125y with M=1.25 M ⊙ ) to an increase by a factor of 10.0 for the more massive models (model s135y with M=1.35 M ⊙ ); this can be seen from the results presented in table II. Both CNO elements (from breakout) and intermediate mass elements are seen to be transformed to iron group elements. The outcome is a net decrease in the mass of hydrogen and CNO elements.

As one might expect, for the higher mass cases (higher peak temperature) there is even a small decrease in the fraction of intermediate mass elements and a significant production of iron group elements (see e.g. Figure 3 and Table II). For lower mass white dwarfs (lower peak temperature) there is a slight increase in the mass fraction of intermediate mass elements and a smaller level of production of iron group elements (see e.g. Table II).

In order to make certain that we indeed achieved 'breakout' from the conventional 'hot carbon-nitrogen-oxygen' cycle we made a definite test. A model similar to s135u (M=1.35 M ⊙ ), for which the accreted matter was assumed to include solar concentrations of nuclei only up to fluorine, was evolved. The energetics of this model are similar to those of model s135u (Table I). With regard to the nucleosynthesis, the final concentration of iron group elements was determined to be comparable to that of model s135u. There is only a small concentration of intermediate mass elements in the final stages, which confirms that indeed CNO nuclei were burned all the way to iron.

Our main conclusion concerning nucleosynthesis is that due to 'breakout' from the conventional 'hot carbon-nitrogen-oxygen' cycle, the heavy element abundances in the relevant novae ejecta can show a much wider variety than what is possible with the conventional mixing mechanisms. Some rare cases could be enriched by breakout alone. Future work will therefore concentrate on the observational predictions that can be made about the time history of the ejected mass. In order to test this hypothesis we will also consider the interpretation of observed abundance patterns in such nova systems as Nova Cygni 1992 and Nova Her 1991, in light of the possibility that they may well have experienced nuclear burning at temperatures approximating or above breakout leading to increased nucleosynthesis of intermediate mass and heavy elements. In order to improve the accuracy of such predictions, we intend to follow the abundance history of the ejected matter all through the phase of nuclear burning and mass ejection.

## Acknowledgments

This work is supported in part at the University of Chicago by the Department of Energy under Grant B523820 to the ASC/Alliances Center for Astrophysical Thermonuclear Flashes and by the National Science Foundation under Grant PHY 02-16783 for the Frontier Center 'Joint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics' (JINA), and at the Argonne National Laboratory by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Physics, under contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.

Table 1. The main parameters for all models that pass T crit

| [ MODEL]  M  WD  [  M  ⊙  ]  Tc [10  6  K]  ˙  M  [  M  ⊙  yr  -  1  ]  δM  ignite  [  M  ⊙  ]  T  peak  [10  8  K]  δt  break  [sec]  s135u  1  .  35  4  .  00  10  -  11  6  .  38  ×  10  -  5  5  .  14  14500  .  m135k  1  .  35  5  .  88  10  -  11  3  .  90  ×  10  -  5  4  .  57  12000  .  m135j  1  .  35  7  .  65  10  -  11  2  .  70  ×  10  -  5  4  .  23  9500  .  m135i  1  .  35  9  .  03  10  -  11  2  .  06  ×  10  -  5  4  .  00  7000  .  m135r  1  .  35  4  .  00  10  -  10  3  .  40  ×  10  -  5  4  .  42  11000  .  m135q  1  .  35  5  .  88  10  -  10  2  .  63  ×  10  -  5  4  .  16  9000  .  m135p  1  .  35  7  .  65  10  -  10  2  .  01  ×  10  -  5  3  .  92  7000  .  m135o  1  .  35  9  .  03  10  -  10  1  .  61  ×  10  -  5  3  .  51  1000  .  m13ek  1  .  30  4  .  00  10  -  11  9  .  62  ×  10  -  5  4  .  29  7000  .  m13ed  1  .  30  6  .  00  10  -  11  5  .  41  ×  10  -  5  3  .  82  4250  .  s125y  1  .  25  4  .  00  10  -  11  13  .  02  ×  10  -  5  3  .  68  3000  .   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2. The changes in mass abundances grouped according to mass number for the models s135u and s125y

| jobname  group of elements  absolute change  relative change  s135u  ∆  X  [  H  ]  -  0  .  0740  -  0  .  10  -  ∆  X  [  He  ]  +0  .  0660  +0  .  24  -  ∆  X  [  C  -  F  ]  -  0  .  0023  -  0  .  23  -  ∆  X  [  Ne  -  Ca  ]  -  0  .  0032  -  0  .  90  -  ∆  X  [  Ti  -  Ni  ]  +0  .  0135  +10  .  0  s125y  ∆  X  [  H  ]  -  0  .  0377  -  0  .  05  -  ∆  X  [  He  ]  +0  .  0365  +0  .  13  -  ∆  X  [  C  -  F  ]  -  0  .  0007  -  0  .  07  -  ∆  X  [  Ne  -  Ca  ]  +0  .  0009  +0  .  25  -  ∆  X  [  Ti  -  Ni  ]  +0  .  0010  +0  .  75   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## REFERENCES

- Anders,E. &amp; Grevesse,N. 1989, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta,53,197
- Bahcall,J.N., &amp; May,R.M. 1997, ApJ, 155, 501
- Gehrz, R. D., Truran, J. W., &amp; Williams, R. E. 1998, PASP,110,3
- Glasner,S.A. &amp; Livne,E. 1995, ApJ, 445,L149
- Glasner,S.A., Livne,E., &amp; Truran,J.W., 1997, ApJ,475,754.
- Glasner,S.A., Livne,E., &amp; Truran,J.W., 1997, ApJ,665,1321.
- Iben, I.Jr., 1982, ApJ, 259,244
- Iglasias,C.A., &amp; Rogers,F.J. 1996, ApJ, 464, 943
- Itoh,N. , Mitake,S., Iyetomi,H., &amp; Ichimaru,S 1983, ApJ, 273, 774
- Jose,J., &amp; Hernanz,m 1998, ApJ, 494, 680
- Livio, M. &amp; Truran, J. W., 1990, in Nonlinear Astrophysical Fluid Mechanics, eds. J.R. Buchler and S.T. Gottesman (New York: Ann. N.Y. Academy Sciences 617), p. 126
- MacDonald, J., 1980, MNRAS, 191, 933
- MacDonald, J., 1983, ApJ, 267, 732
- Nariai,K., Nomoto,K., &amp; Sugimoto,D. , 1980, PASJ, 32,473
- Prialnik, D., Shara, M. M., &amp; Shaviv, G., 1978, A&amp;A, 62, 339
- Prialnik, D. &amp; Kovetz,A., 1984 ApJ, 281,367
- Prialnik, D., 1986 ApJ, 310,222

- Shara, M.,M. 1982 ApJ, 261,649
- Spiegel, E.,A. 1963 ApJ, 138,216
- Starrfield,S. Sparks,W.M. &amp; Truran,J.W., 1974, ApJS, 28,247
- Starrfield,S. Sparks,W.M. &amp; Truran,J.W., 1985, ApJ, 291,136
- Starrfield,S., 2002, in Classical nova explosions, ed. M. Hernanz and J.Jose, AIP Conf. Proc. 637,89.
- Townsley,D.M., &amp; Bildsten,L. 2004, ApJ, 600, 390
- Truran,J.W. 1982, Nuclear Theory of Nova- Essays in Nuclear Astrophysics, ed. C.A.Barnes, D.D.Clayton &amp; D.N. Schramm (Cambridge University Press), 47
- Truran, J. W. 1990, in Physics of Classical Novae , ed. A. Cassatella &amp; R. Viotti (Berlin: Springer), 373
- Weaver,T.A., Zimmerman,G.,B., &amp; Woosley, S., E., 1978, ApJ, 225,1021
- Yaron,O., Prialnik, D., Shara,M.M., &amp; Kovetz,A., 2005 ApJ, 623,398
- Wiescher,M., Gorres,J.,Thielemann,F.K. and Ritter,H., 1986, A&amp;A, 160,56

This manuscript was prepared with the AAS L A T E X macros v4.0.

- 16 -

Fig. 1.- The peak temperature achieved in the runaway as a function of the central temperature T c of the white dwarf.

<!-- image -->

- 17 -

Fig. 2.- The accreted mass at ignition as a function of the central temperature T c of the white dwarf.

<!-- image -->

- 18 -

Fig. 3.- The abundances of the elements in the reaction network as a function of the mass number A. Presented are both the initial (solar) abundances and the 'final' abundances when the peak temperature has fallen below T crit (Model s135u, M=1.35 M ⊙ ).

<!-- image -->