## SHOCK BREAKOUT IN TYPE II PLATEAU SUPERNOVAE: PROSPECTS FOR HIGH REDSHIFT SUPERNOVA SURVEYS

N. Tominaga 1,2 , T. Morokuma 3,4,8 , S. I. Blinnikov 5,2 , P. Baklanov 5 , E. I. Sorokina 6 , K. Nomoto 2,7 Accepted for publication in the Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series.

## ABSTRACT

Shock breakout is the brightest radiative phenomenon in a supernova (SN) but is difficult to be observed owing to the short duration and X-ray/ultraviolet (UV)-peaked spectra. After the first observation from the rising phase reported in 2008, its observability at high redshift is attracting enormous attention. We perform multigroup radiation hydrodynamics calculations of explosions for evolutionary presupernova models with various main-sequence masses M MS , metallicities Z , and explosion energies E . We present multicolor light curves of shock breakout in Type II plateau SNe, being the most frequent core-collapse SNe, and predict apparent multicolor light curves of shock breakout at various redshifts z . We derive the observable SN rate and reachable redshift as functions of filter x and limiting magnitude m x, lim by taking into account an initial mass function, cosmic star formation history, intergalactic absorption, and host galaxy extinction. We propose a realistic survey strategy optimized for shock breakout. For example, the g ′ -band observable SN rate for m g ′ , lim = 27 . 5 mag is 3 . 3 SNe degree -2 day -1 and a half of them locates at z ≥ 1 . 2. It is clear that the shock breakout is a beneficial clue to probe highz core-collapse SNe. We also establish ways to identify shock breakout and constrain SN properties from the observations of shock breakout, brightness, time scale, and color. We emphasize that the multicolor observations in blue optical bands with ∼ hour intervals, preferably over ≥ 2 continuous nights, are essential to efficiently detect, identify, and interpret shock breakout. Subject headings: shock waves - radiative transfer - supernovae: general - stars: evolution surveys

## 1. INTRODUCTION

In contrast to Type Ia supernovae (SNe), systematic observational studies of core-collapse supernovae (CCSNe) have been restricted at a redshift z ∼ &lt; 1 (e.g., Poznanski et al. 2007). This is because CCSNe are typically fainter than Type Ia SNe (e.g., Richardson et al. 2002), except for rare energetic supernovae (hypernovae, e.g., SN 1998bw, Galama et al. 1998) or recently-found extremely bright SNe (e.g., Quimby et al. 2009).

Recent improvements of telescopes/instruments and well-organized survey strategies make it possible to detect unusual core-collapse events at high redshift: for example, bright Type IIn SNe (SNe IIn) at z &gt; 2 (Cooke et al. 2009) and gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) up to z ∼ 8 . 2 (Salvaterra et al. 2009; Tanvir et al. 2009). With the use of the highz accessibility of these events, a star formation history (SFH) and an initial mass function (IMF) at high redshift are intensively studied (e.g., Kistler et al. 2009; Wang &amp; Dai 2009; Cooke et al. 2009). However, special conditions are required to realize such events, i.e., a dense circumstellar matter for an SN IIn (e.g., Chugai et al. 2004) and a fast-rotating progenitor for a GRB (e.g., Woosley 1993). Thus they can not be the main constituents of CCSNe and the SFH and IMF estimated with them could involve large biases. Hence, ways to directly detect normal CCSNe at high redshift are required to investigate the nature of majority of CCSNe and estimate the SFH and IMF with small biases.

1 Department of Physics, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Konan University, 8-9-1 Okamoto, Kobe, Hyogo 658-8501, Japan; tominaga@konan-u.ac.jp

3 Institute of Astronomy, University of Tokyo, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-0015, Japan; tmorokuma@ioa.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

2 Institute for the Physics and Mathematics of the Universe, University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba 2778583, Japan

4 Optical and Infrared Astronomy Division, National Astronomical Observatory, 2-21-1 Osawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-8588, Japan

6 Sternberg Astronomical Institute, Moscow 119992, Russia;

5 Institute for Theoretical and Experimental Physics (ITEP), Moscow 117218, Russia; sergei.blinnikov@itep.ru, baklanovp@gmail.com

sorokina@sai.msu.su

7 Department of Astronomy, School of Science, University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan; nomoto@astron.s.u-

tokyo.ac.jp

Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of

8 Science

The bolometrically-brightest phenomenon in the SN with a shockwave is shock breakout. In a CCSN explosion, an outward shockwave forms around a central remnant by depositing released gravitational energy. The shockwave propagates through a stellar envelope to heat it up and accelerates its expansion. Since the star is optically thick, the shockwave cannot be electromagnetically observed until its emergence from a stellar surface. When the shockwave approaches the stellar surface at a distance with an optical depth ∼ &lt; 10, radiation from the shock front starts to leak out and a hot fire ball suddenly appears to emit a bright soft X-ray and ultraviolet (UV) flash with a quasi-blackbody spectrum ( T &gt; 10 5 K). This phenomenon is shock breakout which has been theoretically predicted by, e.g., Klein &amp; Chevalier (1978). Its duration strongly depends on the presupernova radius. Brightness rises in several seconds to several hours and declines in several ten seconds to several days. Theoretical studies have suggested that the peak bolometric luminosity exceeds 10 44 erg s -1 (e.g., Blinnikov et al. 2000) and that shock breakout is observable even if it takes place at z ∼ &gt; 1 (e.g., Chugai et al. 2000). However, the short duration and soft X-ray/UVpeaked spectra had made detection of shock breakout difficult for a long while, except for fortunate detection of its tail in nearby SNe in U band (e.g., SN 1987A, Catchpole et al. 1987; SN 1993J, Richmond et al. 1994; SN 1999ex, Stritzinger et al. 2002).

First detection of shock breakout in the rising phase was obtained serendipitously in 2004-2008 and reported in 2008: Type Ib SN 2008D in NGC 2770 (distance d = 27 Mpc, Soderberg et al. 2008; Mazzali et al. 2008; Modjaz et al. 2009; Malesani et al. 2009), Type II plateau SN (SN II-P) SNLS-04D2dc (redshift z = 0 . 185, Schawinski et al. 2008; Gezari et al. 2008), and SN II-P SNLS-06D1jd ( z = 0 . 324, Gezari et al. 2008).

For SN 2008D, an X-ray LC from breakout and optical LCs after a tail were observed (e.g., Soderberg et al. 2008; Modjaz et al. 2009). The X-ray LC rises in ∼ 60 sec and declines in ∼ 130 sec but it is not clear whether the X-ray spectral energy distribution (SED) is thermal or nonthermal. For the SNLS SNe II-P, UV LCs of shock breakout and optical LCs of plateau were observed (e.g., Schawinski et al. 2008; Gezari et al. 2008). The UV flash of SNLS-04D2dc rises and declines in several hours and the subsequent UV LC shows rebrightening in several days. However, the UV data have too low signal-to-noise ratios to obtain SED. 9

The observational papers and subsequent papers present theoretical models for shock breakout; analytic models for SN 2008D (e.g., Soderberg et al. 2008; Chevalier &amp; Fransson 2008; Modjaz et al. 2009) 10 and hydrodynamics calculation with two-temperature radiative diffusion (Schawinski et al. 2008) and onetemperature radiation hydrodynamics calculation coupled with non-local thermodynamic equilibrium (non-LTE) spectral calculation for SNLS-04D2dc (Gezari et al. 2008). Tominaga et al. (2009) have performed a multigroup radiation hydrodynamical calculation for the first time and successfully constructed a self-consistent radiation hydrodynamical model for SNLS-04D2dc. They have presented that an SN explosion of a 20 M ⊙ star with an explosion energy 1 . 2 × 10 51 erg reproduces well the UV-optical LCs of shock breakout and plateau. Also, the successful model demonstrates that an SN similar to SNLS-04D2dc is detectable at z = 1 with 8m-class optical telescopes.

The UV-bright shock breakout is followed by a plateau phase. It appears as an SN II-P that is most frequent among core-collapse SNe (e.g., Mannucci et al. 2008; Arcavi et al. 2010; Li et al. 2010; Smith et al. 2010). In contrast to an SN IIn and a GRB, the formation of a plateau phase does not require any specified conditions other than the presence of a thick H envelope. Therefore, the SFH estimated with shock breakout in SNe II-P should have smaller uncertainties and biases than those with SNe IIn or GRBs. Moreover, observational properties of shock breakout, the brightness, color, and time scale, depend on properties of the SN and its progenitor, the explosion energy E , presupernova radius R preSN , and ejecta mass M ej (e.g., Matzner &amp; McKee 1999). Thus, it is possible to derive detailed properties of SN explosions from the observations of shock breakout and constrain an IMF precisely.

9 The UV observations of SNLS-06D1jd have too poor signal-tonoise ratios to extract the characteristics of shock breakout.

10 The subsequent LCs and spectral evolution of SN 2008D are reproduced by the radiative transfer calculation with homologous hydrodynamics evolution (e.g., Tanaka et al. 2009a,b).

Fig. 1.Presupernova density structures of (a) Z = 0 . 02 stars with M MS = 13 M ⊙ ( red ), M MS = 15 M ⊙ ( green ), M MS = 18 M ⊙ ( blue ), M MS = 20 M ⊙ ( magenta ), M MS = 25 M ⊙ ( cyan ), M MS = 30 M ⊙ ( black ), and M MS = 40 M ⊙ ( gray ), and (b) 20 M ⊙ models with Z = 0 . 001 ( red ), Z = 0 . 004 ( green ), Z = 0 . 02 ( blue ), and Z = 0 . 05 ( magenta ).

<!-- image -->

TABLE 1 Progenitor models.

| M  MS  Z  M  preSN  R  preSN  L  preSN  [  M  ⊙  ]  [  M  ⊙  ]  [  R  ⊙  ]  [10  4  L  ⊙  ]  13  0.02  12.7  564  5.57  15  0.02  14.1  507  4.69  18  0.02  16.7  713  8.81  20  0.02  18.4  795  11.1  25  0.02  21.7  1200  23.9  30  0.02  25.0  1360  31.4  40  0.02  21.7  1660  53.8  20  0.001  19.7  756  18.6  20  0.004  19.5  751  13.4  20  0.05  17.3  1050  15.7   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Shock breakout is coming under the spotlight to probe highz CCSNe but the observable properties are poorly understood. Therefore, in order to execute a shock breakout survey effectively, it is required to provide theoretical predictions for observable quantities and propose strategies of observations and analysis to detect, identify, and interpret them. Hence, we perform multigroup radiation hydrodynamics calculations of shock breakout in SNe II-P with various M MS , Z , and E with a multigroup radiation hydrodynamics code stella (Blinnikov et al. 1998, 2000, 2006) and present theoretical predictions of apparent multicolor LCs at various redshifts. Based on the theoretical models, we estimate the number of detection and reachable redshift, clarify requirements on survey strategies, and develop ways to identify shock break- out and to derive the SN properties from the observational quantities of shock breakout.

Fig. 2.Spectral energy distributions at (a) t = 0, (b) t = 0 . 1 days, (c) t = 0 . 3 days, (d) t = 1 days, (e) t = 10 days, and (f) t = 100 days for different opacity prescriptions ( red : original, green : including excited levels in bound-free absorption, and blue including inner-shell photo-ionization).

<!-- image -->

In § 2, the applied models and methods are briefly described. In § 3, results are shown. We present the multicolor LCs of shock breakout ( § 3.1) and predictions of apparent multicolor LCs of shock breakout ( § 3.2). In § 3.3 we offer future prospects on shock breakout surveys: an expected number of detection and reachable redshift ( § 3.3.1), dependencies on extinction and SFH ( § 3.3.2), requirements on survey strategies ( § 3.3.3), ways to identify shock breakout ( § 3.3.4), and ways to constrain SN properties ( § 3.3.5). In § 4, the conclusion and discussion are presented.

## 2. MODELS &amp; METHODS

## 2.1. Progenitor model &amp; explosive nucleosynthesis

We adopt progenitor models with various M MS (= 13 , 15 , 18 , 20 , 25 , 30 , and 40 M ⊙ ) and Z (= 0 . 001 , 0 . 004 , and 0 . 02) which are taken from Umeda &amp; Nomoto (2005). The stellar evolution calculations include a mass loss depending on metallicity Z which is assumed to be proportional to Z 0 . 5 (Kudritzki 2000). Since shock breakout arises at a thin surface layer with an optical depth τ ∼ &lt; 10, we adopt the stellar surface sufficiently outside which is as shallow as τ = 0 . 001. 11 The density structures of the progenitor models are shown in Figures 1a and 1b. The properties of progenitor models, M MS , Z , presupernova mass M preSN , presupernova radius R preSN , and presupernova luminosity L preSN , are summarized in Table 1. 12 R preSN , being the most important ingredient for shock breakout, increases roughly monotonically with Z and M MS , except for the model with M MS = 15 M ⊙ . The progenitor models are red supergiants with R preSN = 500 -1700 R ⊙ producing SNe II-P. We note that the density inversion at the outermost layer corresponds to a super-adiabatic layer, where the temperature gradient is steeper than the adiabatic case.

11 In order to justify the shallowness of the outer boundary, we perform a radiation hydrodynamic calculation for an envelope model down to τ = 10 -8 and confirm the consistency with the envelope model down to τ = 0 . 001. On the other hand, we find that an envelope model down to τ = 0 . 01 shows a bluer SED than that down to τ = 0 . 001. This indicates that τ = 0 . 01 is not shallow enough to treat SEDs of shock breakout.

We calculate explosive nucleosynthesis adopting the same method as described in Tominaga et al. (2007); the explosion is initiated as a thermal bomb, hydrodynamics is calculated including nuclear energy generation with the α -network, and a nucleosynthesis calculation is performed as a postprocessing. Since explosive nucleosynthesis ceases well before the shock emergence from the stellar surface, we perform a radiation hydrodynamics calculation of an explosion for a model with the abundance distribution after explosive nucleosynthesis and the hydrodynamical structure of the progenitor model.

## 2.2. Radiation hydrodynamics

We use the multigroup radiation hydrodynamics code stella (Blinnikov et al. 1998, 2000, 2006). The detail of stella is described in archival literatures (Blinnikov et al. 1998, 2000, 2006) and its reliability has been carefully verified by comparisons with analytic solutions (Matzner &amp; McKee 1999; Rabinak &amp; Waxman 2011), other numerical codes (Blinnikov et al. 1998, 2003), and multicolor SN observations (Blinnikov et al. 1998, 2000, 2006; Chugai et al. 2004). Here, we briefly describe the assumptions and procedures applied in stella and the setup adopted in this paper.

12 We note that the progenitor structures, i.e., the relations among M MS , Z , M preSN , R preSN , and L preSN , depend on the treatment of physics, e.g., rotation, pulsation, mass loss, mixing length, and overshooting (e.g., Limongi &amp; Chieffi 2006; Yoon &amp; Cantiello 2010).

Fig. 3.Absolute bolometric ( red ) and multicolor LCs ( green : FUV, blue : NUV, magenta : u ′ , cyan : g ′ , yellow : r ′ , and black : J ) of the models with (a) M MS = 13 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1, (b) M MS = 15 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1, (c) M MS = 18 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1, (d) M MS = 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1, (e) M MS = 25 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1, (f) M MS = 30 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1, (g) M MS = 40 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1, (h) M MS = 25 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 4, (i) M MS = 25 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 10, (j) M MS = 25 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 20, (k) M MS = 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 001, E 51 = 1, (l) M MS = 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 004, E 51 = 1, and (m) M MS = 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 05, E 51 = 1.

<!-- image -->

stella solves the time-dependent equations implicitly for the angular moments of intensity averaged over fixed frequency bands and computes variable Eddington factors that fully take into account scattering and redshifts for each frequency group in each mass zone. The γ -ray transfer is calculated using a one-group approximation for the nonlocal deposition of the energy of radioactive nuclei; we follow Swartz et al. (1995; see also Jeffery 1998) and use a purely absorptive opacity for γ -ray. It is worthy to note that the γ -ray transfer does not influence the results in this paper because of no contribution to shock breakout from the radioactive decays. In the equation of state, LTE ionizations and recombinations are taken into account. The effect of line opacity is treated as an expansion opacity according to the prescription of Eastman &amp; Pinto (1993; see also Blinnikov et al. 1998).

We adopt 100 frequency bins dividing logarithmically from ν = 6 × 10 13 Hz ( λ = 5 × 10 4 ˚ A) to 3 × 10 18 Hz (1 ˚ A); such a number of frequency bins are enough to solve nonequilibrium continuum radiation and treat any SEDs accurately. We emphasize that there is no need to ascribe any temperature to the radiation. The coupling of multigroup radiation transfer with hydrodynamics enables us to obtain the color temperature in a self-consistent calculation, i.e., a luminosity-weighted blackbody fitting of SED.

All previous computations with stella employed the assumptions used in the code eddington (Eastman &amp; Pinto 1993) for bound-free transitions, in which all atoms and ions, except for hydrogen, are in ground states. Since new opacity tables for stella will be released including excited levels in bound-free absorption (E. Sorokina in prep.) and inner-shell photoionization (P. Baklanov in prep.), we briefly examine these effects on SEDs for a model with M MS = 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, and explosion energy E 51 = E/ (10 51 erg) = 1. While the inner-shell photo-ionization cross-sections are based on formulae derived by Verner et al. (1993, 1996a) and Verner &amp; Yakovlev (1995) 13 as in old eddington and stella routines, the case with excited levels treats all bound-free transitions, also for ground-levels, by different fitting formulae as in code wmbasic 14 (Pauldrach 1987, see also E. Sorokina in prep.).

Fig. 4.Spectral energy distributions at t = 0 of the models with (a) M MS = 13 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1 ( red ), M MS = 15 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1 ( green ), M MS = 18 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1 ( blue ), M MS = 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1 ( magenta ), M MS = 25 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1 ( cyan ), M MS = 30 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1 ( black ), and M MS = 40 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1 ( gray ), (b) M MS = 25 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1 ( red ), M MS = 25 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 4 ( green ), M MS = 25 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 10 ( blue ), and M MS = 25 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 20 ( magenta ), (c) M MS = 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 001, E 51 = 1 ( red ), M MS = 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 004, E 51 = 1 ( green ), M MS = 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1 ( blue ), and M MS = 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 05, E 51 = 1 ( magenta ).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 5.Color temperature evolution of the models. The colors and panels are the same as in Figure 4.

<!-- image -->

The SEDs with three different opacity prescriptions are shown in Figure 2. Although there are small differences as ≤ 0 . 3 mag in several frequency bins, the differences are diluted and diminished when SEDs are convolved with broad-band filters. This illustrates that stella results are robust with respect to different approximations for bound-free transitions at least for shock breakout in an SN II-P in which temperature is not extremely high ( T &lt; 10 6 K). Therefore, in this paper we adopt a procedure from Eastman &amp; Pinto (1993). The opacity table includes 1 . 5 × 10 5 spectral lines from Kurucz &amp; Bell (1995) and Verner et al. (1996b).

## 3. RESULTS

## 3.1. Synthetic multigroup light curves

We perform the multigroup radiation hydrodynamics calculations for models with various M MS , E , and Z . Here, for simplicity, we set M ej to yield a canoni- cal amount of 56 Ni without mixing to the envelope [the ejected 56 Ni mass M ( 56 Ni) = 0 . 07 M ⊙ ]. We note that the assumption does not affect the results because the radioactive decays do not contribute to shock breakout. In this paper, we adopt the AB magnitude system and the following filters: far UV (FUV) and near UV (NUV) bands for GALEX satellite (Morrissey et al. 2005, 2007), u ′ , g ′ , r ′ , i ′ and z ′ bands (Fukugita et al. 1996), J , H , and K bands (Tokunaga et al. 2002), and F322W band for The James Webb Space Telescope ( JWST , Gardner et al. 2006).

The multigroup radiation hydrodynamics calculation provides wavelength- and time-dependent fluxes at an SN surface. Since lights radiated from different parts of the SN surface arrive at an observer in a given direction at different time (for details, see Klein &amp; Chevalier 1978; Imshennik et al. 1981; Ensman &amp; Burrows 1992; Blinnikov et al. 2002, 2003), a light travel time correction 15 and a limb darkening correction in the Eddington approximation are applied.

Absolute LCs of the corrected models are shown in Figures 3a-3m. Figures 3a-3g, 3h-3j, and 3k-3m show the LCs of the models with different M MS , different E , and different Z , respectively. The models with larger M MS and higher Z have larger R preSN , except for the model with M MS = 15 M ⊙ , thus having broader and slightly fainter peak. On the other hand, the models with higher E have brighter and narrower peak. While the bolometric luminosities decline monotonically with time due to an adiabatic cooling, there could be rebrightening in homochromatic LCs due to the shift of peak wavelength with time.

[13 See http://www.pa.uky.edu/ ~ verner/photo.html for details.](http://www.pa.uky.edu/~%20verner/photo.html)

[14 http://www.usm.uni-muenchen.de/people/adi/Programs/Programs.html](http://www.usm.uni-muenchen.de/people/adi/Programs/Programs.html)

15 The light travel time effect in an aspherical explosion is investigated in, e.g., Couch et al. (2009) and Suzuki &amp; Shigeyama (2010).

TABLE 2 Properties of shock breakout.

| M  MS  Z  E  M  ej  T  c  ,  peak  t  1mag  E  rad  ,  1mag  L  peak  T  c  ,  peak  t  1mag  E  rad  ,  1mag  L  peak  [  M  ⊙  ]  [10  51  erg]  [  M  ⊙  ]  [10  5  K]  [10  -  2  days]  [10  48  erg]  [10  44  erg s  -  1  ]  [10  5  K]  [10  -  2  days]  [10  48  erg]  [10  44  erg s  -  1  ]  without corrections  with corrections  13  0.02  1  11.2  3.56  0.651  0.691  10.3  3.35  1.09  0.815  6.99  15  0.02  1  12.7  3.68  0.512  0.536  10.2  3.48  0.915  0.643  6.64  18  0.02  1  15.2  3.03  0.994  0.948  9.41  2.87  1.46  1.09  6.90  20  0.02  1  16.8  2.80  1.19  1.11  9.11  2.70  1.68  1.26  6.91  25  0.02  1  19.9  2.17  2.94  2.07  6.78  2.04  3.40  2.23  5.99  30  0.02  1  23.0  1.99  3.51  2.39  6.52  1.87  3.97  2.54  5.86  40  0.02  1  19.6  2.01  5.16  4.57  8.55  1.92  5.60  4.82  7.90  25  0.02  4  19.8  3.23  1.27  4.20  32.5  3.08  2.28  5.05  21.1  25  0.02  10  19.7  4.38  0.763  6.83  89.6  3.96  2.12  8.74  42.4  25  0.02  20  19.6  5.21  0.511  10.0  196  4.88  2.06  13.5  72.4  20  0.001  1  17.9  2.57  1.35  0.896  6.51  2.51  1.77  1.01  5.23  20  0.004  1  17.8  2.91  1.09  0.986  8.80  2.76  1.54  1.12  6.64  20  0.05  1  15.7  2.41  2.14  1.80  8.09  2.31  2.64  1.99  6.88   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Fig. 6.Comparisons among the models with corrections (fi lled circles ), the models without corrections ( open circles ), and semianalytic solutions (original: cyan shaded region and reduced: gray shaded region ). The color of symbols represents Z = 0 . 02 models ( red ), M MS = 20 M ⊙ models with Z = 0 . 001 , 0 . 004 , and 0 . 05 ( blue ), and M MS = 25 M ⊙ models with E 51 = 1 , 4 , 10 , and 20 ( green ).

<!-- image -->

The SEDs at the bolometric peak ( t = 0, hereafter we set t = 0 at the bolometric peak of each model) are shown in Figures 4a-4c. The SEDs at t = 0 peak in UV ( λ ∼ 40 -100 ˚ A) and have similar spectral slopes at λ ∼ &gt; 400 ˚ A, while the luminosities at λ ∼ &gt; 400 ˚ A are higher for larger R preSN and slightly higher for higher E . Evolution of color temperature is shown in Figures 5a5c. The color temperatures range from T c ∼ 2 × 10 5 to T c ∼ 5 × 10 5 K at t = 0 depending on M MS and E . The SEDs and color temperature evolution depend on M MS (i.e., R preSN ) and E , while their dependencies on Z are small.

The semi-analytic solutions for shock breakout by Matzner &amp; McKee (1999) provide radiation temperature T MM99 , outburst energy E MM99 , timescale t MM99 , and luminosity L MM99 (= E MM99 /t MM99 ) for polytropic envelope structures; the light travel time or limb darkening corrections are not included. In order to compare our results with the semi-analytical solutions, we extract four following characteristics of shock breakout from the corrected and uncorrected models; T c , peak : color temperature at t = 0, t 1mag : days until bolometric magnitude declines by 1 magnitude after the bolometric peak, E rad , 1mag : radiation energy emitted from t = -t 1mag to t = t 1mag , and L peak : peak bolometric luminosity. The properties of our models are summarized in Table 2. Their dependencies on R preSN and E are shown in Figures 6a-6h and compared with the semi-analytic solutions. Since the semi-analytic solutions slightly depend on M ej that is different in the numerical models by a factor of ∼ 2. Possible ranges of the semi-analytic solutions are shown in Figures 6a-6h.

Comparing the uncorrected models and the semianalytic solutions, they are quantitatively different but the dependencies are roughly consistent. The models with larger R preSN have lower T c , peak , longer t 1mag , and higher E rad , 1mag . The models with higher E have higher T c , peak , E rad , 1mag , and L peak and shorter t 1mag . The models with different Z are distributed along a sequence of the models with different R preSN . This indicates that the variations with Z can be interpreted by the variation with R preSN and that the metallicity alters shock breakout mainly through the variation of stellar structure. Accordingly, the Z = 0 . 02 models could be applied even for shock breakout in stars with different Z if they have the same R preSN . 16

Fig. 7.Apparent g ′ -band LCs of the models at z = 0 . 2 ( red ), z = 0 . 5 ( green ), z = 1 ( blue ), z = 1 . 5 ( magenta ), z = 2 ( cyan ), z = 2 . 5 ( yellow ), and z = 3 ( black ). No extinction and no IGM absorption are assumed. The panels are the same as in Figure 3. The horizontal line shows a 5 σ detection limit in g ′ band for Subaru/Suprime-Cam 1 hour integration ( gray , http://www.naoj.org/cgi-bin/spcam tmp.cgi, assuming 0 ′′ . 7 seeing, 1 ′′ . 5 aperture, and 3 days from New Moon).

<!-- image -->

The difference between T c , peak and T MM99 partly stems from the fact that the color temperature is different from the radiation temperature by definition when the opacity depends on frequencies and the SED is not blackbody. However, it is notable that the semi-analytic solution is roughly consistent with the numerical models if T MM99 is reduced by a factor of 1.5 (Figs. 6a and 6b). The semianalytic solutions give slightly higher values also for the other properties. They are in agreement with the numerical models if t MM99 , E MM99 , and L MM99 are reduced by a factor of 2, 3, and 1.5, respectively (Figs. 6c-6h). The reduction factors make it possible to approximately derive

16 It is obviously better to perform a radiation hydrodynamics calculation for an evolutionary presupernova model with proper Z .

progenitor properties from a direct comparison between observations and the semi-analytic solutions. Moreover, the qualitative consistency with the semi-analytic solutions supports the reliability of our numerical results.

The light travel time and limb darkening corrections slightly reduce T c , peak and enhance E rad , 1mag but does not change their dependencies. On the other hand, the corrections considerably change the dependencies of t 1mag on R preSN and E , and the dependence of L peak on E . This is because the corrections smear the LC peak and redistribute radiation energy emitted at bright epochs to a time range of R ph /c , where R ph is a photospheric radius. Consequently, the corrections lengthen t 1mag and diminish L peak more efficiently for a model with shorter t 1mag and brighter L peak . Shock breakout in the model with smaller R preSN and higher E has shorter t 1mag and brighter L peak (Figs. 6c-6d and 6g-6h) and thus more strongly corrected.

Fig. 8.Apparent F322W-band LCs of the models at z = 0 . 5 ( red ), z = 1 ( green ), z = 1 . 5 ( blue ), z = 2 ( magenta ), z = 2 . 5 ( cyan ), and z = 3 ( yellow ). No extinction and no IGM absorption are assumed. The panels are the same as in Figure 3. The horizontal line shows a 10 σ detection limit in F322W band for JWST/NIRCam 10 4 sec integration ( gray , http://www.stsci.edu/jwst/instruments/nircam/sensitivity/index html).

<!-- image -->

## 3.2. Shock breakout at high redshift

The theoretical multigroup LCs allow us to predict apparent LCs of SNe taking place at arbitrary distance, direction, and host galaxy. Let us consider the case where we observe an object at redshift z which emits light with a luminosity per unit frequency L ν 0 at frequency ν 0 in the rest frame and we detect the object with a flux per unit frequency f ν obs at frequency ν obs in the observer frame. Here ν obs = ν 0 / (1 + z ). The observed flux is obtained as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where D L is the luminosity distance. Here, we adopt for cosmological parameters a five-year result of Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (Komatsu et al. 2009): H 0 = 70 . 5 km s -1 Mpc -1 , k = 0, Ω λ = 0 . 726, and Ω M = 0 . 274. Apparent multicolor LCs are derived by convolving the diluted and redshifted multigroup LCs with the bandpasses of the satellites or telescopes.

The LCs in g ′ band for z = 0 . 2, 0 . 5, 1, 1 . 5, 2, 2 . 5, and 3, LCs in F322W band for z = 0 . 5, 1, 1 . 5, 2, 2 . 5, and 3, and LCs in NUV and J bands for z = 0 . 05, 0 . 1, 0 . 15, 0 . 2, 0 . 25, and 0 . 3 are shown in Figures 7a-7m, 8a8m, 9a-9m, and 10a-10m, respectively. These figures also show the limiting magnitudes of telescopes/instruments with wide-field imaging capability: GALEX satellite in NUV band for 5 σ detection with 1500 sec integration ( m NUV , lim = 22 . 7 mag, Morrissey et al. 2005, 2007, Figs. 9a-9m), Subaru/Suprime-Cam in g ′ band for 5 σ detection with 1 hour integration ( m g ′ , lim = 27 . 5 mag, 17 Miyazaki et al. 2002, Figs. 7a-7m), VLT/HAWK-I in J

17 The limiting magnitude is calculated with Subaru Imaging Exposure Time Calculator ( http://www.naoj.org/cgi-bin/spcam\_tmp.cgi ) assuming 0 ′′ . 7 seeing, 1 ′′ . 5 aperture, and 3 days from New Moon.

Fig. 9.Apparent NUV-band LCs of the models at z = 0 . 05 ( red ), z = 0 . 1 ( green ), z = 0 . 15 ( blue ), z = 0 . 2 ( magenta ), z = 0 . 25 ( cyan ), and z = 0 . 3 ( yellow ). No extinction and no IGM absorption are assumed. The panels are the same as in Figure 3. The horizontal line shows a 5 σ detection limit in NUV band for GALEX satellite 1500s integration ( gray , Morrissey et al. 2007).

<!-- image -->

band for 5 σ detection with 1 hour integration ( m J, lim = 24 . 8 mag, Kissler-Patig et al. 2008, Figs. 10a-10m), and JWST /Near Infrared Camera (NIRCam) in F322W band for 10 σ detection with 10 4 sec integration (9 . 18 nJy, 18 Figs. 8a-8m). No extinction and no intergalactic medium (IGM) absorption are adopted here.

These figures demonstrate that the shock breakout with higher E or larger R preSN , i.e., larger M MS or higher Z , can be detected at higher redshift. The shock breakout can be detected in g ′ band even at z ∼ 1 (13 and 15 M ⊙ models), z ∼ 2 (18 and 20 M ⊙ models), and z ∼ 3 (25, 30, and 40 M ⊙ ). On the other hand, the observations in NUV and near infrared (NIR) bands can detect shock breakout only at z ∼ &lt; 0 . 5, although SNe at the later epoch, i.e., plateau stage, are detectable even at z ∼ &gt; 4 by JWST (N. Tominaga, et al. in prep.). This is because the limiting magnitude in UV bands is much shallower than that in optical bands and the SED of shock breakout is too blue for the NIR observations. The shock breakout has a blue color in optical (Figs. 11a-11m), hence an observation in bluer optical bands is more suitable to detect shock breakout as long as the IGM absorption is irrelevant in the adopted bandpass.

[18 http://www.stsci.edu/jwst/instruments/nircam/sensitivity/index\_html . of K g ′ of the 15 M ⊙ and 30 M ⊙ models. The K -correction](http://www.stsci.edu/jwst/instruments/nircam/sensitivity/index_html)

Shock breakout has large negative K -corrections between rest-frame x band and observer-frame x band K x , where x band is an arbitrary bandpass at λ &gt; 100 ˚ A. Figure 12a shows K FUV , K NUV , K u ′ , K g ′ , K r ′ , and K J of the 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, and E 51 = 1 model at t = 0. Since the SED at t = 0 is extremely blue, the negative K -corrections are larger for higher redshift even in FUV band and the K -corrections in redder bands are smaller than those in bluer bands. Figure 12b shows K g ′ of the Z = 0 . 02 models with different M MS at t = 0. The more massive models have slightly larger K -corrections by ∼ &lt; 0 . 5 mag at z ∼ &lt; 4 . 5. Figure 12c shows the evolution evolves more rapidly for higher redshift or smaller M MS . As a result, K g ′ of the 15 M ⊙ model is smaller at t = 0 but larger at t obs = 1 . 5 days than that of the 30 M ⊙ model, where t obs is a time from t = 0 in the observer frame.

Fig. 10.Apparent J -band LCs of the models. No extinction and no IGM absorption are assumed. The panels are the same as in Figure 3 and the color of lines are the same as in Figure 9. The horizontal line shows a 5 σ detection limit in J band for VLT/HAWK-I 1 hour integration ( gray , Kissler-Patig et al. 2008).

<!-- image -->

Figures 13a-13m show distance modulus and apparent peak g ′ -band magnitudes m g ′ , peak of models as a function of redshift for different assumptions on the host galaxy extinction and IGM absorption (Madau 1995). Here, we assume that the host galaxy has a color excess as E ( B -V ) host = 0 or 0 . 1 mag and our Galaxy extinction law (Pei 1992). These figures display that the dimming of apparent magnitude is considerably weak compared to the distance modulus because of the large negative K -correction. For illustration purpose, a 1-hour limiting magnitude for Subaru/Suprime-Cam is also shown ( m g ′ , lim = 27 . 5 mag). The maximum redshift for detecting shock breakout with 8m-class telescopes is mainly determined by the host galaxy extinction, while the IGM absorption becomes relevant at z ∼ &gt; 2 in g ′ band. When a limiting magnitude m g ′ , lim ∼ 30 mag is achieved by nextgeneration 30m-class telescopes, the maximum redshifts are z ∼ 3 . 5 for E ( B -V ) host = 0 . 1 mag and z ∼ 4 . 2 for E ( B -V ) host = 0 which are limited by the IGM absorption. At that era, shock breakout can be used for studies on not only distant SNe II-P, host galaxy extinction, or evolution of universe but also an IGM.

## 3.3. Future prospects for shock breakout surveys

The detection of shock breakout has recently been consummated but the number is still small. This is because it is difficult for past/ongoing SN/transient surveys with several days intervals to detect short-term soft X-ray/UV flashes. Hence, we propose a deep optical survey with short intervals, e.g., ∼ hour, for shock breakout in an SN II-P in the distant universe.

This is motivated by the following two brand-new prospects. (1) Due to the large negative K -correction, distant shock breakout up to z ∼ 3 is bright enough to be detected with current optical facilities ( § 3.2). Such a survey is promising because of three reasons: the duration of a distant event is elongated, the star formation rate (SFR) is high in the distant universe (e.g., Hopkins &amp; Beacom 2006), and available optical facilities are numerous compared to X-ray/UV satellites. (2) The multiepoch imaging observation in a night is essential to draw the LCs of shock breakout in both rising and declining phases because the time scale of shock breakout in an SN II-P at z ∼ &lt; 3 are less than ∼ 1 day in the observer frame ( § 3.2).

Fig. 11.Color ( g ′ -r ′ ) evolution of models in the observer frame at z = 0 . 2 ( red ), z = 0 . 5 ( green ), z = 1 ( blue ), z = 1 . 5 ( magenta ), z = 2 ( cyan ), z = 2 . 5 ( black ), and z = 3 ( gray ). The panels are the same as in Figure 3.

<!-- image -->

In the following, we estimate the expected number and highest redshift of detection, discuss influences of uncertainties on host galaxy extinction and SFH, and propose realistic and promising survey strategies, ways to identify shock breakout, and ways to constrain the SN properties from observable quantities. In this section, we focus on the models with E 51 = 1 and Z = 0 . 02.

## 3.3.1. Expected number

Host galaxy extinction heavily reduces brightness of shock breakout ( § 3.2), and thus it should be taken into account for a realistic number estimate. However, the host galaxy extinction of distant SNe II-P is unknown but instead it will be clarified by future shock breakout studies. Hence we expediently assume that the distribution of host galaxy extinction of distant SNe II-P is equivalent to that of nearby SNe II-P. The host galaxy extinction of a nearby SN II-P is estimated from Na I -D lines of the host galaxy, a spectroscopic observation of SNe, or a color of SN plateau (e.g., Krisciunas et al. 2009; Olivares E. et al. 2010). We employ the distribution of host galaxy extinction presented in Olivares E. et al. (2010). Although we take conservatively the highest extinction for each SN among their estimates, we caution that it could be biased towards bright, i.e., less-reddened, SNe II-P.

We estimate the incidence rate of shock breakout that can be brighter than a limiting magnitude m x, lim in bandpass x , named 'observable SN rate'. The procedure to estimate observable SN rate is as follows: we define a peak magnitude in bandpass x [ m peak ,x ( M MS , A V , z )] for an SN with M MS which explodes in a galaxy with extinction A V at a redshift z , and then a detection probability f x [ m peak ,x ( M MS , A V , z ) , m x, lim ] is set to 1 when m peak ,x ( M MS , A V , z ) ≤ m x, lim or 0 when m peak ,x ( M MS , A V , z ) &gt; m x, lim . Accordingly, the observable SN rate per unit solid angle per unit time in the observer frame n x ( m x, lim ) is obtained by integrating the detection probability with an IMF φ ( M MS ), a cosmic SFH η ( z ), and the distribution of host galaxy extinction χ ( A V ), where ∫ χ ( A V ) dA V = 1, as

Fig. 12.K -corrections K x between rest-frame x band and observer-frame x band. (a) K FUV ( red ), K NUV ( green ), K u ′ ( blue ), K g ′ ( magenta ), K r ′ ( cyan ), and K J ( black ) of the 20 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, and E 51 = 1 model as a function of redshift. (b) K g ′ of the Z = 0 . 02 and E 51 = 1 models with M MS = 13 M ⊙ ( red ), 15 M ⊙ ( green ), 18 M ⊙ ( blue ), 20 M ⊙ ( magenta ), 25 M ⊙ ( cyan ), 30 M ⊙ ( black ), and 40 M ⊙ ( gray ) as a function of redshift. (c) K g ′ of the Z = 0 . 02 and E 51 = 1 models with M MS = 15 M ⊙ ( thin lines ) and 30 M ⊙ ( thick lines ) at z = 0 . 2 ( red ), 0 . 5 ( green ), 1 ( blue ), 1 . 5 ( magenta ), 2 ( cyan ), 2 . 5 ( black ), and 3 ( gray ) as a function of time in the observer frame.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 13.Peak g ′ magnitude m g ′ , peak and distance modulus ( black ) as a function of redshift. The peak magnitudes are derived by assuming no extinction and IGM absorption ( red ), host galaxy extinction ( E ( B -V ) host = 0 . 1 mag and our Galaxy extinction law, Pei 1992) ( blue ), IGM absorption (Madau 1995) ( green ), and host galaxy extinction ( E ( B -V ) host = 0 . 1 mag and our Galaxy extinction law) and IGM absorption ( magenta ). The panels are the same as in Figure 3 and the horizontal line ( gray ) is the same as in Figure 7.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 14.Observable SN rates per square degree per day n x ( m x, lim ) for (a) different bandpass: FUV ( red ), NUV ( green ), u ′ ( blue ), g ′ ( magenta ), r ′ ( cyan ), i ′ ( yellow ), z ′ ( black ), J ( orange ), and F322W ( gray ) and for (b) different host galaxy extinction and SFH in g ′ band: estimates HB06-Gal ( red ), HB06-LMC ( cyan ), HB06-SMC ( gray ), MDP07-no ( green ), MDP07-Gal ( blue ), and MK11-Gal ( magenta ). The insets enlarge the regions with m x, lim ≤ 28 mag.

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where V ( z ) is a comoving volume up to z and Ω is a solid angle. Here, we assume a modified Salpeter A IMF (Salpeter 1955; Baldry &amp; Glazebrook 2003) and a cosmic SFH in Hopkins &amp; Beacom (2006), and we adopt approximate formulae for the IGM absorption (Madau 1995) and the host galaxy extinction (our Galaxy extinction law, Pei 1992). 19

19 Since these formulae cannot be adopted at λ &lt; 800 ˚ A in the rest frame, we assume that the absorption and extinction at λ &lt; 800 ˚ A are the same as those at λ = 800 ˚ A.

Fig. 15.Reachable redshifts z x,f ( m x, lim ) for (a) different bandpass with f = 0 . 9: the colors are the same as in Fig. 14a, for (b) different f in g ′ band: f = 0 . 999 ( red ), 0 . 99 ( green ), 0 . 9 ( blue ), 0 . 5 ( magenta ), and 0 . 1 ( cyan ), and for (c) different host galaxy extinction and SFH in g ′ band; the colors are the same as in Fig. 14b. The insets enlarge the regions with m x, lim ≤ 24 mag.

<!-- image -->

The observable SN rate per square degree per day are shown as a function of m x, lim in Figures 14a and 14b. For deeper limiting magnitude, the observable SN rates are higher due to the larger observable volume and the higher SFR at high redshift. For example, the g ′ -band observations with m g ′ , lim = 20, 22, 24, 26, 27, 28, and 30 mag detect 3 . 1 × 10 -5 , 6 . 2 × 10 -4 , 1 . 4 × 10 -2 , 3 . 7 × 10 -1 , 1 . 7, 5 . 6, and 1 . 8 × 10 SNe degree -2 day -1 , respectively. n g ′ ( m g ′ , lim ) logarithmically increases with m g ′ , lim at m g ′ , lim ∼ &lt; 27 . 5 mag, but the increase slows down at m g ′ , lim ∼ &gt; 27 . 5 mag because the maximum redshift of observable SNe reaches z ∼ 2 . 5 (Figs. 13a-13m) where the IGM absorption becomes nonnegligible and the cosmic SFH hits a peak.

Redshifts below which a given fraction f of observable SNe locates [ z x,f ( m x, lim ), named 'reachable redshift'] are shown in Figures 15a-15c. The fraction of highz events increases with m x, lim . For example, the g ′ -band observations with m g ′ , lim = 20, 22, 24, 26, 27, 28, and 30 mag result in [ z g ′ , 0 . 1 ( m g ′ , lim ), z g ′ , 0 . 5 ( m g ′ , lim ), z g ′ , 0 . 9 ( m g ′ , lim )] = (0 . 013, 0 . 027, 0 . 042), (0 . 035, 0 . 071, 0 . 11), (0 . 095, 0 . 19, 0 . 31), (0 . 26, 0 . 55, 1 . 0), (0 . 42, 0 . 96, 1 . 9), (0 . 62, 1 . 4, 2 . 4), and (0 . 90, 1 . 9, 3 . 0), respectively. If m g ′ , lim ≥ 27 mag is realized, more than half of the observable SNe take place at z ≥ 0 . 9. This capability to access highz universe is an intriguing and unique feature of shock breakout.

Fig. 16.Observable SN rate per day Ω obs n x ( m x, lim ) as a function of limiting magnitude m x, lim and survey area Ω obs . (a) Ω obs n x ( m x, lim ) = 1 in different bandpass: the colors are the same as in Fig. 14a and (b) different Ω obs n x ( m x, lim ) in g ′ band: Ω obs n x ( m x, lim ) = 0 . 01 ( red ), 0 . 1 ( green ), 1 ( blue ), 10 ( magenta ), 100 ( cyan ), 10 3 ( yellow ), 10 4 ( black ), and 10 5 ( orange ). The lines being accessible by equal survey powers are shown ( gray ).

<!-- image -->

If the same limiting magnitude is available, n x ( m x, lim ) and z x,f ( m x, lim ) in bluer bands are higher than those in redder bands at shallow m x, lim , e.g., m x, lim ∼ &lt; 24 -25 mag for UV, due to the blue SED of shock breakout. However, the increases in n x ( m x, lim ) and z x,f ( m x, lim ) for deep m x, lim are suppressed by the IGM absorption. Therefore, n x ( m x, lim ) and z x,f ( m x, lim ) in redder bands overcome those in bluer bands for deep m x, lim . Thus, the most effective bandpass for shock breakout detection depends on feasible m x, lim . For example, the g ′ - and r ′ -band observations are currently the most effective in number and in reachable redshift, respectively, because only 8m-class optical telescopes or Hubble Space Telescope ( m x, lim ∼ &lt; 28 mag) are available at the moment. When 30m-class optical/infrared telescopes ( m x, lim ∼ 30 mag) become operative, the most effective bands will be r ′ band in number and i ′ band in reachable redshift.

The reachable redshift dramatically increases if m x, lim is deeper than 26 -30 mag (Figs. 15a-15c) because the large negative K -correction makes the apparent peak magnitudes of shock breakout almost constant ( ∼

26 -30 mag) for a wide redshift range (Figs. 13a-13m). Therefore, in order to detect distant shock breakout at z ∼ &gt; 1, it is essential to attain m x, lim ∼ &gt; 26 -30 mag. Since the dramatical increases of reachable redshift in optical bands coincide with the limiting magnitudes of current optical facilities, the improvement in near future will enhance the reachable redshift considerably. On the other hand, the increase in z x, 0 . 9 ( m x, lim ) reaches the ceiling at z ∼ 4 for m x, lim ∼ &gt; 30 mag even in NIR bands. This is because the cosmic SFH in Hopkins &amp; Beacom (2006) has low SFR at such a high redshift. It is important to note that the detection of shock breakout at z &gt; 4 is feasible if an SFR is high enough, unless the bandpass are below the rest-frame Ly α wavelength.

According to n x ( m x, lim ), observable SN rates per unit time Ω obs n x ( m x, lim ) with a given m x, lim and a survey area Ω obs are shown in Figures 16a and 16b. An observation in a bluer band is more efficient with the same m x, lim if a wide survey area is available ( &gt; 1 degree 2 ), while an observation in a redder band is slightly better if only a narrow survey area observation ( &lt; 0 . 1 degree 2 ) with deep m x, lim ( ∼ &gt; 30 mag) is available. The flat dependence of Ω obs n x ( m x, lim ) on m x, lim at deep m x, lim , e.g., m g ′ , lim ∼ &gt; 28 mag in g ′ band, stems from the suppression of n x ( m x, lim ) by the IGM absorption and the low SFR at high redshift.

Figure 16b shows lines giving equal Ω obs n g ′ ( m g ′ , lim ) with the g ′ -band observation. The gray lines represent equal survey powers without taking into account observing overhead such as readout time. The number of observable SNe is larger for wider and shallower observations with a given survey power. However, such a wide and shallow observation misses highz events (Figs. 15a-15c) and Ω obs n g ′ ( m g ′ , lim ) has an upper limit somewhere if the overhead is taken into account. Therefore, the practical survey parameters should be customized to purposes of observations and adopted telescopes/instruments, considering the number, reachable redshift, and overhead.

## 3.3.2. Dependencies on host galaxy extinction and star formation history

We set the above estimate with the SFH in Hopkins &amp; Beacom (2006) and our Galaxy extinction law (HB06-Gal) as a control estimate and investigate the dependence of n x ( m x, lim ) on uncertainties of host galaxy extinction and SFH (Fig. 14b).

We attempt Large Magellanic Cloud and Small Magellanic Cloud extinction laws (estimates HB06-LMC and HB06-SMC, Pei 1992) for host galaxies. The LMC and SMC extinction laws have larger absorption at λ &lt; 2000 ˚ A and smaller at λ ∼ 2200 ˚ A in the rest frame than our Galaxy extinction law. As a result, n g ′ ( m g ′ , lim ) of estimates HB06-LMC and HB06-SMC are slightly smaller at m g ′ , lim ∼ &gt; 27 mag than that of estimate HB06-Gal but the estimates HB06-Gal, HB06-LMC, and HB06-SMC are similar at m g ′ , lim ∼ &lt; 26 mag.

The SFH in Hopkins &amp; Beacom (2006) is derived by scaling UV SFH so as to be consistent with infrared SFH and thus presumably includes both visible and dust-obscured star formation. Although we correct the dust extinction in host galaxies, it could underestimate the host galaxy extinction. Additionally, some studies a The limiting magnitude is calculated with Subaru Imaging Exposure Time Calculator ( http://www.naoj.org/cgi-bin/spcam\_tmp.cgi ) assuming 0 ′′ . 7 seeing, 1 ′′ . 5 aperture, and 3 days from New Moon.

TABLE 3 Simulated survey strategies.

| Strategy  N  night  n  obs  t  exp  m  x,  lim  a  Number  b  Reachable redshift  c  Number with overhead  d  [nights]  [night  -  1  ]  [min]  [mag]  [degree  -  2  ]  [degree  -  2  ]  A  1  3  120  28.4  1.56  2.40  1.42  B  2  3  60  28.0  2.62  2.21  2.38  C  4  3  30  27.6  3.57  1.99  3.25  D  12  3  10  27.1  4.66  1.46  4.23  E  24  3  5  26.7  5.22  1.07  4.75  F  40  3  3  26.4  5.49  0.84  4.70  G  60  3  2  26.2  5.81  0.71  4.65  H  2  4  45  27.9  2.71  2.25  2.46  I  2  5  36  27.8  2.73  2.25  2.49  J  2  6  30  27.6  2.71  2.25  2.46  K  2  12  15  27.3  2.31  2.12  2.10  L  3  1  120  28.4  0.0651  2.44  0.0592  M  2  3  120  28.4  3.91  2.35  3.55  N  3  3  120  28.4  6.26  2.34  5.70   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

b The number of observable SNe in total, assuming no overhead.

d The number of observable SNe reduced in proportion to the overhead, 10% for t exp ≥ 5 min and 30 sec for t exp &lt; 5 min.

d The redshift below which 90% of observable SNe occur.

suggest that Hopkins &amp; Beacom (2006) overcorrects the dust extinction and overestimates the SFR by a factor of ∼ 2 at z ∼ 2 -3 (e.g., Nagashima &amp; Yoshii 2004; Nagashima et al. 2005; Baugh et al. 2005; Lacey et al. 2010). Hence, we test with UV dust-unobscured SFH (Mannucci et al. 2007). Although their estimate is limited at z &lt; 2, the SFR at z &gt; 2 is assumed to be the same as the SFR at z = 2. Since the dust attenuation of shock breakout brightness in a host galaxy would be somehow involved in the UV dust-unobscured SFH, we present an estimate with no additional host galaxy extinction (estimate MDP07-no) and also test an estimate with extinction correction with our Galaxy extinction law as a lower limit (estimate MDP07-Gal).

Furthermore, we test an SFH and host galaxy extinction derived from a cold dark matter-based semi-analytic model (M. A.R. Kobayashi, et al. 2011 in prep., see also Nagashima &amp; Yoshii 2004; Kobayashi et al. 2007, 2010) 20 and our Galaxy extinction law (estimate MK11Gal). The estimate MK11-Gal provides a self-consistent observable SN rate with respect to the host galaxy extinction and SFR, although the metallicity evolution is ignored in this paper. The estimates HB06-Gal, MDP07no, and MK11-Gal are consistent but they are higher by a factor of 2 . 5 than the estimate MDP07-Gal at m g ′ , lim ≤ 28 mag. On the other hand, the differences between the estimate HB06-Gal and the estimates MK11Gal and MDP07-no are as large as a factor of 2 -2 . 5 at m g ′ , lim ∼ 30 mag. Therefore the number count of shock breakout with 30m-class telescope can constrain how high the SFR is at high redshift, being independent of galaxy studies.

We also investigate the dependencies of z g ′ ,f ( m g ′ , lim ) on host galaxy extinction and SFH (Fig. 15c). z g ′ , 0 . 9 ( m g ′ , lim ) of the estimates HB06-Gal and MDP07Gal are consistent but they are slightly lower than the estimate MDP07-no at m g ′ , lim ∼ &gt; 26 mag and the estimate MK11-Gal at m g ′ , lim ∼ &lt; 25 mag. And the estimate HB06-LMC has slightly higher z g ′ , 0 . 9 ( m g ′ , lim ) at m g ′ , lim ∼ &lt; 25 mag than the estimate HB06-Gal, while z g ′ , 0 . 9 ( m g ′ , lim ) of the estimate HB06-LMC at m g ′ , lim ∼ &gt; 27 mag and the estimate HB06-SMC are consistent with that of the estimate HB06-Gal. These are because z x,f ( m x, lim ) depends mainly on the host galaxy extinction at shallow m x, lim and the IGM absorption at deep m x, lim . The reason why z x, 0 . 9 ( m x, lim ) of the estimate MDP07-Gal is higher than that of the estimate HB06-Gal at m x, lim ∼ &gt; 31 mag is because we assume the constant SFR at high redshift in the estimate MDP07-Gal which is higher than the SFR in Hopkins &amp; Beacom (2006) at z ∼ &gt; 5.

20 The model well explains observations of nearby and distant galaxy evolutions and dust-unobscured luminosity density. Since the intrinsic SFR and dust extinction of each galaxy are provided, the SFH estimate is free from uncertainties of extinction correction and conversion from the galaxy luminosity to the SFR.

## 3.3.3. Requirements on survey strategies

Although the above estimates refer only to the peak apparent magnitude, the cadence of observations is also an important ingredient to identify transients. Indeed, it is difficult to identify and interpret an event only with oneepoch brightening. Additionally, the above estimates do not take into account an elongation of the duration at high redshift. Hence, we estimate the number of detection of shock breakout N i,x ( m x, lim , Ω obs ) for an observation sampling i with bandpass x , m x, lim , and a field of view Ω obs , which can be obtained by an integration of a 'control time' Γ i,x ( M MS , A V , z, m x, lim ) 21 as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is similar to Eq. (2) but integrates with Γ i,x ( M MS , A V , z, m x, lim ) instead of f x [ m peak ,x ( M MS , A V , z ) , m x, lim ]. We define the detection with two criteria: (1) the event is detected at ≥ N detect samplings with 3 σ and (2) at least one of samplings is taken from t obs = -0 . 2 days to t obs = 0 . 4 days. Γ i,x ( M MS , A V , z, m x, lim ) is determined by simulating the detection of shock breakout. The expected number of detection and reachable redshift are slightly smaller and lower than the previous estimates in which all events with m peak ,x ≤ m x, lim are counted because we require the detectable SN to be brighter than m x, lim over ≥ N detect samplings.

21 Γ i,x ( M MS , A V , z, m x, lim ) is the number of detection of shock breakout with M MS , A V , and z per unit SN rate in the observer frame and thus having a dimension of number/(number/time), i.e., time.

We attempt strategies A-N which divide a 6-, 12-, or 18-hour g ′ -band observation with respective ways, assuming the cosmic SFH in Hopkins &amp; Beacom (2006) and our Galaxy extinction law (Pei 1992). Here, we treat the number of nights N night , observation sampling per night n obs , and exposure time for each sampling t exp as parameters, assume N detect = 3, and adopt Subaru/Suprime-Cam to estimate m x, lim for 3 σ detection (Miyazaki et al. 2002). Each observation sampling is uniformly distributed to the whole night (10 hr for each night) and an overhead is neglected. The detail of strategies and the results, the expected number per square degree and the redshift below which 90% of events occur, are summarized in Table 3.

While large N night enhances the number of detection, large n obs and long t exp enhance the reachable redshift. For the same N night , a strategy with n obs = 5, in which a field is observed every 2 hours, is the most efficient in number and reachable redshift. The remarkably small number of detection of strategy L ( n obs = 1) demonstrates that the multiple photometric observation in a night is essential to detect shock breakout because shock breakout brightens and declines within ∼ 1 day. Comparing the strategies A, M, and N, an additional one night observation increase the number of detection by 2 . 3 degree -2 , which is larger than the number of detection of the one night observation (1 . 6 degree -2 , strategy A). This is because the observation over ≥ 2 continuous nights can detect an event, taking place at the end of the first night, at the subsequent nights. Thus, the strategy with N night ≥ 2 is more favorable than the strategy with N night = 1.

As expected in § 3.3.1, a wider and shallower survey detects larger number of shock breakout at lower redshift. However, the fraction of overhead should be high for extremely short t exp in reality. Thus, we estimate the number of observable SNe taking into account an overhead. Here, we expediently assume an overhead as 10% of total observation for t exp ≥ 5 min or 30 sec for t exp &lt; 5 min, and reduce the number of observable SNe in proportion to the fraction of overhead. As a result, the number of observable SNe peaks at t exp = 5 min for this specific overhead.

## 3.3.4. Identification of shock breakout

Many transients other than shock breakout, e.g., variable stars, SNe, quasars (QSOs), and GRBs, will be found as variable objects in a photometric observation. Shock breakout can be reliably discriminated from other kinds of variable objects holistically referring to observable quantities: time scale, LC shape, color, and position, and other observations.

Fig. 17.Color-color ( u ′ -g ′ vs. g ′ -r ′ ) diagrams for the models with M MS = 15 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1 ( red ), M MS = 25 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 1 ( green ), and M MS = 25 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 02, E 51 = 10 ( blue ), at (a) z = 0 . 5, (b) z = 1, (c) z = 1 . 5, (d) z = 2, (e) z = 2 . 5, and (f) z = 3, without the IGM absorption ( thin line ) and with the IGM absorption ( thick line ). The points represent the colors at t = 0 ( circle ) and at t = 2 days in the observer frame ( square ). The contours show the distributions of stars ( cyan , SDSS, Abazajian et al. 2009) and QSOs ( magenta , Schneider et al. 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2010). The arrows show extinction vectors of host galaxies with A V = 0 . 25 mag, assuming that the extinction curve is the same as our Galaxy ( red ), LMC ( green ), or SMC ( blue ) (Pei 1992).

<!-- image -->

Time scale and LC shape : Shock breakout has a nonrecurrent brightening, a time scale of several sec -several days, and featureless LC. On the other hand, (1) SNe powered by radioactive decays, the plateau of SNe II-P or Type IIn SNe, or linear decay of Type II-L SNe have time scales of several ten days -several hundred days, (2) GRB optical flash has a time scale of several ten sec and frequently has a jagged multiple peaks (e.g., Wo´ zniak et al. 2009), and (3) the flare of low-mass star, e.g., a M dwarf star, has a time scale of several minutes -several hours and recurrent brightening (e.g., Hawley et al. 2003). Therefore, the time scale and LC shape of a transient can be employed for excluding these objects.

Fig. 18.Color-color ( g ′ -r ′ vs. r ′ -i ′ ) diagrams for the models at various redshifts. The panels, contours, points, lines, and arrows are the same as in Figure 17 but A V = 0 . 5 mag is assumed for the extinction vectors of host galaxies.

<!-- image -->

Fig. 19.Color-color (FUV -NUV vs. g ′ -r ′ ) diagrams of the models at (a) z = 0 . 05, (b) z = 0 . 1, (c) z = 0 . 15, (d) z = 0 . 2, (e) z = 0 . 25, and (f) z = 0 . 3. The points without lines represent colors of stars ( cyan , Bruzual-Persson-Gunn-Stryker atlas, Strecker et al. 1979; Gunn &amp; Stryker 1983) and QSOs ( magenta , Vanden Berk et al. 2001). The colors of QSOs are represented by open triangles when the rest-frame Ly α wavelength is redshifted into FUV band. The color of lines, points on lines, and arrows are the same as in Figure 17 but A V = 0 . 5 mag is assumed for the extinction vectors of host galaxies.

<!-- image -->

Position, archival image, and other observations : If a survey is performed at fields with plenty past observations, checking past variabilities at the position can effectively rule out possibilities of long time-scale variables such as QSO or a variable star. If the event occurs in the outskirts of the host galaxy or is not detected in X-ray, the variable object is likely to be shock breakout. 22 And the deep UV, optical, and infrared imaging data are also useful for excluding the possibility of stars. Furthermore, if the field is included in the field of view of γ -ray telescope (e.g., Swift /BAT, Gehrels et al. 2004), an alert of GRB can be used for ruling out a possibility of GRB. Even if the GRB prompt emission cannot be observed (i.e., the GRB orphan afterglows), a radio follow-up observation can constrain the presence of relativistic jets (e.g., Soderberg et al. 2008, 2010).

22 Some low-luminosity AGN at high redshift can not be detected even in deep X-ray data (Sarajedini et al. 2006; Cohen et al. 2006;

Morokuma et al. 2008).

Fig. 20.Color-color ( J -H vs. H -K ) diagrams of the models at various redshifts. The panels, color of lines, points, and arrows are the same as in Figure 19 but A V = 3 mag is assumed for the extinction vectors of host galaxies.

<!-- image -->

Color : The conclusive identification of shock breakout is given by the color of a variable. Figures 17a17f ( u ′ -g ′ vs. g ′ -r ′ ), 18a-18f ( g ′ -r ′ vs. r ′ -i ′ ), 19a-19f (FUV -NUV vs. g ′ -r ′ ), and 20a-20f ( J -H vs. H -K ) show redshift-dependent colorcolor diagrams for the less-massive 15 M ⊙ and E 51 = 1 model, massive 25 M ⊙ and E 51 = 1 model, and energetic 25 M ⊙ and E 51 = 10 model with taking into account the IGM absorption (Madau 1995) and compare them with color-color distributions of stars 23 and QSOs (Schneider et al. 2002, 2003, 2005, 2007, 2010) for Figures 17a-17f and 18a-18f and with colors derived from typical spectra (stars: Bruzual-Persson-Gunn-Stryker atlas, Strecker et al. 1979; Gunn &amp; Stryker 1983 24 and QSOs: Vanden Berk et al. 2001) for Figures 19a-19f and 20a-20f. Here, these figures show extinction-uncorrected colors of stars and extinction-corrected colors of QSOs at z ± ∆ z [where ∆ z = 0 . 1(1 + z ), being an accuracy of a photometric redshift]. Ordinary SNe are not shown because any type of SNe are too red to appear in these figures (e.g., Nugent et al. 2002). The colors of shock breakout are FUV -NUV ∼ -0 . 5, u ′ -g ′ ∼ &lt; -0 . 3, g ′ -r ′ ∼ &lt; -0 . 3, r ′ -i ′ ∼ &lt; -0 . 3, J -H ∼ &lt; -0 . 6, and H -K ∼ &lt; -0 . 8 at t = 0 and FUV -NUV ∼ 0 . 1, u ′ -g ′ ∼ &lt; 0 . 1, g ′ -r ′ ∼ &lt; -0 . 1, r ′ -i ′ ∼ &lt; -0 . 1, J -H ∼ &lt; -0 . 3, and H -K ∼ &lt; -0 . 4 at t obs = 2 days (see also Figs. 11a-11m), except for u ′ -g ′ at z ≥ 2 . 5 or g ′ -r ′ at z ≥ 3. These exceptions stem from the fact that the light in observed u ′ and g ′ bands are heavily absorbed by the IGM at z ≥ 2 . 5 and z ≥ 3, respectively. The color of shock breakout is much bluer than the majorities of stars and QSOs but we note that the color at t = 0 is similar to O/B stars and that the NIR colors of less-massive and energetic models at t obs = 2 days and massive model at t obs = 10 days are similar to QSOs.

23 Photometrically-identified stars with photometric errors &lt; 0 . 01 mag are extracted from the Seventh Data Release (DR7; Abazajian et al. 2009) of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS; York et al. 2000). The number of stars is over 4 × 10 6 . We note that the sample could be biased toward bright and thus blue stars because the stars with small errors are selected.

GRB orphan afterglow and M dwarf flare could have a similar time scale, featureless LC, and nonrecurrent brightening in a limited-time photometric observation. However, the blue color is a precise identifier of shock breakout. According to a standard model for GRB afterglow (e.g., Sari et al. 1998), GRB afterglow are red at a frequency range above frequencies corresponding to minimum or cooling Lorentz factor. Adopting reasonable parameters for GRBs (e.g., Panaitescu &amp; Kumar 2002), the minimum or cooling frequency at ∼ &gt; 0 . 1 days after the prompt burst is ν ∼ &lt; 10 14 Hz and thus the red color is realized at λ ∼ &lt; 3 × 10 4 ˚ A. Although the minimum and cooling frequencies are higher for earlier epochs, the GRB orphan afterglow will typically peak at &gt; 0 . 1 days (e.g., Totani &amp; Panaitescu 2002). Therefore, the GRB orphan afterglow is likely to have a red color in optical bands. Also the color of low-mass star flare is typically red (e.g., Kowalski et al. 2009).

## 3.3.5. Constraints on supernova properties from shock breakout

The SN properties can be constrained from the observations of shock breakout. Here, we focus on three observational quantities: peak magnitude, decline rate, and color evolution. Their dependencies on the model properties, M MS , R preSN , and E , at z = 0 . 2, z = 1, and z = 2 are summarized in Tables 4, 5, 6 and shown in Figures 21a-21o, 22a-22i, and 23a-23i, respectively. Here, we assume that the redshift of shock breakout is determined photometrically or spectroscopically.

Figures 21a-21c, 22a-22c, and 23a-23c show the apparent peak g ′ -band magnitude m g ′ , peak . m g ′ , peak vary over ∼ 1 . 5 -2 mag depending on R preSN and thus M MS , al-

24 http://www.stsci.edu/hst/observatory/cdbs/astronomical\_catalogs.html though L peak are similar for the models with E 51 = 1

Fig. 21.Dependencies of observational quantities on the model properties, M MS , R preSN , and E , at z = 0 . 2. The color of symbols represents Z = 0 . 02 models ( red ), M MS = 20 M ⊙ models with Z = 0 . 001 , 0 . 004 , and 0 . 05 ( blue ), and M MS = 25 M ⊙ models with E 51 = 1 , 4 , 10 , and 20 ( green ). (g-o) The colors of the models at t color obs = 0 (fi lled circles ), 0 . 5 days ( open square ), 1 day ( open triangles ), and 2 days ( open circles ).

<!-- image -->

Fig. 22.Same as Figs. 21, but for z = 1.

<!-- image -->

(Fig. 6a). On the other hand, although L peak varies by an order of magnitude depending on E (Fig. 6b), the m g ′ , peak range of the models with different E is only ∼ 0 . 7 mag. The different behavior between bolometric and monochromatic luminosities stems from the different photospheric temperatures leading to different T c . The models with larger R preSN have lower temperature and thus redder SEDs and slightly brighter at λ ∼ &gt; 300 ˚ A (Fig. 4a), while the models with higher E have higher temperature and thus bluer SEDs but the luminosities are almost similar at λ ∼ &gt; 800 ˚ A (Fig. 4b). We note that the g ′ -band luminosities peak at t obs ∼ 0 . 001 -0 . 05 days because of the temperature evolution (see also Figs. 7a7m).

Figures 21d-21f, 22d-22f, and 23d-23f show days after the g ′ -band peak until g ′ -band magnitude declines by 0 . 5 magnitude t g ′ , 0 . 5mag . The dependencies of the decline rate in g ′ band on R preSN ( M MS ) and E are almost similar to those in the bolometric LC. This is because the decline rate depends on energetics of SNe but not on the temperature when the SED peaks at shorter λ than g ′ band. Since the dependencies of m g ′ , peak and t g ′ , 0 . 5mag on R preSN ( M MS ) and E are different, in principal they could determine R preSN ( M MS ) and E independently.

However, apparent brightness is dimmed by extinction and thus having large uncertainties. Hence, we introduce the color evolution to resolve the uncertainties. Although the absolute color is also strongly reddened by extinction, the color evolution does not suffer from extinction unless extinction changes with time. Figures 21g-21o, 22g-22i, and 23g-23i show the color evolutions, FUV-NUV, u ′ -g ′ , and g ′ -r ′ for z = 0 . 2 and g ′ -r ′ for z = 1 and z = 2, respectively (see also Figs. 11a-11m). These figures show the bluest color, that is realized at t color obs = 0 corresponding to t obs ∼ 0 . 03 -0 . 2 days, and the colors at t color obs = 0 . 5, 1, and 2 days, where color is FUV-NUV, u ′ -g ′ , or g ′ -r ′ . The colors of some models evolve toward red at first and then get back to blue again, which is shown as a loop structure in Figures 17a-17f, 18a-18f, 19a-19f, and 20a20f.

The model with smaller R preSN has a bluer color at the peak because of the higher temperature and its color evolution is more rapid. The color evolution within 2 days are ∆( g ′ -r ′ ) ∼ &gt; 0 . 3 mag for the model with R preSN &lt; 10 3 R ⊙ and ∆( g ′ -r ′ ) ∼ &lt; 0 . 25 mag for the model with R preSN &gt; 10 3 R ⊙ . For example, the 13 M ⊙ model has a redder color than the 30 M ⊙ model at t color obs = 1 day for z = 0 . 2 and at t g ′ -r ′ obs = 2 days for z = 1 and z = 2. On the other hand, the bluest colors of models with different E are similar but the models with higher E have more rapid and smaller variations. The color evolutions of the models with different Z are similar to those of the Z = 0 . 02 models with the same R preSN and thus it could cause an uncertainty for constraining M MS when the metallicity of host galaxy is unknown. In conclusion, the color evolutions can classify shock breakout, at least, to the following three groups: explosions with R preSN &lt; 10 3 R ⊙ and R preSN &gt; 10 3 R ⊙ ( M MS ≤ 20 M ⊙ and M MS ≥ 25 M ⊙ for the Z = 0 . 02 models) and an energetic explosion with E 51 ≥ 10.

Fig. 23.Same as Figs. 21, but for z = 2.

<!-- image -->

## 4. CONCLUSIONS &amp; DISCUSSION

Shock breakout is the brightest event in the SN with a shockwave and could consummate the detection of CCSNe in the highz universe. We present multicolor LCs of shock breakout in SNe II-P with various M MS , Z , and E based on realistic stellar models. Using our theoretical models, we investigate the dependencies of shock breakout properties on the progenitors and explosion energies and present thorough prospects for future surveys of shock breakout. It is essential for identifying and interpreting shock breakout to observe a field more than once in a night in multiple blue optical bands, preferably over ≥ 2 continuous nights. And, adopting standard cosmic SFH, IMF, extinction distribution of host galaxies, the g ′ -band observable SN rate for m g ′ , lim = 27 . 5 mag is 3 . 3 SNe degree -2 day -1 and the half of them locates at z ≥ 1 . 2.

We calculate 13 SN models with M MS = 13 -40 M ⊙ , Z = 0 . 001 -0 . 05, and E 51 = 1 -20 (Tab. 2). The model with larger R preSN , thus typically larger M MS , has lower T c , peak , longer t 1mag , and higher E rad , 1mag , while the model with higher E has higher T c , peak , E rad , 1mag , and L peak . The metallicity affects shock breakout mainly through altering the stellar structure. The variations of T c , peak , t 1mag , E rad , 1mag , and L peak among the adopted models are ∼ (2 -5) × 10 5 K, ∼ 0 . 01 -0 . 6 days, ∼ (0 . 7 -5) × 10 48 erg, and ∼ (0 . 5 -7) × 10 44 erg s -1 , respectively. The dependencies of numerical results are similar to those of the semi-analytic solutions (Matzner &amp; McKee 1999). The semi-analytic solutions are nearly consistent with the numerical results if T MM99 , E MM99 , t MM99 , and L MM99 are reduced by factors of 1.5, 3, 2, and 1.5, respectively.

According to the models, we predict the observational quantities of highz shock breakout. Since shock breakout has a blue SED peaked at ∼ 100 ˚ A, brightness of shock breakout at a fixed observed bandpass is less dimmed compared to the geometrical dilution, i.e., shock breakout has a large negative K -correction. This makes it possible to detect highz shock breakout, e.g., up to z ∼ 3 . 5 in g ′ band with 8m-class telescopes if there is no extinction in the host galaxy. Although shock breakout strongly suffers from the extinction and IGM absorption, it can be detected up to z ∼ 2 if the host galaxy has the color excess E ( B -V ) host = 0 . 1 mag and our Galaxy extinction law.

Convolving the Salpeter's IMF, cosmic SFH, host galaxy extinction, and IGM absorption, we estimate the observable SN rate as a function of bandpass and limiting magnitude. As a result, considering the operative telescopes/instruments, the g ′ band observation is currently the most effective in the number of detection. Adopting cosmic SFH by Hopkins &amp; Beacom (2006) and our Galaxy extinction law, the observable SN rate is 3 . 3 SNe degree -2 day -1 for m g ′ , lim = 27 . 5 mag. Even taking into account uncertainties on host galaxy extinction and SFH, the observable SN rate is ≥ 0 . 93 SNe degree -2 day -1 .

We also present the redshift distribution of observable SNe. For currently-available m g ′ , lim = 27 . 5 mag, 50% of observable SNe take place at z ≥ 1 . 2. Furthermore, for m g ′ , lim = 30 mag, ∼ 10% of observable SNe locate at z ≥ 3. Since the reachable redshift increases dramatically if m x, lim ∼ &gt; 26 -30 mag is feasible, the nextgeneration telescopes/instruments will considerably enhance the reachable redshift. The reachable redshift is almost independent of the uncertainties involved in host galaxy extinction and SFH. Therefore, the shock breakout is the most appropriate phenomenon to aim at the detection of highz CCSNe. The first detection of normal CCSNe at z &gt; 1 can certainly be achieved by the observation of shock breakout in SNe II-P. The direct observation of normal CCSNe at z &gt; 1 will shed light on their nature and cosmic evolution histories, most of which are currently derived from galaxy studies that might be biased by brightness of galaxies.

Future/ongoing wide and/or deep surveys, e.g., Palomar Transient Factory (PTF, Law et al. 2009; Rau et al. 2009), Lick Observatory Supernova Search (LOSS, Leaman et al. 2010), Catalina Real-Time Transient Survey (CRTS, Drake et al. 2009), Kiso/Kiso Wide Field Camera (KWFC), 25 Skymapper, 26 Dark Energy Survey (DES, Bernstein et al. 2009), Panoramic Survey Telescope and Rapid Response System (Pan-STARRS, Kaiser et al. 2002; Kaiser 2004), Subaru/Hyper SuprimeCam (HSC, Miyazaki et al. 2006), and Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST, Ivezic et al. 2008), will find a large number of shock breakout. We simulate realistic survey strategies and show that a wider and shallower survey leads to a higher observable SN rate with a given survey power but misses the higherz events. And the observable SN rate for short integration is suppressed by the overhead. Although the survey parameters should be customized to observation purposes and telescope/instrument, we conclude that the most essential observation is the multicolor photometry with short intervals less than 1 day and that the observation over ≥ 2 continuous nights is favorable.

We also establish the ways to identify shock breakout and to constrain the SN properties from the observations of shock breakout. The LC, color, position, and past or wide frequency-coverage observations excellently distinguish shock breakout from the variable stars, SNe, GRBs, and QSOs. In particular, the blue color of shock breakout is the most important information to identify shock breakout. Shock breakout in an SN II-P with larger R preSN evolves more slowly and has a more luminous peak in optical bandpass. The two observational quantities, time scale and color evolution, can reasonably determine the SN properties, R preSN ( M MS ) and E , being independent of the host galaxy extinction. When numerous shock breakout is detected, the IMF in the highz universe will be constrained by shock breakout. Furthermore, if the SN properties can be determined only from the time scale and color variation with time, the other two observational quantities, peak magnitude and absolute color, can determine the host galaxy extinction. Combining the observations of the host galaxies, the relation between the host galaxy and its stellar contents might be constrained.

Shock breakout enables an untargeted CCSN survey at unprecedentedly high redshift, which can provide large uniform CCSN samples with the comparable redshift range with GRBs. This would allow us to clarify the relation between GRBs and star formation and thus the GRBprogenitors. GRBs are hosted in blue, faint, and/or lowZ galaxies (Le Floc'h et al. 2003; Kewley et al. 2007; Levesque et al. 2010) and thus have been suggested to require lowZ progenitors. On the other hand, Kocevski &amp; West (2010) and Mannucci et al. (2010) recently suggest that the GRB hosts follow a tight correlation among stellar mass, metallicity, and SFR of field galaxies and that the characteristics of GRB hosts can be explained only by the large SFR in lowZ galaxies. If the latter is correct, the host galaxies of CCSN should share the same properties as the GRB hosts because the lifetimes of GRB and CCSN progenitors are similar. 27

[25 http://www.ioa.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/kisohp/top\_e.html](http://www.ioa.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/kisohp/top_e.html)

[26 http://www.mso.anu.edu.au/skymapper/](http://www.mso.anu.edu.au/skymapper/)

27 For example, the lifetimes of stars with M MS ≥ 40 M ⊙ , a putative GRB progenitor, and M MS ≥ 10 M ⊙ , a putative CCSN progenitor, are less than 5 Myr and 20 Myr, respectively (Schaller et al. 1992). In order to make a difference between GRB and CCSN hosts, the star formation in the host galaxies should cease 5 -20 Myr ago or start ≤ 5 Myr ago. Although it is still un-

However, it is suggested that the GRB hosts are fainter and more irregular at z &lt; 1 . 2 and lowerZ at z &lt; 0 . 3 than the CCSN hosts (Fruchter et al. 2006; Modjaz et al. 2008), although there are rooms for improvement, e.g., the statistics and uniformity. Hence, the large CCSN sample of the same quality as GRBs, especially on survey method and redshift range, could give unique information on the environment of GRBs. The comparison between CCSN and GRB hosts at z &gt; 1 can provide an essential clue to unpuzzle the issue. It will probe whether an SFH estimate with GRBs, which is extendible to z ∼ &gt; 8, are biased or not.

Aspherical shock breakout in a cocoon or a jet is suggested for Type Ic SN 2006aj/GRB 060218 (e.g., Soderberg et al. 2006; Campana et al. 2006; Waxman et al. 2007; Ghisellini et al. 2007) and Type Ib SN 2008D/XRF 080109 (e.g., Soderberg et al. 2008; Mazzali et al. 2008). The asphericity stems from the compactness of the progenitor which leads to relativistic outflow at the tip of shockwave. Therefore, in order to precisely deal with aspherical shock breakout, a multidimensional relativistic radiation hydrodynamics calculation is required but has not been attained so far. On the other hand, polarization observations demonstrate that SNe II-P we focused have a spherical structure at the plateau phase even with an aspherical inner core (e.g., Leonard et al. 2006; Wang &amp; Wheeler 2008). This is because the progenitor of an SN II-P has a thick H envelope diluting the asphericity. Therefore, assuming the spherical symmetry is reasonable for SNe II-P and the results are applicable for all SNe II-P.

Recently Smartt et al. (2009) suggests that there is a maximum mass for the progenitor that can be SNe IIP ( M MS ≤ 16 . 5 ± 1 . 5 M ⊙ ). 28 This suggestion cautions the existence of a massive SNe II-P with M MS &gt; 20 M ⊙ . However, the constraints are limited only to SNe IIP having occurred in nearby universe, in which individual stars can be resolved. It is not investigated whether such a low maximum mass for SNe II-P exists in highz universe or at lowZ environment. Also, the reason why the stars with M MS &gt; 20 M ⊙ cannot be SNe II-P is under debate. Some studies suggested that such a massive star forms a black hole directly (e.g., Smartt 2009) or explodes as other kinds of SNe due to a strong mass loss and/or rotation (e.g., Smartt et al.

2009; Yoon &amp; Cantiello 2010, S. Ekstr¨ om et al. in prep.). However, both scenarios are not conclusive because some of stars with M MS ≥ 25 M ⊙ explode as energetic Type Ic SNe with E 51 ≥ 10 (e.g., Iwamoto et al. 1998), which is enough to explode a massive star even with a thick H envelope, and because the mass loss from a massive star is difficult to be predicted theoretically (e.g., Vink 2008 for review). Furthermore, a fast rotating star, that can explain the low maximum mass, has a larger presupernova radius at a given mass than a non-rotating star if the H envelope remains (C. Georgy, S. Ekstr¨ om and G. Meynet, private communication). This could moderate the reduction of the observable SN rate. The observational properties of shock breakout can constrain the properties of SNe II-P and their progenitors at high redshift. The redshift-dependent number count and properties of shock breakout can judge when the maximum mass for SNe II-P is established and could give a clue to the origin of the maximum mass for SNe II-P.

The authors appreciate help by Hideyuki Umeda, A.W.A. Pauldrach, and Masakazu A.R. Kobayashi for providing a progenitor model, an atomic data, and a semi-analytic model, respectively. N.T. and T.M. thank Nobunari Kashikawa for valuable discussion on IGM. N.T. also thank Masaomi Tanaka, Keiichi Maeda, Robert Quimby, Hajime Susa, Cyril Georgy, Sylvia Ekstr¨ om, and Georges Meynet for fruitful discussion on host galaxies, radiation transfer, transients, star formation, and presupernova structures. T.M. has been supported by the JSPS (Japan Society for the Promotion of Science) Research Fellowship for Young Scientists. The work of S.B., P.B., and E.S. in Russia is supported partly by the grant RFBR 10-02-00249-a, by Scientific School Foundation grants 2977.2008.2, 3884.2008.2, by contract with Agency for Science and Innovation No. 02.740.11.0250, contract with Rosnauka No. 02.740.11.5158, SNSF grant No. IZ73Z0-128180/1 under the program SCOPES, and in Germany by MPA guest program. This research has been supported in part by World Premier International Research Center Initiative, MEXT, Japan, and by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research of the JSPS (18104003, 20540226, 21840055) and MEXT (19047004, 22012003).

der debate how short duration of star formation activity is allowed (e.g., Mas-Hesse &amp; Kunth 1999; McQuinn et al. 2010), such short time scales are comparable with the age spreads of OB associations and the lifetimes of giant molecular clouds (McKee &amp; Ostriker 2007

and references therein).

28 Dessart et al. (2010) also suggests that this constraint is consistent with the nebular observations of SNe II-P.

## REFERENCES

- Blinnikov, S. I., Eastman, R., Bartunov, O. S., Popolitov, V. A., &amp; Woosley, S. E. 1998, ApJ, 496, 454

Abazajian, K. N., et al. 2009, ApJS, 182, 543

- Arcavi, I., et al. 2010, ApJ, 721, 777
- Baldry, I. K., &amp; Glazebrook, K. 2003, ApJ, 593, 258
- Baugh, C. M., Lacey, C. G., Frenk, C. S., Granato, G. L., Silva, L., Bressan, A., Benson, A. J., &amp; Cole, S. 2005, MNRAS, 356, 1191
- Bernstein, J. P., Kessler, R., Kuhlmann, S., &amp; Spinka, H. 2009, ArXiv e-prints (ArXiv:0906.2955)
- Blinnikov, S., Chugai, N., Lundqvist, P., Nadyozhin, D., Woosley, S., &amp; Sorokina, E. 2003, in From Twilight to Highlight: The Physics of Supernovae, ed. W. Hillebrandt &amp; B. Leibundgut, 23-+
- Blinnikov, S., Lundqvist, P., Bartunov, O., Nomoto, K., &amp; Iwamoto, K. 2000, ApJ, 532, 1132
- Blinnikov, S. I., Nadyozhin, D. K., Woosley, S. E., &amp; Sorokina, E. I. 2002, in Nuclear Astrophysics, ed. W. Hillebrandt &amp; E. M¨ uller, 144-147
- Blinnikov, S. I., R¨ opke, F. K., Sorokina, E. I., Gieseler, M., Reinecke, M., Travaglio, C., Hillebrandt, W., &amp; Stritzinger, M. 2006, A&amp;A, 453, 229
- Campana, S., et al. 2006, Nature, 442, 1008
- Catchpole, R. M., et al. 1987, MNRAS, 229, 15P
- Chevalier, R. A., &amp; Fransson, C. 2008, ApJ, 683, L135
- Chugai, N. N., Blinnikov, S. I., &amp; Lundqvist, P. 2000, Memorie della Societa Astronomica Italiana, 71, 383
- Chugai, N. N., et al. 2004, MNRAS, 352, 1213
- Cohen, S. H., et al. 2006, ApJ, 639, 731

- Cooke, J., Sullivan, M., Barton, E. J., Bullock, J. S., Carlberg, R. G., Gal-Yam, A., &amp; Tollerud, E. 2009, Nature, 460, 237
- Couch, S. M., Wheeler, J. C., &amp; Milosavljevi´ c, M. 2009, ApJ, 696, 953
- Dessart, L., Livne, E., &amp; Waldman, R. 2010, MNRAS, 408, 827 Drake, A. J., et al. 2009, ApJ, 696, 870
- Eastman, R. G., &amp; Pinto, P. A. 1993, ApJ, 412, 731
- Ensman, L., &amp; Burrows, A. 1992, ApJ, 393, 742
- Fruchter, A. S., et al. 2006, Nature, 441, 463
- Fukugita, M., Ichikawa, T., Gunn, J. E., Doi, M., Shimasaku, K., &amp; Schneider, D. P. 1996, AJ, 111, 1748
- Galama, T. J., et al. 1998, Nature, 395, 670
- Gardner, J. P., et al. 2006, Space Science Reviews, 123, 485
- Gehrels, N., et al. 2004, ApJ, 611, 1005
- Gezari, S., et al. 2008, ApJ, 683, L131
- Ghisellini, G., Ghirlanda, G., &amp; Tavecchio, F. 2007, MNRAS, 382, L77
- Gunn, J. E., &amp; Stryker, L. L. 1983, ApJS, 52, 121
- Hawley, S. L., et al. 2003, ApJ, 597, 535
- Hopkins, A. M., &amp; Beacom, J. F. 2006, ApJ, 651, 142
- Imshennik, V. S., Nadezhin, D. K., &amp; Utrobin, V. P. 1981, Ap&amp;SS, 78, 105
- Ivezic, Z., Tyson, J. A., Allsman, R., Andrew, J., Angel, R., &amp; for the LSST Collaboration. 2008, ArXiv e-prints (ArXiv:0805.2366)
- Iwamoto, K., et al. 1998, Nature, 395, 672
- Jeffery, D. J. 1998, in Stellar Evolution, Stellar Explosions and Galactic Chemical Evolution, ed. A. Mezzacappa, 687-692
- Kaiser, N. 2004, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 5489, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, ed. J. M. Oschmann Jr., 11-22
- Kaiser, N., et al. 2002, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 4836, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, ed. J. A. Tyson &amp; S. Wolff, 154-164
- Kewley, L. J., Brown, W. R., Geller, M. J., Kenyon, S. J., &amp; Kurtz, M. J. 2007, AJ, 133, 882
- Kissler-Patig, M., et al. 2008, A&amp;A, 491, 941
- Kistler, M. D., Y¨ uksel, H., Beacom, J. F., Hopkins, A. M., &amp; Wyithe, J. S. B. 2009, ApJ, 705, L104
- Klein, R. I., &amp; Chevalier, R. A. 1978, ApJ, 223, L109
- Kobayashi, M. A. R., Totani, T., &amp; Nagashima, M. 2007, ApJ, 670, 919
- -. 2010, ApJ, 708, 1119
- Kocevski, D., &amp; West, A. A. 2010, ArXiv e-prints (ArXiv:1011.4060)
- Komatsu, E., et al. 2009, ApJS, 180, 330
- Kowalski, A. F., Hawley, S. L., Hilton, E. J., Becker, A. C., West, A. A., Bochanski, J. J., &amp; Sesar, B. 2009, AJ, 138, 633
- Krisciunas, K., et al. 2009, AJ, 137, 34
- Kudritzki, R. 2000, in The First Stars, ed. A. Weiss, T. G. Abel, &amp; V. Hill, 127-132
- Kurucz, R. L., &amp; Bell, B. 1995, Atomic line list, ed. Kurucz, R. L. &amp; Bell, B.
- Lacey, C. G., Baugh, C. M., Frenk, C. S., Benson, A. J., &amp; . 2010, ArXiv e-prints (ArXiv:1004.3545)
- Law, N. M., et al. 2009, PASP, 121, 1395
- Le Floc'h, E., et al. 2003, A&amp;A, 400, 499
- Leaman, J., Li, W., Chornock, R., &amp; Filippenko, A. V. 2010, ArXiv e-prints (ArXiv:1006.4611)
- Leonard, D. C., et al. 2006, Nature, 440, 505
- Levesque, E. M., Kewley, L. J., Berger, E., &amp; Jabran Zahid, H. 2010, AJ, 140, 1557
- Li, W., et al. 2010, ArXiv e-prints (ArXiv:1006.4612)
- Limongi, M., &amp; Chieffi, A. 2006, ApJ, 647, 483
- Madau, P. 1995, ApJ, 441, 18
- Malesani, D., et al. 2009, ApJ, 692, L84
- Mannucci, F., Della Valle, M., &amp; Panagia, N. 2007, MNRAS, 377, 1229
- Mannucci, F., Maoz, D., Sharon, K., Botticella, M. T., Della Valle, M., Gal-Yam, A., &amp; Panagia, N. 2008, MNRAS, 383, 1121
- Mannucci, F., Salvaterra, R., &amp; Campisi, M. A. 2010, ArXiv e-prints (ArXiv:1011.4506)
- Mas-Hesse, J. M., &amp; Kunth, D. 1999, A&amp;A, 349, 765
- Matzner, C. D., &amp; McKee, C. F. 1999, ApJ, 510, 379
- Mazzali, P. A., et al. 2008, Science, 321, 1185
- McKee, C. F., &amp; Ostriker, E. C. 2007, ARA&amp;A, 45, 565

McQuinn, K. B. W., et al. 2010, ApJ, 724, 49

- Miyazaki, S., et al. 2002, PASJ, 54, 833
- Miyazaki, S., et al. 2006, in Presented at the Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference, Vol. 6269, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series
- Modjaz, M., Kirshner, R. P., Blondin, S., Challis, P., &amp; Matheson, T. 2008, ApJ, 687, L9
- Modjaz, M., et al. 2009, ApJ, 702, 226
- Morokuma, T., et al. 2008, ApJ, 676, 121
- Morrissey, P., et al. 2005, ApJ, 619, L7
- -. 2007, ApJS, 173, 682
- Nagashima, M., Yahagi, H., Enoki, M., Yoshii, Y., &amp; Gouda, N. 2005, ApJ, 634, 26
- Nagashima, M., &amp; Yoshii, Y. 2004, ApJ, 610, 23
- Nugent, P., Kim, A., &amp; Perlmutter, S. 2002, PASP, 114, 803 Olivares E., F., et al. 2010, ApJ, 715, 833
- Panaitescu, A., &amp; Kumar, P. 2002, ApJ, 571, 779
- Pauldrach, A. 1987, A&amp;A, 183, 295
- Pei, Y. C. 1992, ApJ, 395, 130
- Poznanski, D., et al. 2007, MNRAS, 382, 1169
- Quimby, R. M., et al. 2009, ArXiv e-prints (ArXiv:0910.0059)
- Rabinak, I., &amp; Waxman, E. 2011, ApJ, 728, 63
- Rau, A., et al. 2009, PASP, 121, 1334
- Richardson, D., Branch, D., Casebeer, D., Millard, J., Thomas, R. C., &amp; Baron, E. 2002, AJ, 123, 745
- Richmond, M. W., Treffers, R. R., Filippenko, A. V., Paik, Y., Leibundgut, B., Schulman, E., &amp; Cox, C. V. 1994, AJ, 107, 1022
- Salpeter, E. E. 1955, ApJ, 121, 161
- Salvaterra, R., et al. 2009, Nature, 461, 1258
- Sarajedini, V. L., et al. 2006, ApJS, 166, 69
- Sari, R., Piran, T., &amp; Narayan, R. 1998, ApJ, 497, L17
- Schaller, G., Schaerer, D., Meynet, G., &amp; Maeder, A. 1992, A&amp;AS, 96, 269
- Schawinski, K., et al. 2008, Science, 321, 223
- Schneider, D. P., et al. 2002, AJ, 123, 567
- -. 2003, AJ, 126, 2579
- -. 2005, AJ, 130, 367
- -. 2007, AJ, 134, 102
- -. 2010, AJ, 139, 2360
- Smartt, S. J. 2009, ARA&amp;A, 47, 63
- Smartt, S. J., Eldridge, J. J., Crockett, R. M., &amp; Maund, J. R. 2009, MNRAS, 395, 1409
- Smith, N., Li, W., Filippenko, A. V., &amp; Chornock, R. 2010, ArXiv e-prints (ArXiv:1006.3899)
- Soderberg, A. M., et al. 2006, Nature, 442, 1014
- -. 2008, Nature, 453, 469
- -. 2010, Nature, 463, 513
- Strecker, D. W., Erickson, E. F., &amp; Witteborn, F. C. 1979, ApJS, 41, 501
- Stritzinger, M., et al. 2002, AJ, 124, 2100
- Suzuki, A., &amp; Shigeyama, T. 2010, ApJ, 717, L154
- Swartz, D. A., Sutherland, P. G., &amp; Harkness, R. P. 1995, ApJ, 446, 766
- Tanaka, M., et al. 2009a, ApJ, 700, 1680
- -. 2009b, ApJ, 692, 1131
- Tanvir, N. R., et al. 2009, Nature, 461, 1254
- Tokunaga, A. T., Simons, D. A., &amp; Vacca, W. D. 2002, PASP, 114, 180
- Tominaga, N., Blinnikov, S., Baklanov, P., Morokuma, T., Nomoto, K., &amp; Suzuki, T. 2009, ApJ, 705, L10
- Tominaga, N., Umeda, H., &amp; Nomoto, K. 2007, ApJ, 660, 516
- Totani, T., &amp; Panaitescu, A. 2002, ApJ, 576, 120
- Umeda, H., &amp; Nomoto, K. 2005, ApJ, 619, 427
- Vanden Berk, D. E., et al. 2001, AJ, 122, 549
- Verner, D. A., Ferland, G. J., Korista, K. T., &amp; Yakovlev, D. G. 1996a, ApJ, 465, 487
- Verner, D. A., Verner, E. M., &amp; Ferland, G. J. 1996b, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables, 64, 1
- Verner, D. A., &amp; Yakovlev, D. G. 1995, A&amp;AS, 109, 125
- Verner, D. A., Yakovlev, D. G., Band, I. M., &amp; Trzhaskovskaya,
- M. B. 1993, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables, 55, 233
- Vink, J. S. 2008, New Astronomy Review, 52, 419
- Wang, F. Y., &amp; Dai, Z. G. 2009, MNRAS, 400, L10

- Wang, L., &amp; Wheeler, J. C. 2008, ARA&amp;A, 46, 433
- Waxman, E., M´ esz´ aros, P., &amp; Campana, S. 2007, ApJ, 667, 351 Woosley, S. E. 1993, ApJ, 405, 273
- Wo´ zniak, P. R., Vestrand, W. T., Panaitescu, A. D., Wren, J. A., Davis, H. R., &amp; White, R. R. 2009, ApJ, 691, 495

Yoon, S., &amp; Cantiello, M. 2010, ApJ, 717, L62 York, D. G., et al. 2000, AJ, 120, 1579

TABLE 4 Observable quantities at z = 0 . 2 .

| M  MS  Z  E  m  g  ′  ,  peak  t  g  ′  ,  0  .  5mag  FUV  -  NUV  u  ′  -  g  ′  g  ′  -  r  ′  [  M  ⊙  ]  [10  51  erg]  [mag]  [0  .  01 days]  [mag]  [mag]  [mag]  t  FUV  -  NUV  obs  = 0  t  FUV  -  NUV  obs  = 2 days  t  u  ′  -  g  ′  obs  = 0  t  u  ′  -  g  ′  obs  = 2 days  t  g  ′  -  r  ′  obs  = 0  t  g  ′  -  r  ′  obs  = 2 days  13  0.02  1  24.31  2.27  -0.668  -0.371  -0.568  -0.292  -1.45  -0.0750  15  0.02  1  24.50  1.89  -0.683  -0.381  -0.580  -0.290  -1.49  -0.173  18  0.02  1  23.94  3.25  -0.658  -0.337  -0.556  -0.281  -1.41  -0.00539  20  0.02  1  23.76  3.85  -0.645  -0.335  -0.545  -0.285  -1.38  -0.0692  25  0.02  1  23.12  7.28  -0.603  -0.386  -0.507  -0.308  -1.24  -0.185  30  0.02  1  22.92  7.81  -0.599  -0.403  -0.502  -0.314  -1.23  -0.235  40  0.02  1  22.60  13.6  -0.553  -0.430  -0.463  -0.352  -1.17  -0.468  25  0.02  4  22.80  6.46  -0.580  -0.357  -0.495  -0.299  -1.30  -0.499  25  0.02  10  22.60  6.42  -0.561  -0.424  -0.485  -0.322  -1.31  -0.921  25  0.02  20  22.43  4.64  -0.541  -0.446  -0.469  -0.356  -1.29  -1.11  20  0.001  1  23.96  4.81  -0.661  -0.325  -0.557  -0.279  -1.39  -0.0328  20  0.004  1  23.89  3.66  -0.657  -0.329  -0.555  -0.276  -1.39  -0.0569  20  0.05  1  23.26  6.15  -0.610  -0.359  -0.513  -0.303  -1.28  -0.152   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

TABLE 5 Observable quantities at z = 1 .

| M  MS  Z  E  m  g  ′  ,  peak  t  g  ′  ,  0  .  5mag  g  ′  -  r  ′  [  M  ⊙  ]  [10  51  erg]  [mag]  [0  .  01 days]  [mag]  t  g  ′  -  r  ′  obs  = 0  t  g  ′  -  r  ′  obs  = 2 days  13  0.02  1  27.01  4.58  -0.534  -0.156  15  0.02  1  27.17  3.67  -0.548  -0.156  18  0.02  1  26.66  6.18  -0.521  -0.165  20  0.02  1  26.50  7.39  -0.511  -0.201  25  0.02  1  25.94  12.8  -0.464  -0.290  30  0.02  1  25.74  14.3  -0.461  -0.299  40  0.02  1  25.48  24.7  -0.419  -0.308  25  0.02  4  25.59  11.5  -0.460  -0.202  25  0.02  10  25.41  11.0  -0.457  -0.290  25  0.02  20  25.26  7.67  -0.446  -0.360  20  0.001  1  26.69  9.39  -0.523  -0.198  20  0.004  1  26.62  6.96  -0.519  -0.193  20  0.05  1  26.06  11.1  -0.471  -0.271   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

TABLE 6 Observable quantities at z = 2 .

| M  MS  Z  E  m  g  ′  ,  peak  t  g  ′  ,  0  .  5mag  g  ′  -  r  ′  [  M  ⊙  ]  [10  51  erg]  [mag]  [0  .  01 days]  [mag]  t  g  ′  -  r  ′  obs  = 0  t  g  ′  -  r  ′  obs  = 2 days  13  0.02  1  27.84  7.08  -0.428  -0.107  15  0.02  1  27.99  5.71  -0.440  -0.077  18  0.02  1  27.50  9.11  -0.415  -0.119  20  0.02  1  27.34  10.8  -0.408  -0.117  25  0.02  1  26.83  19.1  -0.371  -0.154  30  0.02  1  26.65  20.6  -0.366  -0.164  40  0.02  1  26.39  34.8  -0.355  -0.210  25  0.02  4  26.45  15.2  -0.393  -0.193  25  0.02  10  26.28  13.8  -0.395  -0.304  25  0.02  20  26.13  9.92  -0.391  -0.429  20  0.001  1  27.53  13.7  -0.413  -0.125  20  0.004  1  27.46  10.3  -0.412  -0.123  20  0.05  1  26.94  16.2  -0.383  -0.156   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|