## Heavy ion acceleration in the Breakout Afterburner regime

G. M. Petrov 1 , C. McGuffey 2 , A. G. R. Thomas 3 and K. Krushelnick 3 and F. N. Beg 2 1 Naval Research Laboratory, Plasma Physics Division, 4555 Overlook Ave. SW, Washington, DC 20375, USA 2 Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and Center for Energy Research, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093 USA

3 Center for Ultrafast Optical Science, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 USA

e-mail: george.petrov@nrl.navy.mil

PACS: 52.38.-r, 52.38.Ph, 52.50.Jm

11/06/2015

## Abstract

Theoretical study of heavy  ion acceleration from an ultrathin (20 nm)  gold  foil irradiated by sub-picosecond  lasers is  presented.  Using two dimensional  particle-in-cell simulations  we  identified two  highly  efficient  ion  acceleration  schemes.  By  varying  the  laser  pulse  duration  we  observed  a transition from Radiation Pressure Acceleration to the Breakout Afterburner regime akin to light ions. The underlying physics and ion acceleration regimes are similar to that of light ions, however, nuances of the acceleration process make the acceleration of heavy ions more challenging. Two laser systems are studied in detail: the Texas Petawatt Laser and the Trident laser, the former having pulse duration 180 fs, intermediate between very short femtosecond pulses and picosecond pulses. Both laser systems generated directional gold ions beams (~10 degrees half-angle) with fluxes in excess of 10 11 ion/sr and normalized energy &gt;10 MeV/nucleon.

## 1. Introduction

Ion beams generated from  high-Z  material are useful for  many applications [1,2,3]  including nuclear  reactions  [4,5],  production  of  super-heavy  elements  [6],  exotic  isomers  and  isotopes  for biomedical use, fast ignition fusion, radiation effects in materials [7], medical applications including radiotherapy [8] and radiation oncology [9] and studies of exotic phenomena such as systems relevant to  the  interior  of  stars.  So  far,  research  has  been  conducted  using  conventional  accelerators  at enormously  large  and  expensive  facilities,  however,  short  pulse  lasers  with  duration  &lt;1  ps  are emerging as a viable alternative tool for their production, making possible laboratory experiments at much  lower  cost.  Laser-driven accelerators can generate heavy  ion  beams  with energy in excess of 100s of MeV. The beams are highly directional, which results in relatively large fluxes, on the order of 11 10 / ions sr . In spite of the potential short pulse lasers offer, this approach is still largely unexplored, though possible applications of laser-driven heavy ion beams have been discussed in a recent paper by Nishiuchi et al. [10].

In our previous publication, we studied theoretically the generation of heavy ion beams driven by a short pulse laser with duration 32 fs using 2D particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations [11]. These are one of the shortest pulses available today at intensities relevant to our study ( 20 2 0 10 / I W cm &gt; ). We established  that  the  acceleration  of  gold  ions  is  due  to  either  Target  Normal  Sheath  Acceleration (TNSA)  [12]  or Radiation  Pressure Acceleration (RPA)  [13,14,15,16,17]. Which  acceleration mechanism dominates depends primarily  on the foil thickness.  For  very thin  foils,  &lt;100  nm,  in the RPA regime the simulations predicted gold ions with energy ~10 MeV/nucleon can be generated with conversion efficiency (into gold ions) of ~8 %. The theoretical study revealed that for short pulses the conditions are far more  demanding compared to  protons and  light  ions and a  number of challenges must be overcome in order to successfully accelerate heavy ions. Among them is the limited chargeto-mass ratio q/M , resulting in lower energy per nucleon compared to light ions due to the unfavorable scaling  of  the  normalized  ion  energy  with q/M : 2 / ~ ( / ) E M q M [18,19].  In  particular,  numerical simulations established that for gold / 0.3 q M &lt; . Due to the low q/M it takes longer to accelerate the ions. Finally, it was established that only one half of the laser pulse can be used for acceleration, since the ions must be first ionized, which occurs near the peak of the pulse, before being accelerated. We concluded that acceleration of gold ions using very short (30-50 fs) pulses is borderline possible. The difficulties accompanying the acceleration (low q/M and short acceleration time) can, in principle, be compensated by increasing the laser intensity, which, in turn, may invoke other issues.

The alternative is to use longer pulses. A "long" (ps) pulse would provide ample acceleration time, which  eliminates  the  hurdles  discussed  above.  It  is  now  widely  recognized  and  proved experimentally that they  work  well for  protons and  light  ions in the so called Breakout  Afterburner (BoA) [20,21,22,23] regime.  The next  logical  step  is to address the  more challenging case  of heavy ions such as Au or W. To our knowledge, there is only one experimental work using very short (~40 fs) pulses [24] and another using long (~1 ps) pulses [25] and no theoretical studies in the BoA regime. The  purpose  of  this  work  is  to  extend  the  study  of  heavy  ion  acceleration  from  femtosecond  to picosecond pulses and to explore other regimes of ion acceleration, more specifically, BoA. It is also of  fundamental  interest  to  understand  the  transition  from  RPA  to  BoA  for  heavy  ions and  for  this purpose we consider modeling a laser system with pulse duration intermediate between femtosecond and picosecond. An appropriate system with this property is the Texas Petawatt Laser, which has pulse duration  of 180  fs.  In  Section  2  we  will  briefly  discuss  the  RPA-to-BoA  transition by carrying  out 2D3V  PIC  numerical  simulations  for  gold  ion  acceleration  from  sub-micron  foils  for  three  pulse durations. In Section 3 we discuss in more detail numerical results for the Texas Petawatt Laser, while in Section 4 simulation results for the Trident laser are presented. A discussion and summary are given in the final sections of the paper.

## 2. Transition from RPA to BoA

Numerical  simulations  are  performed  using  a  two-dimensional  electromagnetic  PIC  code [26,27]. In all cases the target is a flat 20 nm Au foil covered with a 5 nm contaminant layer residing on  the  back of the  foil, located  at spatial  position 48 x m µ = . For numerical  purposes,  the contaminants are  modeled  as a thin  sheet  of  water at  liquid density.  The foil thickness is chosen to roughly correspond to the relativistic skin depth 1/2 / skin p c γ ω = ℓ at the peak of the laser pulse, where γ and p ω are the relativistic parameter and electron plasma frequency, and c is the speed of light. Under these conditions, the laser field can penetrate the whole target and volumetrically heat the electrons in the entire volume in the laser spot. This is essential for the initial stage of BoA, that of laser energy absorption and electron heating [21]. The laser, target and simulation parameters are listed in Table 1. A sketch of the computational domain and target is shown in Figure 1. The laser pulse intensity has the form ( ) ( ) 2 2 0 0 ( , ) sin / 2 exp ( / ) FWHM I t y I t y r π τ = -,  where 0 FWHM 1 2 (2) r D ln = is  the  focal  spot  radius at 1/ e level. The parameters FWHM D and FWHM τ are the laser spot size and pulse duration, respectively. The  laser  energy  is  calculated  according  to 2 2 0 0 FWHM 0 FWHM 1.13 laser FWHM r I D I ε π τ τ = ≅

.  The  laser  pulse propagates in the '+x" direction and is linearly polarized in the "y" direction. Particles are initialized with charge +1 for ions and -1 for electrons. During the simulations the ion charge of oxygen and gold is dynamically incremented using a standard Monte Carlo scheme [28,29]. Thus every computational particle has its own charge, which except for electrons and protons, may change in time.

Before presenting simulation results, it  is  worth  mentioning the  main characteristics of RPA and BoA. The fundamental difference between BoA and the linear RPA is the plasma transparency to the electromagnetic radiation. In the linear RPA regime, the plasma remains overdense and the laser pushes a double-layer structure of electrons and ions in a piston-like fashion. The electrons and ions form  a  co-moving  sheath,  which  allows  ions  to  be  accelerated.  In  contrast,  in  BoA  the  main acceleration stage begins after the target has expanded and the electron density has droped sufficiently so that the plasma becomes relativistically transparent to the laser pulse ( e cr n n γ &lt; ), thus allowing the laser pulse to punch through the target. Because the target is transparent to the laser light, the electrons in  and  around  the  focal  spot  can  regain  their  energy  lost  for  accelerating  ions,  thus  continuously accelerating  the  ions.  Since  initially  the  target  is  highly  overdense, / 1000 e cr n n &gt; ,  transparency  is achieved  by  plasma  expansion  in  which  the  electron  density  decreases.  But  for  BoA  to  work,  the plasma must become transparent near the peak of the laser pulse. Since this process takes time, it is more typical for  longer pulses,  on the order of 0.5-1 ps.  For very short pulses,  30-50  fs, the plasma remains  overdense  for  the  duration  of  the  laser  pulse  and  if  the  foil  is  thin  enough,  the  main  ion acceleration mechanism is RPA. Since plasma transparency is the key, in what follows we will assess it in order to attribute the acceleration to either BoA or RPA.

The presence of plasma transparency is usually established by plotting the electron density and comparing it to the relativistically corrected critical density. In 2D and 3D simulations complications arise  since  the  electron  density  can  vary  widely  from  one  location  to  another  making  assessment accurate  locally,  but  somewhat  difficult  globally.  We  use  a  slightly  different  approach  in  which judgement is based on the laser pulse characteristics, specifically electromagnetic wave transmission and reflectivity. Though information regarding the plasma transparency is retrieved indirectly and may be subject to interpretation, the method is rather simple and can be readily applied. It is based on the global  (integrated  over  the  computational  domain)  energy  balance,  which  at  any  given  time  reads [26,30]:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Equation (1) expresses the fact that the electromagnetic wave energy which entered the computational domain  prior  to  time t , in ε ,  is  balanced  by  the  electromagnetic  field  energy field ε residing  in  the computational  domain,  electromagnetic energy out ε that  has  left  in  the  computational  domain,  and specie  kinetic  energy kin ε ,  the  latter  being  summed  over  the  kinetic  energies  of  all  computational particles. Figure 2 shows the individual components for three different cases, very short pulse (32 fs), intermediate case (180 fs) and  long  pulse (600 fs), whose characteristics are listed in  Table 1. Time 0 160 t fs = -corresponds to  the  moment  the  laser  pulse  enters  the  computational  domain  at  spatial position 0 x = , and time 0 t = is the moment it reaches the target. For time 0 t ≤ ( ) ( ) field in t t ε ε = , i.e. the energy entering the computational domain stays as energy of the electromagnetic field since there is  no  interaction  with the  target.  At  time 0 t = the  laser  bullet  reaches  the  foil.  Shortly  thereafter, within 1-2 laser cycles, a hot and highly overdense plasma is formed within the target, which gradually increases  to  density  in  excess  of  10 3 times  the  critical  electron  density.  Part  of  the  electromagnetic pulse is reflected from the plasma mirror and turns around, while the transmitted part couples energy to the plasma.

In Figure 2a, one can observe a sharp increase of out ε starting at around 160 t fs = . This is the reflected pulse going in the x -direction, which has reached the computational domain edge ( 0 x = ) and  leaves.  The  peak  of out ε can  be  used  to  estimate  the  reflection  coefficient  of  the  plasma, ( ) / r out laser sims t ξ ε ε = .  The  simulations  show  that 80% r ξ ≅ of  the  laser  energy  is  reflected  by  the plasma  mirror,  a  strong  indication  that  the  plasma  remains  overdense.  For  the  intermediate  pulse length  the  electromagnetic  pulse  is  partially  reflected  and transmitted,  while  for  the  long  pulse  the reflection  is  negligible.  The  largest  fraction  of  the  initial  energy  is  retained  as  energy  of  the electromagnetic field (Figure 2c).

The coupling of laser energy to the plasma is also very informative. As seen in Figure 2a, for 0 t &gt; field ε starts  to  decrease,  while kin ε starts to increase.  Particles  gain  energy from  the electromagnetic field and the process is irreversible. However, for the long pulse (Figure 2c), both the electromagnetic  field  energy and  kinetic  energy  increase  with  time,  indicating  that electromagnetic energy flows into the system and then continuously transferred to the plasma. This is one of the main characteristics of the BoA mechanism. Considering both the reflection of laser pulse and the traits of energy  coupling,  we  conclude  that  for  the  short  pulse  illustrated  in  Figure  2a  the  ion  acceleration mechanism is RPA, while for the long pulse (Figure 2c) it is BoA. The intermediate case is somewhat closer to RPA, but the analysis is inconclusive.

## 3. Simulations results for the Texas Petawatt Laser

Selected  results  for  the  Texas  Petawatt  Laser  are  shown  in  Figures  3-5.  The  momentum distribution of gold ions and spectrum in the forward direction at the end of the simulations (540 fs)

are shown in  Figure 3.  Only energetic  ions with  kinetic energy  &gt;100 MeV  (&gt;0.5 MeV/nucleon) are included. About half of the ions are accelerated in the forward direction and the other half is scattered in  the  backward  direction,  toward  the  laser.  The  latter  is  most  likely  due  to  Coulomb  explosion  of unbalanced charge. The maximum  normalized ion momentum in the forward direction is / 0.15 x p Mc ≅ , which is less than that typically observed for protons and light ions.

The  ion  beam  is  characterized  with  its  flux,  spectrum,  charge  distribution,  and  angular distribution. For all of them we consider only energetic ions (&gt;0.5 MeV/nucleon). In addition, except for  the angular distribution, only ions  lying within 10 degrees half-angle from the target  normal are collected,  which  corresponds  to  solid  angle 0.095 d sr Ω= .  The  spectrum  of  gold  ions, 2 d N dEd Ω ,  is plotted in Figure 3b. The energy distribution decreases exponentially and has a maximum energy of ~2 GeV (10 MeV/nucleon). The flux in the forward direction is 11 8 10 dN ions d sr ≅ × Ω . The gold ions charge distribution in the forward direction is shown in Figure 4a. The average charge-to-mass ratio is rather low, / 0.2 q M ≈ . The angular distribution is highly peaked, which leads to a large flux in the forward direction. Most ions lie in a cone of ~20 degrees from the target normal (Figure 4b). There is a group of ions scattered backward, seen also in the phase-space plot in Figure 3a, presumably from Coulomb explosion of the Au layer. According to the simplified theory of RPA, the ions located initially in the compression  layer  will  undergo  RPA  and  will be  snow-plowed  forward  because  for  these  ions  the electrostatic pressure balances the radiation pressure, while the plasma containing a sheath of bare ions in the electron depletion layer will Coulomb explode launching ions in the backward direction [15]. It is  interesting  to  note  that  both  forward  accelerated  and  backward  scattered  ions  have very  narrow angular distributions, i.e. both are emitted perpendicular to the foil surface.

Complementary results are given for protons emitted from the contaminant layer on the back surface  of  the  foil.  The  proton  momentum  distribution  and  spectrum  in  the  forward  direction  are plotted in  Figure  5.  Only protons  with energy &gt;1 MeV  are  included.  The proton  spectrum shows a peak at ~10 MeV and the maximum proton energy is ~60 MeV. Comparing the maximum energy per nucleon  of gold  ions and protons, 10 and 60 MeV/nucleon, respectively, we observe a nearly  linear dependence between the energy per nucleon and the charge-to-mass ratio:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our  findings are in  contrast to previous  studies, which showed  a  much  stronger  (quadratic)

dependence.

## 4. Simulations results for the Trident Laser

The Trident laser has been extensively used for ion acceleration in the BoA regime. The focus was on light ions: protons [31], deuterons [31,32] and carbon ions [20,21,22,33,], but ions from mid-Z material (Pd) were accelerated as well [34,35]. The results are impressive: deuterons with normalized energy  of  40  MeV/nucleon  and 6 C + ions  with  energies  exceeding  80  MeV/nucleon  have  been measured.  In  all  cases  the  major  role played  the long  pulse,  which  ensured  long  continuous acceleration of electrons and ions. The same reasoning should apply to heavy ions. Simulation results for the Trident laser are shown in Figures 6-8. The momentum distribution and spectrum of gold ions are similar to that of the Texas Petawatt laser, but the ion energies are higher, presumably due to the longer acceleration time. Gold ions from the bulk of the foils are also blown in the backward direction. This  feature  of  heavy  ion  acceleration  was observed  in  all  simulations.  The  charge  distribution  is, however,  different.  Almost  1/2  of  the  forward  accelerated  gold  ions  have  charge 51 q = ,  and  the maximum ion charge is 62, which contributes to the observed higher maximum ion energy (Figure 7). The gold ion angular distribution, both in the forward and backward directions, is broader. We surmise that this is a result of Coulomb explosion of the forward accelerated beam of ions. The effect is more pronounced for the Trident laser for two reasons: the ion charge in the beam is three times larger (see Table 2) and the  snapshot  is done at a  later time (1.2  ps  vs. 0.54 ps), and the focal spot size  of the Trident laser is twice smaller compared to the Texas Petawatt Laser (5 µ m versus 10 µ m).

The  most  profound  difference  between the two  laser  systems  is found  for  the  proton  beam (Figure 8). The ion  spectrum contains the expected exponential distribution, but in addition,  it has a well-defined monoenergetic component centered around 100 MeV. The total number of monoergetic protons is ~10 11 .

## 5. Discussion

A  summary  of  simulation  results  for  the  ion  beam  properties  for  the  three  laser  systems  is given  in  Table 2,  where the calculated  ion fluxes and maximum energy per nucleon  in the  forward direction  are  listed.  For  gold,  the  ion  fluxes  are  comparable,  on  the  order  of  10 11 ion/sr,  and  not directly related to the laser energy on target. The highest flux is for the laser with intermediate energy (Texas Petawatt Laser) due to its largest focal spot size (compare in Table 1), while the highest energy per  nucleon  is  for  the  laser  with  the  longest  pulse  duration  (Trident).  The  same  holds  for  protons, except the proton flux (from the contaminant layer) is one order of magnitude larger than the flux of gold  ions (from the  bulk of the foil). Both protons and  gold  ions are  in quantities that makes them detectable  with  a  Thompson  parabola.  For  a  typical  opening  angle 7 10 sr -∆Ω≈ ,  we  estimate  that about 10 5 protons and 10 4 gold ions are expected to enter the Thompson parabola.

The  numerical  simulations  indicate  that the  ion  acceleration  mechanisms  for  the  three  laser systems  are  very  different:  RPA for  the  shortest  pulse,  BoA  for  the  longest  and  somewhat undetermined in the intermediate case. But regardless of the vast differences in the underlying physical mechanisms of the acceleration process, the results, e.g. ion beam parameters, are not dissimilar. All laser  systems  considered  are  suitable  for  heavy  ion  acceleration,  which  is  mostly  due  to  the  large amount of energy (&gt;20 J) delivered on target.

## 6. Conclusion

In  conclusion, acceleration  of  heavy ions from ultrathin (&lt;&lt;1 µ m)  foil  has  been  investigated theoretically using a 2D PIC code. The theory of ion acceleration mechanisms developed for light ions was extended to heavy ions. Nuances of the acceleration process, in particular, the two stages of ion acceleration (ionization phase followed by acceleration phase) differentiates the heavy ion acceleration.  Another  distinct  feature  is  the  much  more  demanding  requirements  about  the  laser system, which are needed  in order to  overcome difficulties inherent for  heavy  ion acceleration. We demonstrated  numerically  that  laser  systems  capable  of  delivering  sufficient  amount  of  energy  on target (&gt;10 Joules) can generate ion fluxes with sufficient energy and number. Numerical simulations show that three such  systems, Bella, Texas Petawatt Laser and  Trident can  generate a beam of gold ions with energy 10-45 MeV/nucleon, flux 10 11 ion/sr, and angular divergence of 20 degrees.

## Acknowledgements:

This work was performed with the support of the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under grant FA9550-14-1-0282. G. M. P. would like to acknowledge the DoD HPC computing program at NRL.

## Figure captions:

- Figure 2. Energy balance components in Equation 1 versus time for the Bella laser (a), Texas Petawatt Laser  (b)  and  Trident  laser  system  (c):  energy  entering  the  computational  domain in ε , energy  leaving  the  computational  domain out ε ,  electromagnetic  field  energy field ε and kinetic energy kin ε . Time 0 160 t fs = -corresponds to the moment the laser pulse enters the computational  domain and time 0 t fs = is  the  moment  the  laser  pulse  reaches  the  target. The laser and foil parameters are listed in Table 1.
- Figure  3.  Momentum distribution of gold  ions (a) and energy spectrum  of  forward accelerated gold ions (b) at the end of the simulations for the Texas Petawatt Laser. Only ions with energy &gt;100  MeV  within  solid  angle 0.095 d sr Ω= are included. The  total ions flux is .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- Figure 4. Charge distribution of forward accelerated gold ions (a) and angular distribution of gold ions (b) at the end of the simulations for the Texas Petawatt Laser.
- Figure 5. Momentum distribution of protons (a) and energy spectrum of forward accelerated protons (b) at the end  of the  simulations for the Texas Petawatt Laser.  Only ions  with  energy &gt;1 MeV within solid angle 0.095 d sr Ω= are included. The total protons flux is 12 4.0 10 dN ions d sr ≅ × Ω .
- Figure  6.  Momentum distribution of gold  ions (a) and energy spectrum  of  forward accelerated gold ions (b) at the end of the simulations for the Trident laser. Only ions with energy &gt;100 MeV within solid angle 0.095 d sr Ω= are included. The total ions flux is 11 2.6 10 dN ions d sr ≅ × Ω .
- Figure 7. Charge distribution of forward accelerated gold ions (a) and angular distribution of gold ions (b) at the end of the simulations for the Trident laser.
- Figure 8. Momentum distribution of protons (a) and energy spectrum of forward accelerated protons (b) at the end of the simulations for the Trident laser. Only ions with energy &gt;1 MeV within solid angle 0.095 d sr Ω= are included. The total protons flux is 12 1.2 10 dN ions d sr ≅ × Ω .

Table 1. Laser, target and computational domain parameters used in the simulations.

| parameter  variable &amp; units  Bella  TPW  Trident  laser intensity  2  0  (  /  )  I  W cm  21  3  10  ×  20  2.5  10  ×  20  5  10  ×  pulse duration  (  )  FWHM  m  τ  µ  32  180  600  focal spot size  (  )  FWHM  D  m  µ  5  10  5  wavelength  (  )  m  λ  µ  0.8  1  1  energy  (  )  laser  J  ε  27  50  80  foil thickness  (  )  L nm  20  20  20  foil width  (  )  W  m  µ  126  126  254  foil location  0  (  )  x  m  µ  48  48  48  computational domain  2  (  )  x  y  L  L  m  µ  ×  100x128  100x128  200x256  cell size  2  (  )  x  y nm  ∆ ×∆  20x20  20x20  20x20  time step  (  /  )  t  c  λ  ∆  0.005  0.005  0.005  simulation time  (  )  sims  t  fs  320  540  1200   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Table 2. Calculated  flux and maximum energy per nucleon  in the forward direction for protons and gold ions. The laser and foil parameters are listed in Table 1.

| parameter  variable &amp; units  Bella  TPW  Trident  pulse duration  (  )  FWHM  fs  τ  32  180  600  energy  (  )  laser  J  ε  27  50  80  Au ions  dN/d  Ω  (ion/sr)  (  E/M  )max (MeV/nucleon)  11  1.7  10  ×  25  11  7.7  10  ×  10  11  2.6  10  ×  45  protons  dN/d  Ω  (ion/sr)  (  E/M  )max (MeV/nucleon)  12  2.2  10  ×  85  12  4.0  10  ×  60  12  1.2  10  ×  120   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Figure 1

<!-- image -->

Figure 2

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 5

<!-- image -->

Figure 6

<!-- image -->

Figure 7

<!-- image -->

Figure 8

<!-- image -->

- 1 G. N. Flerov and V. S. Barashenkov, Sov. Phys. Usp. 17 , 783 (1975)
- 2 K. W. D. Ledingham, P. McKenna, R. P. Singhal, Science 300 , 1107 (2003)
- 3 M. Baba, Nuclear Eng. Tech. 38 , 319 (2006)
- 4 P. McKenna, K. W. D. Ledingham, T. McCanny, R. P. Singhal, I. Spencer, M. I. K. Santala, F. N. Beg,  K.  Krushelnick, M. Tatarakis, M.  S.Wei, E.  L.  Clark, R.  J. Clarke,  K. L. Lancaster, P.  A. Norreys, K. Spohr, R. Chapman, and M. Zepf, "Demonstration of Fusion-Evaporation and DirectInteraction Nuclear  Reactions using  High-Intensity Laser-Plasma-Accelerated Ion Beams", Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 , 075006 (2003)
- 5 P. McKenna, K. W. D. Ledingham, J. M. Yang, L. Robson, T. McCanny, S. Shimizu, R. J. Clarke, D.  Neely,  K.  Spohr,  R.  Chapman, R. P. Singhal,  K.  Krushelnick, M. S. Wei, and P. A. Norreys, Phys. Rev. E 70 , 036405 (2004)
- 6  D.  Habs, P.  G.  Thirolf,  M.  Gross,  K.  Allinger,  J.  Bin,  A.  Henig,  D.  Kiefer,  W.  Ma, J.  Schreiber, Appl. Phys. B 103 , 471 (2011)
- 7 P. K. Patel, A. J. Mackinnon, M. H. Key, T. E. Cowan, M. E. Foord, M. Allen, D. F. Price, H. Ruhl, P.  T.  Springer,  and  R.  Stephens,  "Isochoric  Heating  of  Solid-Density  Matter  with  an  Ultrafast Proton Beam", Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 , 125004 (2003).
- 8 K. W. D. Ledingham, Hyperfine Interact 171 , 69 (2006)
- 9 D. Kramer, Phys. Today 68 , 24 (2015)
- 10 M. Nishiuchi, H. Sakaki, T. Zh. Esirkepov, K. Nishio, T. A. Pikuz, A. Ya. Faenov, I. Yu. Skobelev, R.  Orlandi,  H.  Sako,  A.  S.  Pirozhkov,  K.  Matsukawa,  A.  Sagisaka,  K.  Ogura,  M.  Kanasaki,  H. Kiriyama, Y. Fukuda, H. Koura, M. Kando, T. Yamauchi, Y. Watanabe, S. V. Bulanov, K. Kondo, K. Imai, and S. Nagamiya, Phys. Plasmas 22 , 033107 (2015)
- 11  G.  M.  Petrov,  C.  McGuffey,  A.  G.  R.  Thomas,  K.  Krushelnick  and  F.  N.  Beg,  "Heavy  ion acceleration using femtosecond laser pulses", submitted to PRE
- 12  S.  C.  Wilks,  A.  B.  Langdon,  T.  E.  Cowan,  M.  Roth,  M.  Singh,  S.  Hatchett,  M.  H.  Key,  D. Pennington, A. MacKinnon, and R. A. Snavely, Phys. Plasmas 8 , 542 (2001)
- 13 S. C. Wilks, W. L. Kruer, M. Tabak and A. B. Langton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 69 , 1383 (1992)
- 14 B. Qiao, M. Zepf, M. Borghesi and M. Geissler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 , 145002 (2009)
- 15 A. Macci, S. Veghini, and F. Pegoraro, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 , 085003 (2009)
- 16 A. Henig, S. Steinke, M. Schünrer, T. Sokollik, R. Hörlein, D. Kiefer, D. Jung, J. Schreiber, B. M. Hegelich,  X.  Q.  Yan,  J.  Meyer-ter-Vehn,  T.  Tajima,  P.  V.  Nickles, W.  Sandner,  and  D.  Habs, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 , 245003 (2009)
- 17 B. Qiao, S. Kar, M. Geissler, P. Gibbon, M. Zepf, and M. Borghesi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 , 115002 (2012)
- 18 P. McKenna, F. Lindau, O. Lundh, D. C. Carroll, R. J. Clarke, K. W. D. Ledingham, T. McCanny, D.  Neely,  A. P. L. Robinson, L. Robson, P. T. Simpson, C-G. Wahlstrom, and M.  Zepf, Plasma Phys. Contr. Fusion 49 , B223 (2007)
- 19 J.  Schreiber,  F. Bell,  F.  Gruner,  U.  Schramm, M. Geissler, M. Schnurer, S. Ter-Avetisyan, B. M. Hegelich,  J.  Cobble,  E.  Brambrink,  J.  Fuchs,  P.  Audebert5  and  D.  Habs,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett. 97 , 045005 (2006)
- 20 L. Yin, B. J. Albright, B. M. Hegelich, and J. C. Fernández, Laser Part. Beams 24 , 291 (2006)
- 21  L.  Yin,  B.  J.  Albright,  B.  M.  Hegelich,  K.  J.  Bowers,  K.  A.  Flippo,  T.  J.  T.  Kwan,  and  J.  C. Fernandez, Phys. Plasmas 14 , 056706 (2007)
- 22  L.  Yin,  B.  J.  Albright,  D.  Jung,  R.  C.  Shah,  S.  Palaniyappan,  K.  J.  Bowers,  A.  Henig,  J.  C. Fernandez, and B. M. Hegelich, Phys. Plasmas 18 , 063103 (2011)

- 23 D. Jung, L. Yin, D. C. Gautier, H.-C. Wu, S. Letzring, B. Dromey, R. Shah, S. Palaniyappan, T. Shimada,  R.  P.  Johnson,  J.  Schreiber,  D.  Habs,  J.  C.  Fernandez,  B.  M.  Hegelich,  and  B.  J. Albright, Phys. Plasmas 20 , 083103 (2013)
- 24  J.  Braenzel,  A.  A.  Andreev,  K.  Platonov,  M.  Klingsporn,  L.  Ehrentraut,  W.  Sandner,  and  M. Schnürer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 , 124801 (2000)
- 25 E. L. Clark, K. Krushelnick, M. Zepf, F. N. Beg, M. Tatarakis, A. Machacek, M. I. K. Santala, I. Watts, P. A. Norreys, and A. E. Dangor, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85 , 1654 (2000)
- 26 G. M. Petrov and J. Davis, Phys. Plasmas 18 , 073102 (2011)
- 27 G. M. Petrov and J. Davis, Commun. Comput. Phys. 16 , 599 (2014)
- 28 G. M. Petrov, J. Davis and Tz. Petrova, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 51 , 095005 (2009)
- 29 A. J. Kemp, R. E. W. Pfund and J. Meyer-ter-Vehn Phys. Plasmas 11 , 5648 (2004)
- 30 G. M. Petrov and J. Davis, Computer Phys. Comm. 179 , 868 (2008)
- 31 M. Roth, D. Jung, K. Falk, N. Guler, O. Deppert, M. Devlin, A. Favalli, J. Fernandez, D. Gautier, M. Geissel, R. Haight, C. E. Hamilton, B. M. Hegelich, R. P. Johnson, F. Merrill, G. Schaumann, K. Schoenberg, M. Schollmeier, T. Shimada, T. Taddeucci, J. L. Tybo, F. Wagner, S. A. Wender, C. H. Wilde, and G. A. Wurden, PRL 110 , 044802 (2013)
- 32 D. Jung, K. Falk, N. Guler, O. Deppert, M. Devlin, A. Favalli, J. C. Fernandez, D. C. Gautier, M. Geissel, R. Haight, C. E. Hamilton, B. M. Hegelich, R. P. Johnson, F. Merrill, G. Schaumann, K. Schoenberg, M. Schollmeier, T. Shimada, T. Taddeucci, J. L. Tybo, S. A. Wender, C. H. Wilde, G. A. Wurden, and M. Roth, Phys. Plasmas 20 , 056706 (2013)
- 33 D. Jung, L. Yin, B. J. Albright, D. C. Gautier, S. Letzring, B. Dromey, M. Yeung, R. Horlein, R. Shah,  S.  Palaniyappan,  K.  Allinger,  J.  Schreiber,  K.  J.  Bowers,  H.-C.  Wu,  J.  C.  Fernandez,  D. Habs, and B. M. Hegelich, New Journal of Physics 15 , 023007 (2013)
- 34  B.  M.  Hegelich,  B.  Albright, P.  Audebert,  A.  Blazevic,  E.  Brambrink,  J.  Cobble,  T.  Cowan, J. Fuchs,  J.  C.  Gauthier,  C.  Gautier,  M.  Geissel,  D.  Habs,  R.  Johnson,  S.  Karsch,  A.  Kemp,  S. Letzring, M. Roth, U. Schramm, J. Schreiber, K. J. Witte, and J. C. Fernández, Phys. Plasmas 12 , 056314 (2005)
- 35 B. M. Hegelich, B. J. Albright, J. Cobble, K. Flippo, S. Letzring, M. Paffett, H. Ruhl, J. Schreiber, R. K. Schulze, and J. C. Fernandez, Nature 439 , 441 (2006)