## A Memetic Algorithm Based on Breakout Local Search for the Generalized Travelling Salesman Problem

Mehdi El Krari * , Belaïd Ahiod

Faculty of Science, Mohammed V University in Rabat Rabat, Morocco LRIT, associated unit to CNRST (URAC 29)

abbreviated title: A Memetic BLS for the GTSP

## Abstract

The   Travelling   Salesman   Problem   (TSP)   is   one   of   the   most   popular Combinatorial Optimization Problem. It is well solicited for the large variety of applications that it can solve, but also for its difficulty to find optimal solutions. One of   the   variants   of   the   TSP   is   the   Generalized   TSP   (GTSP),   where   the  TSP   is considered as a special case which makes the GTSP harder to solve. We propose in this paper a new memetic algorithm based on the well-known Breakout Local Search (BLS) metaheuristic to provide good solutions for GTSP instances. Our approach is competitive compared to other recent memetic algorithms proposed for the GTSP and gives at the same time some improvements to BLS to reduce its runtime.

Keywords: Generalized Travelling Salesman Problem, Breakout Local Search, Memetic Algorithms, Iterated Local Search

## 1 Introduction

The Generalized Travelling Salesman Problem (GTSP) is an extension of the well-known   Travelling   Salesman   Problem   (TSP),   they   are   both   Combinatorial Optimization Problems (COP). The problem has numerous applications such as postal   routing,   airport   selection,   sequencing   computer   files and   many   others (Laporte, Asef-Vaziri, and Sriskandarajah 1996), the work made by Ilhan (2017) is a concrete example of real-life applications of such problems. Several approaches and studies   have   been   considered   since   GTSP   was   presented   by  Henry-Labordere (1969)  and Srivastava   et   al.   (1969). Fischetti,   Salazar   Gonzalez,   and   Toth (1997) introduced branch-and-cut which is an exact algorithm. Such algorithms are important but very greedy in runtime. Lin-Kernighan, one of the most successful heuristic for the TSP, has been adapted for the GTSP by  Karapetyan and Gutin

*

Corresponding author: M. El Krari

(2011). The only metaheuristics that competed with Lin-Kernighan in the TSP are those   combine   genetic   and   local   searches   algorithms,   called   memetic   algorithms (Hart, Krasnogor, and Smith 2004). Last and best studies for the GTSP focused on memetic with different local search algorithms and genetic approaches.

We introduce in our paper a new memetic algorithm based on the Breakout Local Search (BLS) as the main method for running local searches. Iterated Local Search (ILS) (Lourenço, Martin, and Stutzle 2001) is known to suffer from lack of effectiveness in escaping some local optima, BLS follows the basic scheme of this framework and improves it by combining the features of other efficient methods during perturbation process. BLS find a local optimum with a local search procedure, then run the most appropriate perturbations to jump from one neighbourhood to another in the search space. Those perturbations are done with a variable degree of diversification by determining dynamically how many jumps to perform and making an adaptive selection from several types of dedicated movements. BLS perturbation strategy is based on both the history and state of search.

BLS was developed by Benlic and Hao in 2012. Since then, it has been used for solving some COP, such as the Quadratic Assignment Problem  (Benlic and Hao 2013b),   Maximum   Clique   Problems  (Benlic   and   Hao   2013a),   Max-Cut   problem (Benlic and Hao 2013c) and Minimum Sum Coloring Problem (Benlic and Hao 2012), and has given very good results. BLS was also used in other studies of by other researchers (Ghandi and Masehian 2015; Fu and Hao 2014). This paper provides a memetic algorithm based on BLS metaheuristic for the GTSP, whose performance will be evaluated by solving 39 benchmark instances of the GTSPLIB (Reinelt 1991).

We will talk in the next Section about the GTSP by defining the problem and presenting   some   previous   works.   We   introduce   later   in   Section   3   our   memetic approach where we devote an important part to the BLS metaheuristic which is the main contribution. Experimental tests and comparisons are exposed in Section 4 and finally a conclusion in Section 5.

## 2 The Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem

## 2.1 Problem formulation

The GTSP can be considered as a weighted complete graph where represents the set of vertices/cities, E is the set of all edges/paths (v i , v j ) for i, j = 1, 2, ...n and c is the cost function giving the weight for each edge which is the distance between two nodes. While the TSP consists of visiting all the given nodes V, the GTSP nodes are distributed over a set of clusters such that and the intersection of any pair of clusters is an empty set.

A   GTSP   solution   can   be   formulated   as   a   sub-graph . is the set of nodes where each cluster has one node for . is the subset of edges composed by N and forming a cyclic tour which total distance is calculated by the formula (1) below:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 2.2 Previous works

First   solutions   provided   for   the   GTSP   were   methods   based   on   dynamic programming (Srivastava et al. 1969; Henry-Labordere 1969). Laporte, Mercure, and Nobert (1987)  proposed an exact method using integer programming (Branch and Bound) techniques. Later,  Fischetti, Salazar Gonzalez, and Toth (1997)  made a solution based on Branch and Cut which provide optimal solutions for any instance with up to 442 cities and 89 clusters.

Several researchers (Ben-Arieh et al. 2003; Laporte and Semet 1999; Noon and Bean 1993) suggested transformations of a GTSP instance into a TSP one as there are efficient heuristics and exact algorithms for the TSP. This idea is very limited since we must have exact solutions from obtained TSP instance, otherwise, it may lead to an infeasible GTSP solution.

A variety of tour construction heuristics inspired from the TSP have been adapted   on   the   GTSP, Noon   and   Bean   (1991)  proposed   a   nearest-neighbour heuristic,   while Fischetti,   Salazar   Gonzalez,   and   Toth   (1997) presented   other adaptations such as the farthest, nearest and cheapest insertion.

Several local search heuristics were studied in  (Karapetyan and Gutin 2011, 2012; Pourhassan and Neumann 2015; Smith and Imeson 2017)  and some others. Many researchers worked also on Genetic Algorithm(s) (GA) (Bontoux, Artigues, and Feillet 2010; Snyder and Daskin 2006; Silberholz and Golden 2007) while others made hybrid   algorithms   with   local   search   heuristics   and   Genetic   Algorithms   yielding memetic algorithms.

Memetic algorithms  (Hart, Krasnogor, and Smith 2004)  are known for their competitiveness since they hybrid between local searches which favour exploitation and genetic algorithms which are good for diversification. It's known in the TSP that the   only   metaheuristics   that   can   compete   with   the   famous   Lin-Kernighan   are memetic algorithms. This fact lets many researchers focus on memetic algorithms for the GTSP (Gutin, Karapetyan, and Krasnogor 2008; Bontoux, Artigues, and Feillet 2010; Gutin and Karapetyan 2010) and motivates us to work on it.

## 3 Memetic Breakout Local Search

## 3.1 The BLS framework

BLS is a metaheuristic based on the Iterated Local Search (ILS) framework: it consists of discovering the search space by moving from a neighbourhood to a new one via perturbation(s) once the algorithm meets a local optimum. BLS provides an interesting strategy which establishes perturbations whose moves and number of jumps are elected dynamically on each iteration.

From an initial permutation (usually produced by a construction method), BLS land in a local optimum via a local search procedure. It browses the entire neighbourhood to find the best improving permutation to alter the current local optimum. The best move found during the iteration is saved in a history matrix H which will be solicited later during the algorithm.

In addition to the history matrix, BLS perturbations are determined by two other parameters: (i) L decides how many jumps to perform in each perturbation. It is incremented if the previous one didn't help to escape the current neighbourhood, otherwise downgraded to a minimal value L0. (ii)  ω  counts the number of the consecutive non-improving best solution found so far. It is incremented by one if the best permutation is not updated, else it will be reset to zero. ω has a maximal value T, if reached then BLS run a strong perturbation which resides on performing a perturbation with an important number of jump Lmax, then  ω  is reset to zero. Algorithm 1 below describes the overall approach of the BLS framework.

Every local search ends in a local optimum and needs diversification to explore a new neighbourhood. Perturbations are an important step in the ILS framework (and thus for BLS too) since they allow to jump to a new area in the search space. The distance between this area and the current local optimum depends on the nature of   the   perturbation.   BLS   introduces   a   new   well   adapted   adaptive   perturbations defined   by   the   nodes/cities   to   be   involved   in   the   movement   and   how   many perturbations to perform before to start a new local search.

## Algorithm 1 : Breakout Local Search Framework

Require : π :   initial   solution, Descmax :   maximal  descents  to   perform, L0 :   initial number   of   jumps, T :   maximal   consecutive   visited   local   optima   without   any improvement, Lmax : number of jumps when reaching T

## Ensure : A solution π best

```
1. c ← objectiveValue(π) 2. πbest ← π /* π best saves best solution found */ 3. c best ← c /* c best saves best objective value */ 4. ω ← 0 /* ω gives the number of consecutive non-improving best solution found so far */ 5. L ←  L0 /* L saves number of jumps to perform, set to it's minimal value L 0 */ 6. c p ← c /* c p saves objective value of last descent */ 7. Desc ← 0 /* Desc saves current number of descents */ 8. Iter ← 0 /*global iteration counter*/ 9. while Desc 〈 Desc max do 10. while 2optMove(x,y) such that (c+delta2Opt(π,x,y)〈c) ∃ 2optMove(x,y) such that (c+delta2Opt(π,x,y)〈c) do 11. π ← π 2OptMove(x,y) ⨁ 2OptMove(x,y) /* perform the best improving move*/ 12. c ← c + delta2Opt(π,x,y) /* cost variation of π with (x,y) move*/ 13. Update H with iteration number when edges move was last performed 14. Iter ← Iter+1 15. end while 16. if c 〈 c best then 17. Update πbest and c best 18. ω ← 0 /* reset counter for consecutive non-improving local optima */ 19. else 20. ω ←  ω+1 21. end if 22. if ω 〉 T then /*strong perturbation with L max moves */ 23. π ← Perturbation(π, L max, H, Iter, ω, M) 24. ω ← 0 25. else if c = c p then /* search returned the previous local optimum */ 26. L ← L+1 /*increment moves if the previous move didn't help to improve */ 27. else /*Search escaped from the previous local optimum, reinitialize indicator */ 28. L ← L0 29. end if 30. c p ← c /* update the objective value of the previous local optimum */ 31. if strong perturbation not performed then 32. π ← Perturbation(π, L, H, Iter, ω, M) /* see algorithm 2 */ 33. end if 34. end while 35. return π best
```

## 3.1.1 Principle of adaptive perturbations

## Main idea

Perturbations in the ILS framework must be well chosen. Indeed, perturbations with low intensity allow to explore gradually the search space, but maybe insufficient when the local optimum is attractive which may imply a stagnation in the current neighbourhood. While strong perturbations ensure to escape the neighbourhood but may seem to be a new random start. BLS proposes perturbations that adapt on the search state, the number of jumps and movements depend on how long the search is trapped in the current neighbourhood.

Instead of completing arbitrarily moves in each iteration, BLS come up with three different perturbations: (i) directed, (ii) recency-based and (iii) random. Each one is called in specific circumstances following a probability and generates a set M of moves that will be solicited during the perturbation with the constraint that the resulting tour must be feasible.

## The three types of perturbation moves

The directed   perturbation is   designed   to   select   movement   candidates resulting to a new solution with minimal degradation. These movements should not belong to a tabu list (Glover 1989, 1990) (which length is γ) unless one of them can) unless one of them can produce a new solution which fitness is better than the best found so far. Candidates for the directed perturbation are set by the set A:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The recency-based perturbation is, as indicated by his name, established from the history of movements which is saved in H. The selected moves are the oldest ones or those who have never been solicited if there are. This candidates' set is defined by the set B where

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The random perturbation is   the   third  and last one in the BLS adaptive perturbation. Candidates (C) are chosen randomly without criteria…

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

BLS selects for each jump one of the three perturbations described above. The selection process is done pseudo-randomly following a probability calculated by ω and T. Directed perturbation have a high probability to be selected when the current neighbourhood is recently discovered (ω is then small). This probability becomes lower when the local optimum seems to be more attractive (ω begins to tend towards T), recency-based and random perturbations are then privileged to offer a stronger diversification.

Using the directed perturbation is done with a probability P which has a threshold (Eq. (5)). While the recency-based and the random perturbations are decided respectively by and where Q is a constant from [0,1].

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From a local optimum (π), BLS perform a sequence of L jumps, each one selects its move from a set of candidates built by one the three formulas (2-4). Current solution and moves History are updated after each jump and if ever BLS meet a solution that improves the best one found so far, π best is updated and ω is reset to zero.

## Algorithm 2: Perturbation (π, L, H, Iter, ω, M)

Require : π : current solution, which is a local optimality, L : Number of jumps, H :   Matrix   of   moves   historic, Iter :   Global   iteration   counter, ω :   Number   of consecutive non-improving local optima, M : Set of candidate moves

## Ensure :

A perturbed solution  π

| 1. for i from 1 to L do  2. take a pair(x,y) M ∈ M  3. update π, c, and H  4. Iter ← Iter + 1  5. if c 〈 c best then  6. πbest ←  π  7. c best ← c  8. ω ← 0  9. end if 10. end for   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

In   each   iteration   of   the   perturbation   process,   BLS   builds   the   set   M   of candidates following one of the three perturbations. The directed and recency-based perturbations need to browse all the history matrix which cost O(n²) . Building the set M 'L times' during only one perturbation impacts the runtime especially for large instances and make BLS very slow.

Instead of looking through all the matrix H, we propose in our adaptation for the GTSP to pick randomly N moves and keep those who will satisfy the selected perturbation. This improvement will decrease the complexity of each jump from O(n²) to O(n) and will highly contribute reducing the BLS runtime.

## 3.2 The memetic BLS

We propose in our work a memetic algorithm (MA) by combining the studied BLS (in subsection 3.1) with the benefits of genetic algorithm (GA) (Davis 1991).

A GA follows the natural mechanism of selection. It consists of constructing a population   of   candidate   solutions,   called   chromosomes,   which   will   be   the   first generation. The population converges gradually from a generation of chromosomes to new ones to reach a final solution having the best objective value from all met candidates.

The generations evolve at each iteration of the GA heuristic. Several procedures are run each time on the chromosomes to enhance the population by finding better individuals that can improve the overall fitness and become the best solution found so   far.   We   expose   in   this   subsection   all   the   components   that   compose   a   MA framework.

## 3.2.1 Initialization

M/2 solutions are generated to constitute the population, where M is the number of clusters. Each solution is created with the semi-random construction heuristic. It consists of generating a random permutation of clusters and select the best node in each cluster. This can be done using the Cluster Optimization heuristic (Fischetti, Salazar Gonzalez, and Toth 1997).

## 3.2.2 Improvements

Improvements in MA algorithms are usually made with one or many local search procedures. Each solution in the population will be improved by BLS in order to get a population with good quality solutions.

## 3.2.3 Crossover

The crossover   operator   produces   a   new   solution(s)   for   the   population   by coupling two existing solutions (S 1 and S2 ) belonging to the previous generation and selected following a strategy. Uniform crossover (UC) (Syswerda 1989) is used in our memetic approach, it produces two children from S 1 and S 2 which are picked from the population by a tournament selection (Miller, Goldberg, and others 1995), each one is selected among three solutions picked randomly.

## 3.2.4 Mutation

The mutation is a genetic operator that alters some solutions in the population in   order   to   reduce   the   probability   of   convergence   by   maintaining   a   diversified population. The mutation is performed on a solution without any criteria and may naturally guide to the worst solution.

We use in our memetic approach the double bridge move (Martin, Otto, and Felten 1991) as a mutation operator in order to minimize chances of coming back to the same solution after the improvement step.

## 3.2.5 Termination condition

We stop producing new generations once we found the best-known fitness for the concerned instance I . Else, the maximum number of generations is equal to the number of clusters in I . The output solution will be the best solution in the last generation.

## 4 Experimental results

## 4.1 Experimental protocol

Memetic BLS is implemented in Java 1.7, and run on a Pentium Dual-Core CPU T4400 with 2.20 GHz and 2.8 GB of memory. 39 instances from the TSPLIB benchmark (and converted to GTSP instances by the standard clustering procedure (Fischetti et al., 1997)) are solved whose sizes are from 10 clusters and 48 nodes to 89 clusters and 442 nodes, each one is run 20 times.

## 4.2 Computational results and comparisons

Memetic BLS is compared during our tests with another memetic approach by (Bontoux, Artigues, and Feillet 2010) and a random-key genetic algorithm proposed by (Snyder and Daskin 2006). Below are listed the performance measures used for evaluating our Memetic BLS and comparing it with the branch-and-cut runtime (Fischetti, Salazar Gonzalez, and Toth 1997) and the two other approaches.

(i) The average deviation of obtained solutions from the best known solution, denoted dev : where is the fitness average of the 20 solutions obtained from 20 runs of Memetic BLS, and best is the best known fitness.

(ii) the CPU time in seconds.

Table 1: Comparative results between Memetic BLS and other evolutionary heuristics

| Instance  Nodes  Clusters  Best  B&amp;C  Time  MBLS  Bontoux  Snyder  dev  CPU (s)  dev  CPU (s)  dev  CPU (s)  10att48  48  10  5,394  2.1  -  -  0.00  0.57  0.00  0.00  10gr48  48  10  1,834  1.9  -  -  0.00  0.97  0.00  0.50  10hk48  48  10  6,386  3.8  -  -  0.00  0.58  0.00  0.20  11eil51  51  11  174  2.9  0.00  0.05  0.00  0.84  0.00  0.10  11berlin52  52  11  4,040  -  0.00  0.03  -  -  -  -  12brazil58  58  12  15,332  3.0  -  -  0.00  0.85  0.00  0.30  14st70  70  14  316  7.3  0.00  0.09  0.00  1.02  0.00  0.20  16eil76  76  16  209  9.4  0.00  0.42  0.00  1.18  0.00  0.20  16pr76  76  16  64,925  12.9  0.00  0.64  0.00  1.27  0.00  0.20  20gr96  96  20  29,440  19.4  0.00  1.32  -  -  -  -  20kroA100  100  20  9,711  18.4  0.00  0.57  0.00  1.98  0.00  0.40  20kroB100  100  20  10,328  22.2  0.00  0.68  0.00  2.01  0.00  0.40  20kroC100  100  20  9,554  14.4  0.00  0.60  0.00  1.84  0.00  0.30  20kroD100  100  20  9,450  14.3  0.00  0.56  0.00  2.93  0.00  0.40  20kroE100  100  20  9,523  13.0  0.00  1.21  0.00  1.87  0.00  0.80  20rat99  99  20  497  51.5  0.00  3.13  0.00  3.52  0.00  0.70  20rd100  100  20  3,650  16.6  0.00  2.12  0.00  2.93  0.00  0.30  21eil101  101  21  249  25.6  0.00  1.14  0.00  2.07  0.00  0.20  21lin105  105  21  8,213  16.4  0.00  0.64  0.00  3.25  0.00  0.30  22pr107  107  22  27,898  7.4  0.00  0.68  0.00  4.67  0.00  0.40  24gr120  120  24  2,769  41.9  -  -  0.00  2.3  0.00  0.50  25pr124  124  25  36,605  25.9  0.00  2.65  0.00  2.89  0.00  0.60  26ch130  130  26  2,828  -  0.00  5.74  -  -  -  -  26bier127  127  26  72,418  23.6  0.00  1.33  0.00  3.02  0.00  0.50  28gr137  137  28  36,417  -  0.00  6.09  -  -  -  -  28pr136  136  28  42,570  43.0  0.00  6.34  0.00  4.17  0.00  0.50  29pr144  144  29  45,886  8.2  0.00  1.75  0.00  5.38  0.00  0.30  30ch150  150  30  2,750  -  0.00  9.49  -  -  -  -  30kroA150  150  30  11,018  100.3  0.00  15.77  0.00  5.27  0.00  1.30  30kroB150  150  30  12,196  60.6  0.00  10.21  0.00  4.61  0.00  1.00   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

| Instance  Nodes  Clusters  Best  B&amp;C  Time  MBLS  Bontoux  Snyder  dev  CPU (s)  dev  CPU (s)  dev  CPU (s)  31pr152  152  31  51,576  94.8  0.00  4.09  0.00  4.45  0.00  1.50  32u159  159  32  22,664  146.4  0.00  8.46  0.00  5.53  0.00  0.60  39rat195  195  39  854  245.9  0.00  9.55  0.00  10.42  0.00  0.70  40d198  198  40  10,557  763.1  0.00  34.00  0.00  8.72  0.00  1.20  40kroA200  200  40  13,406  187.4  0.00  45.00  0.00  6.74  0.00  2.70  40kroB200  200  40  13,111  268.5  0.00  71.00  0.00  8.78  0.00  1.40  41gr202  202  41  23,301  1,022  0.00  81.00  -  -  -  -  45ts225  225  45  68,340  37,875  0.00  141.00  0.04  35.31  0.00  2.40  46gr229  229  46  71,972  1,187  0.00  56.00  -  -  -  -  46pr226  226  46  64,007  106.9  -  -  0.00  6.92  0.00  1.00  53gil262  262  53  1,013  6,624  0.09  346.00  0.14  25.12  0.79  1.90  53pr264  264  53  29,549  337.0  -  -  0.00  16.64  0.00  1.30  56a280  280  56  1,079  -  0.12  3861.00  -  -  -  -  60pr299  299  60  22,615  812.8  -  -  0.00  20.19  0.00  6.10  64lin318  318  64  20,765  1,671  -  -  0.00  24.89  0.00  3.50  80rd400  400  80  6,361  7,021  -  -  0.42  38.33  1.37  3.50  84fl417  417  84  9,651  16,719  0.17  4733.00  0.00  21.9  0.07  2.40  88pr439  439  88  60,099  5,422  0.00  2733.00  0.00  56.46  0.23  9.10  89pcb442  442  89  21,657  58,770  1.28  2437.00  0.19  76.64  1.31  10.10  Average  0.04  375.21  0.02  10.46  0.09  1.46   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Experimental   results   done   on   the   Memetic   BLS   are   quite   satisfying.   Our approach succeeds to reach the optimal solution 35 times from the 39 studied instances, while the average deviation (for all instances) is 0.04% which let our method competitive regarding the others using in the comparison. On the other hand, memetic BLS seems to be greedy in runtime which not strange for BLS (Benlic and Hao 2013b). Recall that BLS has been improved in this work and without this improvement, runtime could be much higher.

## 5 Conclusion

We presented in this paper a new memetic approach for solving the GTSP where the BLS metaheuristic is used in the improvement stage. BLS is a performing metaheuristic that proved its performances in many COPs. Results given in all related works (including this one) are very convincing especially in terms of fitness and deviation from the optimal solution.

The exposed results in the previous Section demonstrate the competitiveness of the memetic BLS by finding optimal solutions in most of the studied instances. The comparative   study   done   consolidates   the   good   performances   of   our   work.   The metaheuristic complexity still restrictive because of some heavy components which can be considered as a drawback, depending on decision makers. Thus, we proposed an improvement to the perturbation component by reducing the complexity from O(n²) to O(n) .

## References

- Ben-Arieh, David, Gregory Gutin, M Penn, Anders Yeo, and Alexey Zverovitch. 2003. 'Transformations of Generalized ATSP into ATSP.' Operations Research Letters 31 (5): 357-65.
- Benlic, Una, and Jin-Kao Hao. 2012. 'A Study of Breakout Local Search for the Minimum Sum Coloring Problem.' In Simulated Evolution and Learning , 128-37. Springer.
- ---. 2013a. 'Breakout Local Search for Maximum Clique Problems.' Computers {&amp;} Operations Research 40 (1): 192-206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor.2012.06.002.
- ---. 2013b. 'Breakout Local Search for the Quadratic Assignment Problem.' Applied Mathematics and Computation 219 (9): 4800-4815. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amc.2012.10.106.
- ---. 2013c. 'Breakout Local Search for the Max-Cutproblem.' Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 26 (3): 1162-73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2012.09.001.
- Bontoux, Boris, Christian Artigues, and Dominique Feillet. 2010. 'A Memetic Algorithm with a Large Neighborhood Crossover Operator for the Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem.' Computers &amp; Operations Research 37 (11): 1844-52.
- Davis, Lawrence. 1991. 'Handbook of Genetic Algorithms.'
- Fischetti, Matteo, Juan Jose Salazar Gonzalez, and Paolo Toth. 1997. 'A Branch-and-Cut Algorithm for the Symmetric Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem.' Operations Research 45 (3): 378-94.
- Fu, Zhang-Hua, and Jin-Kao Hao. 2014. 'Breakout Local Search for the Steiner Tree Problem with Revenue, Budget and Hop Constraints.' European Journal of Operational Research 232 (1): 209-20.

- Ghandi, Somayé, and Ellips Masehian. 2015. 'A Breakout Local Search (BLS) Method for Solving the Assembly Sequence Planning Problem.' Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 39: 245-66.
- Glover, Fred. 1989. 'Tabu Search - Part I.' ORSA Journal on Computing 1 (3): 190-206. https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.1.3.190.
- ---. 1990. 'Tabu Search - Part II.' ORSA Journal on Computing 2 (1): 4-32. https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.2.1.4.
- Gutin, Gregory, and Daniel Karapetyan. 2010. 'A Memetic Algorithm for the Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem.' Natural Computing 9 (1): 47-60.
- Gutin, Gregory, Daniel Karapetyan, and Natalio Krasnogor. 2008. 'Memetic Algorithm for the Generalized Asymmetric Traveling Salesman Problem.' In Nature Inspired Cooperative Strategies for Optimization (NICSO 2007) , 199-210. Springer.
- Hart, William E, Natalio Krasnogor, and James E Smith. 2004. Recent Advances in Memetic Algorithms . Vol. 166. Springer Science &amp; Business Media.
- Henry-Labordere, A L. 1969. 'The Record Balancing Problem: A Dynamic Programming Solution of a Generalized Travelling Salesman Problem.' RIRO B-2: 43-49.
- Ilhan, Ilhan. 2017. 'An Application On Mobile Devices With Android And IOS Operating Systems Using Google Maps APIs For The Traveling Salesman Problem.' Applied Artificial Intelligence , 1-14.
- Karapetyan, Daniel, and Gregory Gutin. 2011. 'Lin--Kernighan Heuristic Adaptations for the Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem.' European Journal of Operational Research 208 (3): 221-32.
- ---. 2012. 'Efficient Local Search Algorithms for Known and New Neighborhoods for the Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem.' European Journal of Operational Research 219 (2): 234-51.
- Laporte, Gilbert, Ardavan Asef-Vaziri, and Chelliah Sriskandarajah. 1996. 'Some Applications of the Generalized Travelling Salesman Problem.' Journal of the Operational Research Society 47 (12): 1461-67.
- Laporte, Gilbert, Hélène Mercure, and Yves Nobert. 1987. 'Generalized Travelling Salesman Problem through n Sets of Nodes: The Asymmetrical Case.' Discrete Applied Mathematics 18 (2): 185-97.
- Laporte, Gilbert, and Frédéric Semet. 1999. 'Computational Evaluation of a Transformation Procedure for the Symmetric Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem.' INFOR:

Information Systems and Operational Research 37 (2): 114-20.

- Lourenço, Helena R, Olivier C Martin, and Thomas Stutzle. 2001. 'Iterated Local Search.' ArXiv Preprint Math/0102188 .
- Martin, Olivier, Steve W Otto, and Edward W Felten. 1991. Large-Step Markov Chains for the Traveling Salesman Problem . Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and Technology, Department of Computer Science and Engineering.
- Miller, Brad L, David E Goldberg, and others. 1995. 'Genetic Algorithms, Tournament Selection, and the Effects of Noise.' Complex Systems 9 (3): 193-212.
- Noon, Charles E, and James C Bean. 1991. 'A Lagrangian Based Approach for the Asymmetric Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem.' Operations Research 39 (4): 623-32.
- ---. 1993. 'An Efficient Transformation of the Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem.' INFOR: Information Systems and Operational Research 31 (1): 39-44.
- Pourhassan, Mojgan, and Frank Neumann. 2015. 'On the Impact of Local Search Operators and Variable Neighbourhood Search for the Generalized Travelling Salesperson Problem.' In Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation , 465-72.
- Reinelt, Gerhard. 1991. 'TSPLIB - A Traveling Salesman Problem Library.' ORSA Journal on Computing 3 (4): 376-84. https://doi.org/10.1287/ijoc.3.4.376.
- Silberholz, John, and Bruce Golden. 2007. 'The Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem: A New Genetic Algorithm Approach.' In Extending the Horizons: Advances in Computing, Optimization, and Decision Technologies , 165-81. Springer.
- Smith, Stephen L, and Frank Imeson. 2017. 'GLNS: An Effective Large Neighborhood Search Heuristic for the Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem.' Computers &amp; Operations Research .
- Snyder, Lawrence V, and Mark S Daskin. 2006. 'A Random-Key Genetic Algorithm for the Generalized Traveling Salesman Problem.' European Journal of Operational Research 174 (1): 38-53.
- Srivastava, S S, S Kumar, R C Garg, and P Sen. 1969. 'Generalized Travelling Salesman Problem through n Sets of Nodes.' CORS J. 7: 97-101.

Syswerda, Gilbert. 1989. 'Uniform Crossover in Genetic Algorithms.' In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Genetic Algorithms , 2-9. San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.