<!-- image -->

Article

## Magnetar wind-driven shock breakout emission after double neutron star mergers: The effect of the anisotropy of the merger ejecta

<!-- image -->

Guang-Lei Wu 1 , Yun-Wei Yu 1,2 * and Shao-Ze Li 3

- 1 Institute of Astrophysics, Central China Normal University, Wuhan 430079, China
- 2 Key Laboratory of Quark and Lepton Physics (Central China Normal University), Ministry of Education, Wuhan 430079, China
- 3 College of Physics Science and Technology, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, China
* Correspondence: yuyw@ccnu.edu.cn

Abstract: Arapidly rotating and highly magnetized remnant neutron star (NS; magnetar) could survive from a merger of double NSs and drive a powerful relativistic wind. The early interaction of this wind with the previous merger ejecta can lead to shock breakout (SBO) emission mainly in ultraviolet and soft X-ray bands, which provides an observational signature for the existence of the remnant magnetar. Here we investigate the effect of an anisotropic structure of the merger ejecta on the SBO emission. It is found that bolometric light curve of the SBO emission can be broadened, since the SBO can occur at different times for different directions. In more detail, the profile of the SBO light curve can be highly dependent on the ejecta sturcture and, thus, we can in principle use the SBO light curves to probe the structure of the merger ejecta in future.

Keywords: kilonova/mergernova; magnetar; shock breakout

## 1. Introduction

Kilonovae are optical transient emission originating from mergers of double neutron stars (NSs) or NS-black hole (BH) binaries [1-6]. The power source of the kilonova emission is conventionally considered to be the radioactive decays of r -process elements, as these elements can be synthesized effectively in the neutron-rich merger ejecta. As an electromagnetic counterpart of the merger-induced GW radiation, kilonova emission can play a very important role in confirming the position, time, redshift, and even the progenitor properties of the mergers. Such effects of kilonovae had been manifested completely in the famous GW170817 event [7], which was accompanied with a kilonova AT2017gfo [8-16]. The detailed modeling of the observed kilonovae and as well as their associated gamma-ray burst (GRB) afterglows could further give constraint on the properties of the merger products, especially, when the traditional kilonova model is challenged by the observations.

The nature of the remnant of double NS mergers is one of the most concerned issues in current astrophysical studies. The answer to this mystery would help to constrain the mass limit of NSs and thus the equation of state (EOS) of nuclear matter, which is highly related to the unclear non-perturbative quantum chromodynamics at low energies. However, the confirmation of the nature of merger products is beyond the ability of the current GW detectors, since the detector sensitivities are still higher than the potential GW radiation from the merger products [17]. Therefore, alternatively, it is expected that the electromagnetic counterparts of the GW events can provide other observational signatures for judging the nature of the merger

<!-- image -->

Citation: Lastname, F.; Lastname, F.; Lastname, F. Title. Universe 2022 , 1 , 0. https://doi.org/

Received: Accepted: Published:

Publisher's Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

<!-- image -->

Copyright: © 2022 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (https:// creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ 4.0/).

<!-- image -->

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

37

38

39

40

41

42

products. Following this consideration, Yu et al. (2013) [18] and Metzger &amp; Piro (2014) [19] investigated the influence of a post-merger NS on the kilonova emission, where the remnant NS is considered to be rapidly rotating and highly magnetized, i.e., a millisecond magnetar. As the most direct effect, the spin-down of the millisecond magnetar can inject energy into the merger ejecta and then enhance the kilonova emission and accelerate the ejecta significantly. Thus, a new name of mergernova was suggested to replace the traditional kilonova, in order to reflect the predicted wide range of the emission luminosity that depends on the specific properties of the remnant NS [18]. Using this magnetar-driven mergernova model, Yu et al. (2018) successfully accounted for the relatively high luminosity of AT 2017gfo on the order of ∼ 10 42 erg s -1 [20], whereas the radioactive kilonova model needs to invoke a too high ejecta mass [21-23] (cf., Reference [24] showed this difficulty could somewhat overcome by considering the 2D radiative transfer elaborately).

Frankly speaking, in view of the complication of mergernova emission, only the information of the luminosity and temperature of the emission is not enough for confirming the existence of a post-merger magnetar. The detailed transfer and transformation of the spin-down energy of the magnetar need to be investigated further [19-21,25-35], which could lead to some extra independent observational signatures for the magnetar. Specifically, the energy release from the spinning-down magnetar could be initally in the form of a Poynting flux and gradually transform into a relativistic wind consisting of electron/positron pairs. Once this magnetar wind catches up and collides with the preceding merger ejecta, it will generate a forward shock (FS) propagating into the ejecta and a termination shock (TS) reversely into the continuously injected wind. After a short period, the FS would break out from the ejecta, while the TS is long lasting. So, the primary channel of the energy transfer is the absorption of the TS emission (i.e., a pulsar wind nebula emission) by the merger ejecta. The TS emission can finally leak from the merger ejecta as the ejecta becomes transparent in the related electromagnetic band. As a rsult, a non-thermal emission component can appear in the late phase of the mergernova emission, which have been found in many mergernova candidates including AT2017gfo [26,29,31-34]. Meanwhile, the breakout of the FS could also cause a rapid soft X-ray flare prior to the primary mergernova emission [25], which is similar to the situation discovered in the supernovae that are suggested to be driven by a magnetar too [36-38]. Generally, this shock breakout (SBO) precursor emission of a mergernova is likely to be outshone by more luminous afterglow emission of the associated GRB. Neverthelss, the observation of GRB 170817A indicates that the nearby GW events are very probably observed off-axis, which can significantly suppress the early afterglow emission and then make the SBO emission emerging.

Therefore, at present, it is necessary to investigate in advance more detailed features of the observational signatures of the magnetar-driven mergernovae, particularly, in expectation of the future discovery of the SBO emission. In theory, the propagation of the FS into the merger ejecta is determined by the radial structure of the merger ejecta. The description of the ejecta structure requires detailed numerical simulations. The first simulation on this topic was performed by Davies et al. (1994) with an analytical EOS of nuclear matter and a Newtonian gravity [39], which showed that ∼ 2% mass of the system can be ejected around the equatorial plane as the dynamical tail of the spiral tidal arms. This result was subsequently reproduced by more simulations [40-44], which further found that (i) the neutrino-energy deposition in the cool outer regions of the tidal arms can enhance the mass loss and (ii) the material at the contact interface between the NSs can be squeezed out although the tidal ejecta could still be dominant. Subsequently, the consideration of general relativity and more realistic EOSs leads to some new understandings of the formation of the ejecta [45-55]. It is showed that the squeezed component of the ejecta could become dominant over the tidal component [47,48,56], as the squeezed material is effectively heated and accelerated by a shock, spreading into a quasi-isotropic region and owning a velocity higher than that of the tidal component. Then, the

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

53

54

55

56

57

58

59

60

61

62

63

64

65

66

67

68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

collision of the squeezed component with the tidal component would lead to a more complex structure of the ejecta. On the other hand, the simulations also showed that a thick disk of a mass of ∼ 0.1 M ⊙ can surround the merger remnant and the neutrino emission from both the disk and remnant can drive a hot wind into a funnel shape region in the polar direction [57-60]. The disk wind component can last for a relatively long timescale due to the viscous heating in the disk, which is further dependent on the lifetime of the remnant NS and the magnetic field configuration of the disk [61,62,62-64]. As the accretion disk finally expands and becomes advection dominated, the wind would become more isotropic and slower until the accretion becomes inefficient [62,64-66]. In summary, the properties of the merger ejecta can vary obviously with the angle relative to the symmetric axis of the system, which may leave imprints in the SBO emission. Therefore, in this paper, we revisit the SBO emission by taking into account the anisotropic structure of the merger ejecta.

## 2. The model

## 2.1. Anisotropic merger ejecta

Figure 1. The density profile employed in our calculations.

<!-- image -->

As introduced, the material ejected during a merger of double NSs can have different origins, which at least contain three channels including the tidal and squeezed dynamical origins and the disk wind origin. These ejecta components own different masses, velocities, electron fractions, and element compositions, which leads the merger ejecta to be highly anisotropic. In this paper, we adopt the empirical description of the ejecta structure suggested by Kawaguchi et al. [24,67]. While the disk wind is considered to be roughly isotropic, the mass distribution of the dynamical ejecta can exhibit an angular dependence as follows: [24,67]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where f represents the density ratio of q = 0 to p /2 and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

93

94

95

96

97

98

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

The above expressions were summarized from the numerical simulations such as those given by References [22,49,51,68], which describe the combination of the tidal and squeezed components. The propagation of the magnetar wind-driven FS in the ejecta is highly dependent on the radial distribution of the ejecta mass. According to numerical simulations, we assume as usual that the radial profile of the different ejecta components can be described by power laws as follows [69]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which can be normalized by the masses of the disk wind ejecta M ej,w and the dynamical ejecta M ej,d , respectively. This 2D distribution of the density of the merger ejecta in the vx -vz plane is shown in Fig. 1, for the parameter values of Model A listed in Table 1. An axial symmetry around the z -axis is adopted. Here, the maximum radii of the ejecta components are determiend by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v max,w and v max,d are the corresponding maximum velocities.

Table 1. Model parameters

| Model  A  B  C  D  E  F  L  w,i/ergs  -  1  10 48  t  md/s  5  ×  10 3  k  w/cm 2 g  -  1  1  k  d,p /cm 2 g  -  1  1  k  d,e /cm 2 g  -  1  10  k  x/cm 2 g  -  1  7  ×  10 3  f  0.01  0.1  0.01  0.01  0.01  0.01  M  ej,w/0.01  M  ⊙  1  1  0.25  1  1  1  M  ej,d /0.01  M  ⊙  1  1  0.1  0.25  1  1  v  max,d /  c  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.3  0.2  0.4  v  max,w/  c  0.1   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 2.2. Magnetar wind

The remnant NS of a merger event is very likely to be in differential rotation initially, which can lead to the amplification of the magnetic fields of the NS through dynamo mechanisms (e.g. 70-72). As the NS become a magnetar, a powerful relativistic wind can be driven with a luminosity of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where B p, R s, and P i are the polar magnetic filed strength, radius, and spin period of the magnetar. Here the convention Qx /10 x is adopted in cgs units. The reference values of the parameters in the above expression are adopted by according to the inference from the shallowdecay and plateau afterglows of GRBs by ascribing these afterglow features to the consequence of a magnetar engine [73-76]. Nevertheless, the fitting of the mergernova AT2017gfo, which is in counterpart with the GW170817/GRB 170817A event, indicates that the magnetic filed of the remnant NS on a timescale of days could be not much higher than 10 11 G [20,21], if such a NS indeed played a role in there as supposed. By combining with these two different observational constraints, Yu et al. (2018) suggested that the ultra-high magnetic field of the

107

108

109

110

111

112

113

remnant magnetar could be suppressed drastically by some unclear mechanisms (e.g., hidden by fallback material) at a time of a few hundreds to thousand of seconds [20]. This assumption could also be supported by the discovery of an extremely steep decay following a plateau in some GRB afterglows. In any case, for simplicity, here we would not consider this potential complex in our calculation and the temporal evolution of the wind luminosity is adopted to be as usual as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where t md = 2 × 10 3 R -6 s,6 B -2 p,15 P 2 i, -3 s is the spin-down timescale.

## 2.3. Shock dynamics and breakout emission

As the powerful magnetar wind collides with the merger ejecta, the wind can be shocked by the TS to generate high energy emission, which is absorbed in part by the merger ejecta. Meanwhile, the FS propagates into and finally crosses the ejecta and its the dynamical evolution can be determined by [25]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v sh is the shock velocity of the shock front, U is the total internal energy of the shocked region, and L tot is the total luminosity of the thermal emission of merger ejecta. The increase of the swept-up mass M sh can be calculated by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r sh is the radius of the shock front, v ej is the velocity of the ejecta material in front of the shock, and the mass density r ej is given by Eq. (3). Meanwhile, the thermal energy deposited in the shocked material is given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, since the merger ejecta is anisotropic, the above equations should be solved separately for different directions. After the determination of H sh ( t ) , the evolution of the internal energy accumulated by the shock can be derived from

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where V sh and P sh = U sh / ( 3 V sh ) are the volume and pressure of the shock heating region, respectively, and L sh is the bolometric luminosity of the SBO emission. Meanwhile, the evolution of the internal energy excluding the shock-accumulated part, U ej = U -U sh , can be written as (ignoring the radioactivity energy)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where V ej and P ej = U ej/ ( 3 V ej ) are the volume and the pressure of the ejecta behind the shock, 116 respectively, and L mn is the bolometric luminosity of the mergernova emission. 117

114

115

Following the approximate one-zone diffusion model in Reference [77], the bolometric luminosity of the SBO emission can be estimated by 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r sbo is the radius at which SBO occurs and t sbo is the optical depth of the shell between the radii r sbo and r max,d . Above r sbo , photons can escape from the merger ejecta, because the photon diffusion time in the outside shell is equal to the dynamical time, i.e.,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

from which the radius r sbo can be derived, where k is the opacity. When r sbo ≪ r max,d , the above equation returns to its usual form as t sbo = c / v max,d . Meanwhile, the bolometric luminosity of the mergernova emission can be given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where t sh ≈ k M sh /4 p r 2 sh and t un = ∫ r max,d r sh kr dr are the optical depths of shocked and unshocked ejecta. In our calculations, the opacity k is adopted to be [33,78]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for kT int ≥ 0.3keV and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

for kT int &lt; 0.3keV, where T int ≈ ( cU /4 V s ) 1/4 is the average internal temperature of the related region, k is the Boltzmann constant, s is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, and the values of parameters k x, k w, k d,p and k d,e are listed in Table 1. Here, for the dynamical ejecta, two different opacity values are simply taken for q ≤ p /4 and q &gt; p /4, in order to reflect the angluardependence of the electron faction, which is result of the anisotropic neutrino irradiation from the remnant NS and the disk.

Finally, as photons diffuse and are thermalized continuously, a black-body emission appears at a photosphere of radius r ph with an effective temperature of

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

1 Here the shocked energy is considered to distribute approximately uniformly behind the shock, which is different from [25] where the shocked energy is assumed to be concentrated within a thin shell immediately behind the shock front.

118

119

120

121

122

123

where L tot = L sh + L mn and r ph ≈ r max,d is taken in our calculation. Then, the emergent net flux at a frequency n can be given by using the black-body spectrum as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where h is the Planck constant.

## 2.4. Integration over the emission surface

Figure 2. The sketch of the coordinate system we use, the angles Q and F are the represent the direction of line of sight, the angles q and f represent the location of a point in local structure.

<!-- image -->

As illustrated in Fig. 2, we adopt coordinates with z -axis along the symmetric axis of the system and denote the zenith and azimuth angles by q and f . Then, the specific luminosity for an observer on the line of sight (LOS) of ( Q , F ) can be obtained by integrating the specific intensity over the visible photosphere as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is viable for an unresolved emitting source [79-82], where m = ˆ n ( q , f ) · ˆ k ( Q , F ) with ˆ n and ˆ k being the unit vectors of the normal of the differential solid angle and the direction of the LOS, respectively. For an ideal black-body surface, the angular distribution of emergent intensities is uniform and, thus, the value of I n can in principle be derived from Eq. (19) to I n ( m , q , f ) = F n ( q , f ) / p . However, as a more realistic consideration, the hot, expanding ejecta should contain an abundance of free electrons, especially, in the fastest head of dynamical ejecta. In other words, the atmosphere above the photosphere can deviate from the thermal equilibrium and become scattering dominated. In this case, the limb darkening effect needs to be taken into account, which is widely discussed in the radiation transfer of stellar atmosphere

124

125

[83-85]. Here we simply consider pure isotropic scattering, which leads the emergent intensities to be different for different directions as [83,84,86]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where 2

for H ( m = 1 ) = 1 and q ( t ) is the Hopf function. This function implies that the intensity emerging from the limb is about 40% of that from the center of the emission source, when the Eddington approximation is taken q ( t = 0 ) = 2/3, which is in fair agreement with the observations of the Sun.

## 3. Results

For the parameter values listed in Table 1, we calculate the light curves of the SBO and mergernova emission, as presented in Fig. 3. First of all, the SBO emission is mainly in the UV and soft X-ray bands, while the mergernova emission is in optical, just as found in [25]. In comparison with the GRB afterglow emission, the SBO emission is most likely to be detected in soft X-rays, especially, when the GRB jet is deviate from the LOS.

The anisotropic structure of the merger ejecta can broaden the bolometric light curve of the SBO emission. This is because the SBO occurs at different times for different directions and thus it takes a relatively long period to observe the total SBO emission. In more detail, the harder emission can emerge earlier than the softer emission, since the former corresponds to a smaller SBO radius due to a thin merger ejecta in the polar direction while the later comes from the thick equatorial ejecta. Such a shift of the highlight on the emission surface is clearly shown in Fig. 4. In more detail, the comparison between the different panels shows that the profile of the light curves, in particular, of the increasing phase is highly dependent on the structure parameters of the ejecta, which thus enables us to probe the ejecta structure by observing this SBO emission.

In addition, the SBO light curves show a slight dependence of the viewing angle. This a result of the limb darkening effect, which leads to the on-axis observation on an emitting element can receive more intensity than the off-axis observation. Therefore, when the highlight point moves on the emission surface, observers on different directions would detect different light curves, as also shown in Fig. 4. Here, it is worth mentioning that this viewing angledependence of the SBO emission would be likely to cause a significant difference in the polarization of the emission between different observational directions, although its influence on the light curve profile is unremarkable.

## 4. Conclusions and Discussion

In this paper, we investigate the influence of the anisotropic structure of merger ejecta on the SBO emission driven by a magnetar wind. In view of the possible suppression of the magnetic field of the magnetar at late time, the early SBO emission (in particular, in the soft X-ray band) can provide an important observational signature for the existence of a remnant magnetar.

2 An exact expression of H ( m ) had been given by Mihalas (1978) as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

142

143

144

145

146

147

148

149

150

151

152

153

154

155

156

157

158

159

Figure 3. Mult-band light curves of the magnetar-driven SBO (i.e., the first bump at around 10 3 -4 s) and mergernova (i.e., the second bump at around 10 5 -6 s) emission from an anisotropic merger ejecta for parameters listed in Table 1, including 0.1 keV (Green), 6 keV (Purple), 2 eV (Yellow), 0.5 eV (Red) and the bolometric ones (black). For a comparison, the GRB X-ray (0.1 KeV) afterglow is also presented by the cyan dotted-dashed lines for three viewing angles of 0 ◦ , 4 ◦ and 8 ◦ , which are yielded from the afterglowpy [87] for a top-hat jet model with a half-opening angle of 3 ◦ , where the typical parameter values as inferred from the GRB 170817A observations are taken as E iso = 10 51 erg, n = 10 -3 cm -3 , p = 2.3, e e = 0.1, and e B = 10 -4 . Due to the limb darkening effect, the SBO emission can slightly vary with the observational directions, as labeled by the solid ( Q = 0 ◦ ), dotted (30 ◦ ), dashed (60 ◦ ), and dashed-dotted (90 ◦ ) lines.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4. The intensity distribution on the emission surface for different times (rows) and different viewing angles (columns), for the Model A parameter values.

<!-- image -->

## References

1. Li, L.X.; Paczy´ nski, B. Transient Events from Neutron Star Mergers. Astrophys. J. Lett. 1998 , 507 , L59-L62, [arXiv:astro-ph/astroph/9807272]. doi:10.1086/311680.
2. Metzger, B.D.; Martínez-Pinedo, G.; Darbha, S.; Quataert, E.; Arcones, A.; Kasen, D.; Thomas, R.; Nugent, P.; Panov, I.V.; Zinner, N.T. Electromagnetic counterparts of compact object mergers powered by the radioactive decay of r-process nuclei. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2010 , 406 , 2650-2662, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1001.5029]. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.16864.x.
3. Roberts, L.F.; Kasen, D.; Lee, W.H.; Ramirez-Ruiz, E. Electromagnetic Transients Powered by Nuclear Decay in the Tidal Tails of Coalescing Compact Binaries. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2011 , 736 , L21, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1104.5504]. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/736/1/L21.
4. Barnes, J.; Kasen, D. Effect of a High Opacity on the Light Curves of Radioactively Powered Transients from Compact Object Mergers. Astrophys. J. 2013 , 775 , 18, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1303.5787]. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/775/1/18.
5. Kasen, D.; Badnell, N.R.; Barnes, J. Opacities and Spectra of the r-process Ejecta from Neutron Star Mergers. Astrophys. J. 2013 , 774 , 25, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1303.5788]. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/774/1/25.
6. Tanaka, M.; Hotokezaka, K. Radiative Transfer Simulations of Neutron Star Merger Ejecta. Astrophys. J. 2013 , 775 , 113, [arXiv:astroph.HE/1306.3742]. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/775/2/113.
7. Abbott, B.P.; Abbott, R.; Abbott, T.D.; Acernese, F.; Ackley, K.; Adams, C.; Adams, T.; Addesso, P.; Adhikari, R.X.; Adya, V.B.; et al. Gravitational Waves and Gamma-Rays from a Binary Neutron Star Merger: GW170817 and GRB 170817A. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2017 , 848 , L13, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.05834]. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aa920c.
8. Abbott, B.P.; Abbott, R.; Abbott, T.D.; Acernese, F.; Ackley, K.; Adams, C.; Adams, T.; Addesso, P.; Adhikari, R.X.; Adya, V.B.; et al. Multi-messenger Observations of a Binary Neutron Star Merger. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2017 , 848 , L12, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.05833]. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aa91c9.
9. Arcavi, I.; Hosseinzadeh, G.; Howell, D.A.; McCully, C.; Poznanski, D.; Kasen, D.; Barnes, J.; Zaltzman, M.; Vasylyev, S.; Maoz, D.; et al. Optical emission from a kilonova following a gravitational-wave-detected neutron-star merger. Nature 2017 , 551 , 64-66, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.05843]. doi:10.1038/nature24291.

It is found that, due to the different density distribution in different directions, the occurring time of the SBO can vary with the angle relative to the symmetric axis of the system. This leads to the broadening of the bolometric light curve of the SBO emission, which makes it more possible to be detected. Furthermore, in future, as some detailed observations can be achieved (e.g., by the Einstein Probe [88]), we can even use the SBO light curve to probe the structure of the merger ejecta, where of course a more realistic structure description must be involved for elaborate modelings. In addition, we also find the observational SBO emission can be slightly dependent on the viewing angle. This is because the anisotropic structure of the merger ejecta leads to a highlight point moving from the polar to the equatorial direction on the emission surface. This could simultaneously lead to a significant variation in the polarization of the emission for different observational directions, which is worth to be investigated carefully in future.

Recently, some fast X-ray transients have been detected and suspected to be powered by a spinning-down magnetar [89,90], which could be directly contributed by the dissipating magnetic wind if it is not trapped by thick material [91]. Alternatively, as presented in this paper, even if the magentar wind is surrounded by a merger ejecta, the SBO driven by the magnetar wind could still generate an X-ray transient. In contrast to the highly-beamed GRB emission, this SBO emission can in principle be detected at arbitrary directions, which therefore provides a valuable signal for test the existence of the remnant magnetar. Additionally, in view of the similarity of the mergernovae and superluminous supernovae, such a SBO signal can also be expected to appear in these supernova emission, probably with a relatively longer timescale [37,38].

## Acknowledgments

This work is supported by the National Key R&amp;D Program of China (2021YFA0718500), the National SKA Program of China (2020SKA0120300), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant No. 11833003).

160

161

162

163

164

165

166

167

168

169

170

171

172

173

174

175

176

177

178

179

180

181

182

183

184

185

186

187

188

189

190

191

192

193

194

195

196

197

198

199

200

201

202

203

204

205

206

207

208

10. Coulter, D.A.; Foley, R.J.; Kilpatrick, C.D.; Drout, M.R.; Piro, A.L.; Shappee, B.J.; Siebert, M.R.; Simon, J.D.; Ulloa, N.; Kasen, D.; et al. Swope Supernova Survey 2017a (SSS17a), the optical counterpart to a gravitational wave source. Science 2017 , 358 , 1556-1558, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.05452]. doi:10.1126/science.aap9811.
11. Cowperthwaite, P.S.; Berger, E.; Villar, V.A.; Metzger, B.D.; Nicholl, M.; Chornock, R.; Blanchard, P.K.; Fong, W.; Margutti, R.; SoaresSantos, M.; et al. The Electromagnetic Counterpart of the Binary Neutron Star Merger LIGO/Virgo GW170817. II. UV, Optical, and Near-infrared Light Curves and Comparison to Kilonova Models. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2017 , 848 , L17, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.05840]. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aa8fc7.
12. Evans, P.A.; Cenko, S.B.; Kennea, J.A.; Emery, S.W.K.; Kuin, N.P.M.; Korobkin, O.; Wollaeger, R.T.; Fryer, C.L.; Madsen, K.K.; Harrison, F.A.; et al. Swift and NuSTAR observations of GW170817: Detection of a blue kilonova. Science 2017 , 358 , 1565-1570, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.05437]. doi:10.1126/science.aap9580.
13. Nicholl, M.; Berger, E.; Kasen, D.; Metzger, B.D.; Elias, J.; Briceño, C.; Alexander, K.D.; Blanchard, P.K.; Chornock, R.; Cowperthwaite, P.S.; et al. The Electromagnetic Counterpart of the Binary Neutron Star Merger LIGO/Virgo GW170817. III. Optical and UV Spectra of a Blue Kilonova from Fast Polar Ejecta. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2017 , 848 , L18, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.05456]. doi:10.3847/20418213/aa9029.
14. Smartt, S.J.; Chen, T.W.; Jerkstrand, A.; Coughlin, M.; Kankare, E.; Sim, S.A.; Fraser, M.; Inserra, C.; Maguire, K.; Chambers, K.C.; et al. Akilonova as the electromagnetic counterpart to a gravitational-wave source. Nature 2017 , 551 , 75-79, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.05841]. doi:10.1038/nature24303.
15. Soares-Santos, M.; Holz, D.E.; Annis, J.; Chornock, R.; Herner, K.; Berger, E.; Brout, D.; Chen, H.Y.; Kessler, R.; Sako, M.; et al. The Electromagnetic Counterpart of the Binary Neutron Star Merger LIGO/Virgo GW170817. I. Discovery of the Optical Counterpart Using the Dark Energy Camera. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2017 , 848 , L16, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.05459]. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aa9059.
16. Tanvir, N.R.; Levan, A.J.; González-Fernández, C.; Korobkin, O.; Mandel, I.; Rosswog, S.; Hjorth, J.; D'Avanzo, P.; Fruchter, A.S.; Fryer, C.L.; et al. The Emergence of a Lanthanide-rich Kilonova Following the Merger of Two Neutron Stars. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2017 , 848 , L27, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.05455]. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aa90b6.
17. Abbott, B.P.; Abbott, R.; Abbott, T.D.; Acernese, F.; Ackley, K.; Adams, C.; Adams, T.; Addesso, P.; Adhikari, R.X.; Adya, V.B.; et al. Search for Post-merger Gravitational Waves from the Remnant of the Binary Neutron Star Merger GW170817. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2017 , 851 , L16, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.09320]. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aa9a35.
18. Yu, Y.W.; Zhang, B.; Gao, H. Bright 'Merger-nova' from the Remnant of a Neutron Star Binary Merger: A Signature of a Newly Born, Massive, Millisecond Magnetar. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2013 , 776 , L40, [arXiv:astro-ph.SR/1308.0876]. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/776/2/L40.
19. Metzger, B.D.; Piro, A.L. Optical and X-ray emission from stable millisecond magnetars formed from the merger of binary neutron stars. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2014 , 439 , 3916-3930, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1311.1519]. doi:10.1093/mnras/stu247.
20. Yu, Y.W.; Liu, L.D.; Dai, Z.G. A Long-lived Remnant Neutron Star after GW170817 Inferred from Its Associated Kilonova. Astrophys. J. 2018 , 861 , 114, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1711.01898]. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aac6e5.
21. Li, S.Z.; Liu, L.D.; Yu, Y.W.; Zhang, B. What Powered the Optical Transient AT2017gfo Associated with GW170817? Astrophys. J. Lett. 2018 , 861 , L12, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1804.06597]. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aace61.
22. Shibata, M.; Fujibayashi, S.; Hotokezaka, K.; Kiuchi, K.; Kyutoku, K.; Sekiguchi, Y.; Tanaka, M. Modeling GW170817 based on numerical relativity and its implications. Phys. Rev. D 2017 , 96 , 123012, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1710.07579]. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.96.123012.
23. Metzger, B.D.; Thompson, T.A.; Quataert, E. A Magnetar Origin for the Kilonova Ejecta in GW170817. Astrophys. J. 2018 , 856 , 101, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1801.04286]. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aab095.
24. Kawaguchi, K.; Shibata, M.; Tanaka, M. Radiative Transfer Simulation for the Optical and Near-infrared Electromagnetic Counterparts to GW170817. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2018 , 865 , L21, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1806.04088]. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/aade02.
25. Li, S.Z.; Yu, Y.W. Shock Breakout Driven by the Remnant of a Neutron Star Binary Merger: An X-Ray Precursor of Mergernova Emission. Astrophys. J. 2016 , 819 , 120, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1511.01229]. doi:10.3847/0004-637X/819/2/120.
26. Gao, H.; Ding, X.; Wu, X.F.; Dai, Z.G.; Zhang, B. GRB 080503 Late Afterglow Re-brightening: Signature of a Magnetar-powered Merger-nova. Astrophys. J. 2015 , 807 , 163, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1506.06816]. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/807/2/163.
27. Siegel, D.M.; Ciolfi, R. Electromagnetic Emission from Long-lived Binary Neutron Star Merger Remnants. I. Formulation of the Problem. Astrophys. J. 2016 , 819 , 14, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1508.07911]. doi:10.3847/0004-637X/819/1/14.
28. Siegel, D.M.; Ciolfi, R. Electromagnetic Emission from Long-lived Binary Neutron Star Merger Remnants. II. Lightcurves and Spectra. Astrophys. J. 2016 , 819 , 15, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1508.07939]. doi:10.3847/0004-637X/819/1/15.
29. Gao, H.; Zhang, B.; Lü, H.J.; Li, Y. Searching for Magnetar-powered Merger-novae from Short GRBS. Astrophys. J. 2017 , 837 , 50, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1608.03375]. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aa5be3.
30. Wollaeger, R.T.; Fryer, C.L.; Fontes, C.J.; Lippuner, J.; Vestrand, W.T.; Mumpower, M.R.; Korobkin, O.; Hungerford, A.L.; Even, W.P. Impact of Pulsar and Fallback Sources on Multifrequency Kilonova Models. Astrophys. J. 2019 , 880 , 22, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1904.05934]. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab25f5.
31. Yu, Y.W.; Chen, A.; Li, X.D. X-Ray Transients from the Accretion-induced Collapse of White Dwarfs. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2019 , 877 , L21, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1904.11840]. doi:10.3847/2041-8213/ab1f85.

209

210

211

212

213

214

215

216

217

218

219

220

221

222

223

224

225

226

227

228

229

230

231

232

233

234

235

236

237

238

239

240

241

242

243

244

245

246

247

248

249

250

251

252

253

254

255

256

257

258

259

260

261

262

263

32. Ren, J.; Lin, D.B.; Zhang, L.L.; Li, X.Y.; Liu, T.; Lu, R.J.; Wang, X.G.; Liang, E.W. A Pulsar Wind Nebula Embedded in the Kilonova AT 2017gfo Associated with GW170817/GRB 170817A. Astrophys. J. 2019 , 885 , 60, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1905.04670]. doi:10.3847/15384357/ab4188.
33. Ren, J.; Dai, Z.G. Broad-band emission from a kilonova ejecta-pulsar wind Nebula system: late-time X-ray afterglow rebrightening of GRB 170817A. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2022 , 512 , 5572-5579, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2203.08576]. doi:10.1093/mnras/stac797.
34. Wu, G.L.; Yu, Y.W.; Zhu, J.P. Does a long-lived remnant neutron star exist after short gamma-ray burst GRB 160821B? Astron. Astrophys. 2021 , 654 , A124, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2108.01349]. doi:10.1051/0004-6361/202141325.
35. Ai, S.; Zhang, B.; Zhu, Z. Engine-fed Kilonovae (Mergernovae) - I. Dynamical Evolution and Energy Injection / Heating Efficiencies. arXiv e-prints 2022 , p. arXiv:2203.03045, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2203.03045].
36. Kasen, D.; Metzger, B.D.; Bildsten, L. Magnetar-driven Shock Breakout and Double-peaked Supernova Light Curves. Astrophys. J. 2016 , 821 , 36, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1507.03645]. doi:10.3847/0004-637X/821/1/36.
37. Liu, L.D.; Gao, H.; Wang, X.F.; Yang, S. Magnetar-driven Shock Breakout Revisited and Implications for Double-peaked Type I Superluminous Supernovae. Astrophys. J. 2021 , 911 , 142, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2103.09971]. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/abf042.
38. Zhang, Z.D.; Yu, Y.W.; Liu, L.D. The effects of a magnetar engine on the gamma-ray burst-associated supernovae: Application to double-peaked SN 2006aj. arXiv e-prints 2022 , p. arXiv:2204.11092, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2204.11092].
39. Davies, M.B.; Benz, W.; Piran, T.; Thielemann, F.K. Merging Neutron Stars. I. Initial Results for Coalescence of Noncorotating Systems. Astrophys. J. 1994 , 431 , 742, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/9401032]. doi:10.1086/174525.
40. Ruffert, M.; Janka, H.T.; Schaefer, G. Coalescing neutron stars - a step towards physical models. I. Hydrodynamic evolution and gravitational-wave emission. Astron. Astrophys. 1996 , 311 , 532-566, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/9509006].
41. Rosswog, S.; Liebendörfer, M.; Thielemann, F.K.; Davies, M.B.; Benz, W.; Piran, T. Mass ejection in neutron star mergers. Astron. Astrophys. 1999 , 341 , 499-526, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/9811367].
42. Rosswog, S.; Davies, M.B.; Thielemann, F.K.; Piran, T. Merging neutron stars: asymmetric systems. Astron. Astrophys. 2000 , 360 , 171-184, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0005550].
43. Ruffert, M.; Janka, H.T. Coalescing neutron stars - A step towards physical models. III. Improved numerics and different neutron star masses and spins. Astron. Astrophys. 2001 , 380 , 544-577, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0106229]. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20011453.
44. Korobkin, O.; Rosswog, S.; Arcones, A.; Winteler, C. On the astrophysical robustness of the neutron star merger r-process. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2012 , 426 , 1940-1949, [arXiv:astro-ph.SR/1206.2379]. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21859.x.
45. Piran, T.; Nakar, E.; Rosswog, S. The electromagnetic signals of compact binary mergers. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2013 , 430 , 2121-2136, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1204.6242]. doi:10.1093/mnras/stt037.
46. Rosswog, S.; Piran, T.; Nakar, E. The multimessenger picture of compact object encounters: binary mergers versus dynamical collisions. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2013 , 430 , 2585-2604, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1204.6240]. doi:10.1093/mnras/sts708.
47. Bauswein, A.; Goriely, S.; Janka, H.T. Systematics of Dynamical Mass Ejection, Nucleosynthesis, and Radioactively Powered Electromagnetic Signals from Neutron-star Mergers. Astrophys. J. 2013 , 773 , 78, [arXiv:astro-ph.SR/1302.6530]. doi:10.1088/0004637X/773/1/78.
48. Hotokezaka, K.; Kiuchi, K.; Kyutoku, K.; Okawa, H.; Sekiguchi, Y.i.; Shibata, M.; Taniguchi, K. Mass ejection from the merger of binary neutron stars. Phys. Rev. D 2013 , 87 , 024001, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1212.0905]. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.87.024001.
49. Sekiguchi, Y.; Kiuchi, K.; Kyutoku, K.; Shibata, M.; Taniguchi, K. Dynamical mass ejection from the merger of asymmetric binary neutron stars: Radiation-hydrodynamics study in general relativity. Phys. Rev. D 2016 , 93 , 124046, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1603.01918]. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.93.124046.
50. Foucart, F.; O'Connor, E.; Roberts, L.; Kidder, L.E.; Pfeiffer, H.P.; Scheel, M.A. Impact of an improved neutrino energy estimate on outflows in neutron star merger simulations. Phys. Rev. D 2016 , 94 , 123016, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1607.07450]. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.94.123016.
51. Radice, D.; Galeazzi, F.; Lippuner, J.; Roberts, L.F.; Ott, C.D.; Rezzolla, L. Dynamical mass ejection from binary neutron star mergers. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2016 , 460 , 3255-3271, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1601.02426]. doi:10.1093/mnras/stw1227.
52. Dietrich, T.; Bernuzzi, S.; Tichy, W. Closed-form tidal approximants for binary neutron star gravitational waveforms constructed from high-resolution numerical relativity simulations. Phys. Rev. D 2017 , 96 , 121501, [arXiv:gr-qc/1706.02969]. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.96.121501.
53. Dietrich, T.; Ujevic, M.; Tichy, W.; Bernuzzi, S.; Brügmann, B. Gravitational waves and mass ejecta from binary neutron star mergers: Effect of the mass ratio. Phys. Rev. D 2017 , 95 , 024029, [arXiv:gr-qc/1607.06636]. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.95.024029.
54. Radice, D.; Perego, A.; Hotokezaka, K.; Fromm, S.A.; Bernuzzi, S.; Roberts, L.F. Binary Neutron Star Mergers: Mass Ejection, Electromagnetic Counterparts, and Nucleosynthesis. Astrophys. J. 2018 , 869 , 130, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1809.11161]. doi:10.3847/15384357/aaf054.
55. Shibata, M.; Fujibayashi, S.; Sekiguchi, Y. Long-term evolution of neutron-star merger remnants in general relativistic resistive magnetohydrodynamics with a mean-field dynamo term. Phys. Rev. D 2021 , 104 , 063026, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2109.08732]. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.104.063026.

264

265

266

267

268

269

270

271

272

273

274

275

276

277

278

279

280

281

282

283

284

285

286

287

288

289

290

291

292

293

294

295

296

297

298

299

300

301

302

303

304

305

306

307

308

309

310

311

312

313

314

315

316

317

318

56. Oechslin, R.; Janka, H.T.; Marek, A. Relativistic neutron star merger simulations with non-zero temperature equations of state. I. Variation of binary parameters and equation of state. Astron. Astrophys. 2007 , 467 , 395-409, [arXiv:astro-ph/astro-ph/0611047]. doi:10.1051/0004-6361:20066682.
57. Dessart, L.; Ott, C.D.; Burrows, A.; Rosswog, S.; Livne, E. Neutrino Signatures and the Neutrino-Driven Wind in Binary Neutron Star Mergers. Astrophys. J. 2009 , 690 , 1681-1705, [arXiv:astro-ph/0806.4380]. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/690/2/1681.
58. Perego, A.; Rosswog, S.; Cabezón, R.M.; Korobkin, O.; Käppeli, R.; Arcones, A.; Liebendörfer, M. Neutrino-driven winds from neutron star merger remnants. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2014 , 443 , 3134-3156, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1405.6730]. doi:10.1093/mnras/stu1352.
59. Martin, D.; Perego, A.; Arcones, A.; Thielemann, F.K.; Korobkin, O.; Rosswog, S. Neutrino-driven Winds in the Aftermath of a Neutron Star Merger: Nucleosynthesis and Electromagnetic Transients. Astrophys. J. 2015 , 813 , 2, [arXiv:astro-ph.SR/1506.05048]. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/813/1/2.
60. Fujibayashi, S.; Sekiguchi, Y.; Kiuchi, K.; Shibata, M. Properties of Neutrino-driven Ejecta from the Remnant of a Binary Neutron Star Merger: Pure Radiation Hydrodynamics Case. Astrophys. J. 2017 , 846 , 114, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1703.10191]. doi:10.3847/15384357/aa8039.
61. Siegel, D.M.; Ciolfi, R.; Rezzolla, L. Magnetically Driven Winds from Differentially Rotating Neutron Stars and X-Ray Afterglows of Short Gamma-Ray Bursts. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2014 , 785 , L6, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1401.4544]. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/785/1/L6.
62. Fujibayashi, S.; Kiuchi, K.; Nishimura, N.; Sekiguchi, Y.; Shibata, M. Mass Ejection from the Remnant of a Binary Neutron Star Merger: Viscous-radiation Hydrodynamics Study. Astrophys. J. 2018 , 860 , 64, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1711.02093]. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aabafd.
63. Siegel, D.M.; Metzger, B.D. Three-dimensional GRMHD Simulations of Neutrino-cooled Accretion Disks from Neutron Star Mergers. Astrophys. J. 2018 , 858 , 52, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1711.00868]. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/aabaec.
64. Fernández, R.; Tchekhovskoy, A.; Quataert, E.; Foucart, F.; Kasen, D. Long-term GRMHD simulations of neutron star merger accretion discs: implications for electromagnetic counterparts. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2019 , 482 , 3373-3393, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1808.00461]. doi:10.1093/mnras/sty2932.
65. Fernández, R.; Metzger, B.D. Delayed outflows from black hole accretion tori following neutron star binary coalescence. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2013 , 435 , 502-517, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1304.6720]. doi:10.1093/mnras/stt1312.
66. Just, O.; Bauswein, A.; Ardevol Pulpillo, R.; Goriely, S.; Janka, H.T. Comprehensive nucleosynthesis analysis for ejecta of compact binary mergers. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2015 , 448 , 541-567, [arXiv:astro-ph.SR/1406.2687]. doi:10.1093/mnras/stv009.
67. Kawaguchi, K.; Shibata, M.; Tanaka, M. Diversity of Kilonova Light Curves. Astrophys. J. 2020 , 889 , 171, [arXiv:astroph.HE/1908.05815]. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab61f6.
68. Kiuchi, K.; Kawaguchi, K.; Kyutoku, K.; Sekiguchi, Y.; Shibata, M.; Taniguchi, K. Sub-radian-accuracy gravitational waveforms of coalescing binary neutron stars in numerical relativity. Phys. Rev. D 2017 , 96 , 084060, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1708.08926]. doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.96.084060.
69. Nagakura, H.; Hotokezaka, K.; Sekiguchi, Y.; Shibata, M.; Ioka, K. Jet Collimation in the Ejecta of Double Neutron Star Mergers: A New Canonical Picture of Short Gamma-Ray Bursts. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2014 , 784 , L28, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1403.0956]. doi:10.1088/20418205/784/2/L28.
70. Duncan, R.C.; Thompson, C. Formation of Very Strongly Magnetized Neutron Stars: Implications for Gamma-Ray Bursts. Astrophys. J. Lett. 1992 , 392 , L9. doi:10.1086/186413.
71. Price, D.J.; Rosswog, S. Producing Ultrastrong Magnetic Fields in Neutron Star Mergers. Science 2006 , 312 , 719-722, [arXiv:astroph/astro-ph/0603845]. doi:10.1126/science.1125201.
72. Cheng, Q.; Yu, Y.W. How can Newly Born Rapidly Rotating Neutron Stars Become Magnetars? Astrophys. J. Lett. 2014 , 786 , L13, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1404.7228]. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/786/2/L13.
73. Yu, Y.W.; Cheng, K.S.; Cao, X.F. The Role of Newly Born Magnetars in Gamma-ray Burst X-ray Afterglow Emission: Energy Injection and Internal Emission. Astrophys. J. 2010 , 715 , 477-484, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1004.1685]. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/715/1/477.
74. Lyons, N.; O'Brien, P.T.; Zhang, B.; Willingale, R.; Troja, E.; Starling, R.L.C. Can X-ray emission powered by a spinning-down magnetar explain some gamma-ray burst light-curve features? Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 2010 , 402 , 705-712, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/0908.3798]. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15538.x.
75. Lü, H.J.; Zhang, B. A Test of the Millisecond Magnetar Central Engine Model of Gamma-Ray Bursts with Swift Data. Astrophys. J. 2014 , 785 , 74, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1401.1562]. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/785/1/74.
76. Lü, H.J.; Zhang, B.; Lei, W.H.; Li, Y.; Lasky, P.D. The Millisecond Magnetar Central Engine in Short GRBs. Astrophys. J. 2015 , 805 , 89, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1501.02589]. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/805/2/89.
77. Kasen, D.; Bildsten, L. Supernova Light Curves Powered by Young Magnetars. Astrophys. J. 2010 , 717 , 245-249, [arXiv:astroph.HE/0911.0680]. doi:10.1088/0004-637X/717/1/245.
78. Chen, M.H.; Li, L.X.; Lin, D.B.; Liang, E.W. Gamma-Ray Emission Produced by r-process Elements from Neutron Star Mergers. Astrophys. J. 2021 , 919 , 59, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2107.02982]. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac1267.
79. Rybicki, G.B. Theoretical Methods of Treating Line Formation Problems in Steady-State Extended Atmospheres. International Astronomical Union Colloquium 1970 , 2 , 85-118. doi:10.1017/S025292110015119X.

319

320

321

322

323

324

325

326

327

328

329

330

331

332

333

334

335

336

337

338

339

340

341

342

343

344

345

346

347

348

349

350

351

352

353

354

355

356

357

358

359

360

361

362

363

364

365

366

367

368

369

370

371

372

373

| 80. Collins, G. W., I. Further Note on Terminology - Specific Luminosity. Astron. Astrophys. 1973 , 26 , 315.  374  81. Kandel, R.S. Note on Terminology - Specific Luminosity. Astron. Astrophys. 1973 , 22 , 155.  375  82. Rybicki, G.B.; Hummer, D.G. The specific luminosity of a three-dimensional medium in terms of the escape probability. Astrophys. J. 1983 , 274 , 380-398. doi:10.1086/161454.  376  377  83. Hopf, E. Remarks on the Schwarzschild-Milne model of the outer layers of a star. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 1930 , 90 , 287-293. doi:10.1093/mnras/90.3.287.  378  379  84. Chandrasekhar, S. Radiative transfer ; 1960.  380  85. Mihalas, D. Stellar atmospheres ; 1978; pp. 53-74.  381  86. Bronstein, M. Zum Strahlungsgleichgewichtsproblem von Milne. Zeitschrift fur Physik 1929 , 58 , 696-699. doi:10.1007/BF01339637.  382  87. Ryan, G.; van Eerten, H.; Piro, L.; Troja, E. Gamma-Ray Burst Afterglows in the Multimessenger Era: Numerical Models and Closure Relations. Astrophys. J. 2020 , 896 , 166, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1909.11691]. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ab93cf.  383  384  88. Yuan, W. The Einstein Probe mission. 44th COSPAR Scientific Assembly. Held 16-24 July, 2022, Vol. 44, p. 1966.  385  89. Xue, Y.Q.; Zheng, X.C.; Li, Y.; Brandt, W.N.; Zhang, B.; Luo, B.; Zhang, B.B.; Bauer, F.E.; Sun, H.; Lehmer, B.D.; et al. Amagnetar- powered X-ray transient as the aftermath of a binary neutron-star merger. Nature 2019 , 568 , 198-201, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1904.05368]. doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1079-5.  386  387  388  90. Lin, D.; Irwin, J.A.; Berger, E.; Nguyen, R. Discovery of Three Candidate Magnetar-powered Fast X-Ray Transients from Chandra Archival Data. Astrophys. J. 2022 , 927 , 211, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/2201.06754]. doi:10.3847/1538-4357/ac4fc6.  389  390  91. Zhang, B. Early X-Ray and Optical Afterglow of Gravitational Wave Bursts from Mergers of Binary Neutron Stars. Astrophys. J. Lett. 2013 , 763 , L22, [arXiv:astro-ph.HE/1212.0773]. doi:10.1088/2041-8205/763/1/L22.  391  392   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|