## Magnetic field breakout in ultramassive crystallizing white dwarfs

<!-- image -->

Daniel Blatman and Sivan Ginzburg

<!-- image -->

Racah Institute of Physics, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem 9190401, Israel

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

## ABSTRACT

Ultramassive white dwarfs with masses u1D440 ≳ 1 . 1 M ⊙ probe extreme physics near the Chandrasekhar limit. Despite the rapid increase in observations, it is still unclear how many harbour carbon-oxygen (CO) versus oxygen-neon (ONe) cores. The origin of these white dwarfs and their strong magnetic fields - single stellar evolution or a stellar merger - is another open question. The steep mass-radius relation of the relativistic ultramassive white dwarfs shortens their crystallization time u1D461 cryst, such that the recently proposed crystallization dynamo mechanism may present an alternative to mergers in explaining the early appearance of magnetism in the observed population. However, the magnetic diffusion time from the convective dynamo to the white dwarf's surface delays the magnetic field's breakout time u1D461 break &gt; u1D461 cryst. We compute u1D461 break ( u1D440 ) for CO and ONe ultramassive white dwarfs and compare it to the local 40 pc volume-limited sample. We find that the breakout time from CO cores is too long to account for the observations. ONe crystallization dynamos remain a viable option, but their surrounding non-convective envelopes comprise only a few per cent of the total mass, such that u1D461 break is highly sensitive to the details of stellar evolution.

Key words: stars: evolution - stars: interiors - stars: magnetic fields - white dwarfs

## 1 INTRODUCTION

When a main sequence star exhausts the hydrogen fuel at its centre, the helium ash of nuclear burning builds up a degenerate core while the hydrogen envelope expands on the red giant branch (see Kippenhahn et al. 2012, for a review of standard stellar evolution). Hydrogen burning continues in a thin shell around the degenerate helium core, gradually increasing the core's mass. When the core exceeds a mass of ≈ 0 . 5 M ⊙ , the helium ignites, eventually producing a carbon-oxygen (CO) degenerate core. Helium-shell burning continues to increase the underlying core's mass as the hydrogen envelope expands on the analogous asymptotic giant branch (AGB). Strong stellar winds during the AGB phase remove the hydrogen envelope, truncating the core's growth at some point, leaving behind a degenerate CO white dwarf. However, an initially massive enough star may grow a CO core to a mass of ≈ 1 . 1 M ⊙ , when carbon ignites. Such stars enter another analogous super-AGB phase, with a degenerate oxygen-neon (ONe) core surrounded by a carbonburning shell. If the ONe core approaches the Chandrasekhar mass ( ≈ 1 . 4 M ⊙ ), it collapses in a supernova explosion. However, for a narrow range of initial stellar masses, winds during the superAGB phase truncate the ONe core's growth - potentially leaving behind an ONe white dwarf (Rakavy et al. 1967; Murai et al. 1968; García-Berro et al. 1997; Siess 2006, 2010; Kippenhahn et al. 2012; Doherty et al. 2015, 2017).

Although ultramassive ( ≳ 1 . 1 M ⊙ ) white dwarfs are now being routinely discovered (Thejll et al. 1990; Bergeron et al. 1992; Schmidt et al. 1992; Vennes &amp; Kawka 2008; Hermes et al. 2013; Cummings et al. 2016; Kilic et al. 2021), both the formation and composition of these stars are still uncertain. Whereas some ultramassive white dwarfs seem to be consistent with the single stellar evolution described above (Miller et al. 2022, 2023; Kilic et al. 2023b), others may have formed through a merger of two lower mass white dwarfs (Hollands et al. 2020; Pshirkov et al. 2020; Caiazzo et al. 2021; Kilic et al. 2024); the contribution of these two channels to the overall population appears to be similar (Temmink et al. 2020; Fleury et al. 2022; Kilic et al. 2023a). The critical mass ≈ 1 . 1 M ⊙ distinguishing ONe from CO white dwarfs is sensitive to rotation (Dominguez et al. 1996) and stellar winds (Althaus et al. 2021). Whether or not this carbon-ignition mass is different in white dwarf mergers is still under debate (Schwab 2021a; Wu et al. 2022; Shen et al. 2023). Observationally, a recently detected clustering in the Gaia data (the Q branch) appears to favour CO, rather than ONe, cores for at least some ultramassive white dwarfs (Cheng et al. 2019; Tremblay et al. 2019; Bauer et al. 2020; Blouin et al. 2021; Camisassa et al. 2021; Bédard et al. 2024). On the other hand, the high measured neon abundance in several novae indicates that some ONe white dwarfs also exist (Truran &amp; Livio 1986; Livio &amp; Truran 1994).

[★ E-mail: daniel.blatman1@mail.huji.ac.il](mailto:daniel.blatman1@mail.huji.ac.il)

[† E-mail: sivan.ginzburg@mail.huji.ac.il](mailto:sivan.ginzburg@mail.huji.ac.il)

Many ultramassive white dwarfs are strongly magnetized, with measured magnetic fields typically exceeding 1 MG (Bagnulo &amp; Landstreet 2022). These strong fields are often interpreted as an indication of a double white dwarf merger, with fast differential rotation driving a magnetic dynamo (García-Berro et al. 2012). However, fields of similar strength are also observed for many lower mass CO white dwarfs. One of the promising mechanisms to account for these magnetic CO white dwarfs is compositional convection during their crystallization (Stevenson 1980; Mochkovitch 1983; Isern et al. 1997). When white dwarfs cool down sufficiently, their interiors begin to crystallize from the inside out. The crystal phase is enriched in oxygen and depleted in carbon compared to the liquid phase, generating an unstable compositional gradient in the liquid layers above the crystal core. The ensuing convection may drive a magnetic dynamo on its own (Isern et al. 2017) or transport primordial fossil fields closer to the white dwarf's surface. While the magnitude of such crystallization dynamos is still uncertain (Schreiber et al. 2021; Ginzburg et al. 2022; Fuentes et al. 2023, 2024; Castro-Tapia et al. 2024a; Montgomery &amp; Dunlap 2024), their timing can be compared to the observed magnetic white dwarf ages. Specifically, Bagnulo &amp; Landstreet (2022) found that in a volumelimited sample strong magnetic fields appear predominantly after the onset of crystallization, emphasizing this channel's potential contribution. In Blatman &amp; Ginzburg (2024) we conducted a more careful analysis, by considering the magnetic field's breakout time to the surface rather than the crystallization time. At the early stages of crystallization, the magnetic field is trapped inside the convective region above the crystal core. Only once a significant (and mass dependent) portion of the white dwarf has crystallized, convection approaches the white dwarf's envelope sufficiently and the field reaches the surface by magnetic diffusion. This breakout process delays the emergence of magnetism by up to a few Gyr, depending on the white dwarf's mass.

The two-component phase diagrams of CO and ONe are qualitatively similar, with the heavier component (i.e. oxygen for CO mixtures and neon for ONe mixtures) being more abundant in the crystal phase than in the liquid phase (Medin &amp; Cumming 2010; Blouin &amp; Daligault 2021a,b). This similarity implies that ONe white dwarfs may also harbour crystallization dynamos. Camisassa et al. (2022b) proposed to exploit the difference in crystallization times between CO and ONe white dwarfs with the same mass (see also Bauer et al. 2020; Camisassa et al. 2021, 2022a) to identify the composition of some magnetic ultramassive white dwarfs, assuming that their fields are generated by a crystallization dynamo.

Here, we compute the breakout time of magnetic fields to the surface of both CO and ONe ultramassive white dwarfs, extending our previous work on lower mass CO white dwarfs (Blatman &amp; Ginzburg 2024). This breakout time may be significantly longer than the crystallization time - delaying the observed appearance of magnetism. The magnetic breakout times may be used to identify the formation channel (single star or merger), composition (CO or ONe, and the carbon, oxygen, and neon profiles), and magnetization mechanism (crystallization or merger) of the observed ultramassive white dwarf population.

The remainder of this letter is organized as follows. In Section 2 we derive an analytical model for the crystallization time of ultramassive white dwarfs. In Section 3 we compute the crystallization and breakout times numerically. We discuss the implications on the observed population in Section 4, and summarize our conclusions in Section 5.

## 2 ULTRAMASSIVE WHITE DWARF CRYSTALLIZATION

In Blatman &amp; Ginzburg (2024) we used the Mestel (1952) white dwarf cooling theory to derive an analytical relation u1D461 cryst ∝ u1D440 -5 / 3 between the white dwarf's mass u1D440 and its crystallization time u1D461 cryst . Here, we extend this analytical theory to ultramassive white dwarfs that approach the Chandrasekhar (1931a,b, 1935) mass u1D440 ch .

The pressure u1D443 in the interior of ultramassive white dwarfs is given by relativistic degenerate electrons, approaching u1D443 ∼ ℎu1D450u1D45B 4 / 3 u1D452 , where ℎ is Planck's constant, u1D450 is the speed of light and u1D45B u1D452 is the electron number density. Further from the centre, u1D45B u1D452 decreases and the degenerate electrons become non-relativistic with u1D443 ∼ ℎ 2 u1D45A -1 u1D452 u1D45B 5 / 3 u1D452 , where u1D45A u1D452 is the electron's mass (see Hansen et al. 2004, for details and omitted numerical coefficients). Thanks to the heat conductivity of degenerate electrons, the entire degenerate region is approximately isothermal, with a temperature u1D447 c . As u1D45B u1D452 decreases even further close to the white dwarf's edge, the degeneracy is lifted when the ideal gas pressure becomes comparable to the degeneracy pressure

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where u1D458 B is Boltzmann's constant. Equation (1) indicates that the degeneracy is lifted at u1D45B u1D452 &lt; ( u1D45A u1D452 u1D450 / ℎ ) 3 as long as u1D458 B u1D447 c &lt; u1D45A u1D452 u1D450 2 (white dwarfs crystallize at much lower central temperatures; see van Horn 1968), such that the degeneracy is lifted in the non-relativistic outer layers even for ultramassive white dwarfs.

The white dwarf's cooling is regulated by photon diffusion through the geometrically thin non-degenerate envelope. Using equation (1), the density u1D70C at the base of this envelope scales as u1D70C ∝ u1D45B u1D452 ∝ u1D447 3 / 2 u1D450 and the pressure scales as u1D443 ∝ u1D447 5 / 2 u1D450 . The envelope's optical depth is given by u1D70F ∼ u1D443 u1D705 / u1D454 , where the opacity u1D705 ∝ u1D70Cu1D447 -7 / 2 u1D450 follows Kramers' law and the surface gravity u1D454 = u1D43A u1D440 u1D445 -2 , with u1D43A denoting the gravitational constant and u1D445 the white dwarf's radius. We find the luminosity u1D43F by applying the diffusion equation

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where u1D70E is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, and the radius u1D445 cancels out (Mestel 1952). The white dwarf's heat capacity is dominated by the non-degenerate ions, such that the cooling time down to a given central temperature scales as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the mass u1D440 cancels out as well.

As the white dwarf cools and u1D447 c decreases, its interior begins to crystallize when the plasma coupling parameter at the centre

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

exceeds a critical value Γ ≈ 200 (van Horn 1968; Potekhin &amp; Chabrier 2000; Bauer et al. 2020; Jermyn et al. 2021), where the central density is given by u1D70C u1D450 ∼ u1D440 u1D445 -3 . Using equations (3) and (4), the crystallization time scales as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We adopt the approximate white dwarf mass-radius relation from Hansen et al. (2004) 1

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which is a fit to numerical integration of the hydrostatic equilibrium equation with the accurate u1D443 ( u1D45B u1D452 ) , properly transitioning from u1D443 ∝ u1D45B 5 / 3 u1D452 to u1D443 ∝ u1D45B 4 / 3 u1D452 . In particular, equation (6) reproduces the nonrelativistic limit u1D445 ∝ u1D440 -1 / 3 for u1D440 ≪ u1D440 ch and the ultra-relativistic limit u1D445 → 0 for u1D440 → u1D440 ch . 2 By plugging this relation in equation (5), we find

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

1 Private communication by Eggleton (1982) in Truran &amp; Livio (1986).

2 General relativity becomes important for white dwarfs with u1D440 ≳ 1 . 3 M ⊙ (Carvalho et al. 2018; Althaus et al. 2022, 2023), which are beyond our scope.

whichreducesto u1D461 cryst ∝ u1D440 -5 / 3 for u1D440 ≪ u1D440 ch (Blatman &amp; Ginzburg 2024), and approaches u1D461 cryst → 0 for ultramassive white dwarfs with u1D440 → u1D440 ch . In the following Section 3, we demonstrate that our analytical equation (7) agrees well with a more accurate numerical calculation of u1D461 cryst ( u1D440 ) .

## 3 NUMERICAL RESULTS

We use the stellar evolution code mesa , version r24.03.1 (Paxton et al. 2011, 2013, 2015, 2018, 2019; Jermyn et al. 2023) to construct initial CO and ONe white dwarf models using two different methods. In the first method, CO white dwarfs with u1D440 ⩽ 1 . 05 M ⊙ and ONe white dwarfs with 1 . 1 M ⊙ ⩽ u1D440 ⩽ 1 . 2 M ⊙ are evolved from pre-main sequence progenitors with different initial masses using the test suites make\_co\_wd and make\_o\_ne\_wd . 3 In the second method, we use the relax\_mass\_scale procedure to re-scale the 1 . 05 M ⊙ COwhite dwarf and the 1 . 15 M ⊙ and 1 . 18 M ⊙ ONe white dwarfs (created using the first method) to different total masses u1D440 , while preserving the chemical profile as a function of the relative mass coordinate u1D45A / u1D440 . We then compute the cooling and crystallization of all the initial white dwarf models (created by both methods) using the test suite wd\_cool\_0.6M .

The onset of crystallization is determined by the Skye equation of state (Jermyn et al. 2021) and plotted in Fig. 1. As found in previous studies (Bauer et al. 2020; Camisassa et al. 2021, 2022a,b), ONe white dwarfs crystallize before CO white dwarfs with the same mass (due to the different ion electrical charge). For the most part, our ONe crystallization curve u1D461 cryst ( u1D440 ) is independent of the method used to generate the initial white dwarf model (or the source model used for mass re-scaling), and it fits well our analytical equation (7) with u1D440 ch = 1 . 46 M ⊙ (Hansen et al. 2004; Kippenhahn et al. 2012). Specifically, as indicated by equation (7), the u1D461 cryst ∝ u1D440 -5 / 3 power law bends for ultramassive white dwarfs, such that they crystallize much earlier than lower-mass stars.

During crystallization, the phase separation of CO or ONe into a crystal (enriched with the heavier element) and a liquid (enriched with the lighter element) is computed using the phase\_separation scheme (Bauer 2023), according to the Blouin &amp; Daligault (2021a,b) phase diagrams. This scheme determines the outer radius of the convective region iteratively until a stable composition profile is obtained. We calculate the magnetic diffusion time from this radius to the white dwarf's surface and determine the breakout time u1D461 break similarly to Blatman &amp; Ginzburg (2024).

Fig. 1 demonstrates that unlike u1D461 cryst , the ONe breakout time u1D461 break is highly sensitive to the assumed oxygen and neon profiles. Even a mild difference in the stellar evolution (which we parametrize by applying relax\_mass\_scale to source profiles with slightly different masses: 1 . 15 M ⊙ and 1 . 18 M ⊙ ) leads to a dramatic effect on u1D461 break . The origin of this sensitivity is elucidated in Fig. 2, where we plot the chemical profiles. Similarly to Blatman &amp; Ginzburg (2024), the crystallization-driven convection zone encompasses the approximately uniform inner core of the white dwarf, stopping at the steep compositional gradient above it (vertical magenta lines in Fig. 2). Unlike in the lower-mass CO white dwarfs studied in Blatman &amp; Ginzburg (2024), this convective boundary advances only slightly between u1D461 cryst and u1D461 break . In our ONe white dwarfs, the outer convectively stable envelope contains only a few per cent of the total mass (see also Camisassa et al. 2022b), with the exact value depending critically on the details of stellar evolution. The time it takes magnetic fields to diffuse through this thin envelope to reach the surface is comparable to u1D461 cryst or even longer, leading to large variations in the breakout time.

3 We use the nominal deBoer et al. (2017) 12 C ( u1D6FC, u1D6FE ) 16 O nuclear reaction rates (expanded by Mehta et al. 2022), whereas in Blatman &amp; Ginzburg (2024) both the Kunz et al. (2002) and the Mehta et al. (2022) rates were used.

Figure 1. Crystallization and magnetic field breakout times for CO and ONe white dwarfs. CO white dwarfs with mass u1D440 ⩽ 1 . 05 M ⊙ are evolved from main sequence progenitors, whereas more massive CO white dwarfs are scaled versions of the u1D440 = 1 . 05 M ⊙ model. Similarly, we construct ONe white dwarfs with 1 . 1M ⊙ ⩽ u1D440 ⩽ 1 . 2M ⊙ through stellar evolution (solid red and magenta lines), and scale the 1 . 15 M ⊙ and 1 . 18 M ⊙ models to both lower and higher masses (dashed lines). Whereas the ONe u1D461 cryst ( u1D440 ) is robust and fits our analytical equation (7), the ONe u1D461 break ( u1D440 ) is sensitive to the assumed O/Ne profile, and therefore to the mass of the source model (see Fig. 2). The observed white dwarfs (blue for hydrogen atmospheres and red for helium) are from the volume-limited sample of Bagnulo &amp; Landstreet (2022). Empty dots represent non-magnetic white dwarfs and filled dots mark magnetic ones, with the strength of the measured magnetic field indicated by the number of surrounding circles.

<!-- image -->

In fact, the uncertainty in u1D461 break could be even larger than illustrated in Fig. 1. Chemical profiles of ONe white dwarfs resulting from state-of-the-art stellar evolution calculations by various groups differ substantially from one another (Lauffer et al. 2018; Camisassa et al. 2019; Bauer et al. 2020). These evolutionary calculations are sensitive to uncertain parameters such as convective overshooting and super-AGB winds. The chemical profiles of white dwarf merger remnants are even less constrained (Schwab 2021a,b).

## 4 OBSERVATIONS

We populate Fig. 1 with the volume-limited sample of Bagnulo &amp; Landstreet (2022). They interpreted the early appearance of strong magnetic fields in ultramassive white dwarfs as an indication of a merger origin. While we also find that some ultramassive magnetic white dwarfs are indeed younger than the CO u1D461 cryst ( u1D440 ) line, all of these stars are older than our ONe u1D461 cryst ( u1D440 ) curve. Judging by the crystallization time alone, we may therefore conclude that these ultramassive white dwarfs could have been magnetized by a crystallization dynamo, regardless of whether they are the products of single stellar evolution or a merger. 4 Similarly to Camisassa et al. (2022b), we find that a significant portion of the ultramassive magnetic white dwarfs lie in between the ONe and CO crystallization curves (2 out of 6 ultramassive white dwarfs with fields above a MG). If these stars were magnetized by a crystallization dynamo, then we may determine that they harbour ONe cores. Alternatively, if these stars harbour CO cores, then we may rule out a crystallization dynamo as the source of their magnetism.

Figure 2. Initial neon, oxygen, and carbon abundances u1D44B as a function of the relative mass coordinate u1D45A / u1D440 for the two ONe source models used in Fig. 1, where these profiles are scaled to different white dwarf masses 1 . 0 M ⊙ &lt; u1D440 &lt; 1 . 3 M ⊙ while preserving u1D44B ( u1D45A / u1D440 ) . The crystallization of the white dwarf's core drives convection, which extends up to the compositional transition region (vertical magenta lines). From there, magnetic fields diffuse to the surface. This diffusive envelope is almost twice as massive in models derived from u1D440 = 1 . 15 M ⊙ compared to u1D440 = 1 . 18 M ⊙ , roughly doubling the diffusion time u1D461 diff = u1D461 break -u1D461 cryst, as seen in Fig. 1.

<!-- image -->

Considering the magnetic diffusion time from the convective dynamo to the surface complicates this analysis. Our CO u1D461 break ( u1D440 ) times appear to be too long to account for the observed magnetic ultramassive white dwarfs. While our ONe breakout times are generally shorter - the 1 . 2 M ⊙ full stellar evolution model approaches the observations - the ONe u1D461 break ( u1D440 ) curve critically depends on the assumed O/Ne profile within the star (see Section 3). It therefore remains unclear whether ONe crystallization could explain ultramassive white dwarf magnetism.

The strength of volume-limited samples such as Bagnulo &amp; Landstreet (2022) is the absence of observational bias, but this comes at the cost of a small sample size. For a complementary picture, we also compare our crystallization and breakout curves to the Hardy et al. (2023a,b) sample in Fig. 3. This sample contains almost all the white dwarfs from the Montreal White Dwarf Database 5 (Dufour et al. 2017) that show clear signs of line splitting (magnetic fields u1D435 ≳ 1 MG). This sample is not volume-complete, and as such suffers from various observational biases. In particular, most of the white dwarfs in the sample are drawn from magnitude-limited surveys, in which young stars (i.e. short cooling times) are over-represented. Nevertheless, Fig. 3 demonstrates that at least some ultramassive white dwarfs (as well as lower mass ones) acquire strong magnetic fields before our ONe and CO crystallization times, implying that other magnetization channels must exist.

4 The cooling time (which is reset by mergers), and not the actual age, is the relevant quantity throughout this letter.

Figure 3. Same as Fig. 1, but showing the Hardy et al. (2023a,b) sample of magnetic white dwarfs from the Montreal White Dwarf Database (Dufour et al. 2017). As in Fig. 1, blue markers indicate hydrogen atmospheres (Hardy et al. 2023a), and red markers indicate helium atmospheres (Hardy et al. 2023b). Unlike Fig. 1, this sample is not volume-limited, such that young white dwarfs are over-represented.

<!-- image -->

## 5 CONCLUSIONS

Ultramassive white dwarfs ( u1D440 ≳ 1 . 1 M ⊙ ) have been studied extensively over the last several years both theoretically and observationally. It is still unclear, however, how many of these white dwarfs formed through single stellar evolution and how many through white dwarf mergers, which of them harbour CO vs. ONe cores, and what is the origin of their strong magnetic fields. Bagnulo &amp; Landstreet (2022) argued that the early appearance of strong magnetic fields in ultramassive white dwarfs much younger than a Gyr indicates formation and magnetization by a merger. Camisassa et al. (2022b), on the other hand, pointed out that at least some of these ultramassive white dwarfs could have been magnetized by a convective crystallization dynamo instead (Isern et al. 2017). They suggested that the difference between CO and ONe crystallization times could be used to determine the core composition of these stars. In this letter, we reanalysed the timing of CO and ONe crystallization dynamos by considering the magnetic diffusion time from the outer edge of the convective dynamo to the white dwarf's surface, using the newly implemented phase separation scheme in mesa (Bauer 2023).

[5 https://www.montrealwhitedwarfdatabase.org](https://www.montrealwhitedwarfdatabase.org/)

The steepening mass-radius relation of ultramassive white dwarfs (due to the relativistic degenerate electrons) dramatically shortens their crystallization time u1D461 cryst as a function of mass u1D440 . The crystallization time is shortened further in ONe white dwarfs compared to CO white dwarfs with the same mass -due to the stronger Coulomb interactions of the ions (Bauer et al. 2020; Camisassa et al. 2021, 2022a,b). As a result, the entire ultramassive white dwarf population within the local 40 pc volume-limited sample (Bagnulo &amp; Landstreet 2022) is consistent with an ONe crystallization dynamo - if the diffusion time to the surface is ignored, i.e. if other mechanisms can transport the magnetic field to the surface faster (Charbonneau &amp; MacGregor 2001; MacGregor &amp; Cassinelli 2003; MacDonald &amp; Mullan 2004). About a third of the ultramassive magnetic white dwarfs (notwithstanding the small-number statistics) lie in between the ONe and the CO crystallization curves. For these stars, a CO crystallization dynamo can be safely ruled out, i.e. they either harbour ONe cores or were magnetized through a merger (see also Camisassa et al. 2022b).

However, accounting for the magnetic diffusion time to the surface delays the emergence of magnetic fields from crystallization dynamos. We find that this delay rules out a CO crystallization dynamo scenario for the entire ultramassive white dwarf population in the sample, at least up to u1D440 = 1 . 2 M ⊙ . As for ONe ultramassive white dwarfs, the picture is more complicated. The diffusive envelope in these stars is only a few per cent of the total mass, and it is very sensitive to small variations in the preceding stellar evolution. Therefore, while we find that ONe magnetic breakout times u1D461 break ( u1D440 ) are generally shorter than for CO white dwarfs with the same mass, it remains unclear whether they are short enough to explain the observations.

We conclude that magnetic breakout from ONe - but not CO crystallization dynamos presents a viable alternative to mergers in explaining some observed young magnetic ultramassive white dwarfs. If this is the dominant magnetization channel, then by extrapolating our results from Figs 1 and 2, the non-convective envelope of these stars must be smaller than about 1-2 per cent of their total mass. This stringent constraint on the chemical profile may in turn constrain the stellar evolution; in particular, whether these ultramassive white dwarfs formed from a single star or through a (non-magnetizing) merger. We emphasize that an ONe crystallization dynamo cannot be the sole magnetization mechanism, because some magnetic white dwarfs in magnitude-limited surveys are younger than our ONe u1D461 cryst ( u1D440 ) ; see Fig. 3.

During the revision of this letter, Castro-Tapia et al. (2024b) published an analysis of magnetic diffusion in CO white dwarfs with u1D440 ⩽ 1 . 0 M ⊙ , focusing on the evolution of the surface magnetic field strength u1D435 ( u1D461 ) . It could be interesting to extend this analysis to the ultramassive white dwarfs studied here. Specifically, we find that the initial convection zone in ONe white dwarfs extends to ≈ 0 . 8 u1D445 , maximizing the surface u1D435 according to Castro-Tapia et al. (2024b).

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Ana Antonini, Evan Bauer, Simon Blouin, Jim Fuller, and Na'ama Hallakoun for motivating discussions. We also thank the organizers of the 'Current challenges in the physics of white dwarf stars' workshop in Santa Fe (March 2024) for an excellent meeting where many of the ideas presented here were discussed. Finally, we thank the reviewer for a helpful report which improved the letter. We acknowledge support from the Israel Ministry of Innovation, Science, and Technology (grant No. 1001572596), and from the United States - Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF; grant No. 2022175). MesaScript (Wolf et al. 2023) was used to automate some of the steps in this work.

## DATA AVAILABILITY

The mesa input files required to reproduce our results are available at https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.11583092 .

## REFERENCES

Althaus L. G., et al., 2021, A&amp;A, 646, A30

- Althaus L. G., Camisassa M. E., Torres S., Battich T., Córsico A. H., RebassaMansergas A., Raddi R., 2022, A&amp;A, 668, A58

Althaus L. G., Córsico A. H., Camisassa M. E., Torres S., Gil-Pons P., Rebassa-Mansergas A., Raddi R., 2023, MNRAS, 523, 4492

Bagnulo S., Landstreet J. D., 2022, ApJ, 935, L12

Bauer E. B., 2023, ApJ, 950, 115

Bauer E. B., Schwab J., Bildsten L., Cheng S., 2020, ApJ, 902, 93

Bédard A., Blouin S., Cheng S., 2024, Nature, 627, 286

Bergeron P., Saffer R. A., Liebert J., 1992, ApJ, 394, 228

Blatman D., Ginzburg S., 2024, MNRAS, 528, 3153

Blouin S., Daligault J., 2021a, Phys. Rev. E, 103, 043204

Blouin S., Daligault J., 2021b, ApJ, 919, 87

Blouin S., Daligault J., Saumon D., 2021, ApJ, 911, L5

Caiazzo I., et al., 2021, Nature, 595, 39

Camisassa M. E., et al., 2019, A&amp;A, 625, A87

Camisassa M. E., Althaus L. G., Torres S., Córsico A. H., Rebassa-Mansergas A., Tremblay P.-E., Cheng S., Raddi R., 2021, A&amp;A, 649, L7

Camisassa M. E., Althaus L. G., Koester D., Torres S., Gil-Pons P., Córsico A. H., 2022a, MNRAS, 511, 5198

Camisassa M. E., Raddi R., Althaus L. G., Isern J., Rebassa-Mansergas A., Torres S., Córsico A. H., Korre L., 2022b, MNRAS, 516, L1

Carvalho G. A., Marinho R. M., Malheiro M., 2018, General Relativity and Gravitation, 50, 38

Castro-Tapia M., Cumming

[p. arXiv:2402.01947](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024arXiv240201947C)

Castro-Tapia M., Zhang S., Cumming A., 2024b, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2406.01807

Chandrasekhar S., 1931a, ApJ, 74, 81

Chandrasekhar S., 1931b, MNRAS, 91, 456

Chandrasekhar S., 1935, MNRAS, 95, 207

Charbonneau P., MacGregor K. B., 2001, ApJ, 559, 1094

Cheng S., Cummings J. D., Ménard B., 2019, ApJ, 886, 100

Cummings J. D., Kalirai J. S., Tremblay P. E., Ramirez-Ruiz E., Bergeron P., 2016, ApJ, 820, L18

deBoer R. J., et al., 2017, Reviews of Modern Physics, 89, 035007

Doherty C. L., Gil-Pons P., Siess L., Lattanzio J. C., Lau H. H. B., 2015, MNRAS, 446, 2599

Doherty C. L., Gil-Pons P., Siess L., Lattanzio J. C., 2017, Publ. Astron. Soc. Australia, 34, e056

Dominguez I., Straniero O., Tornambe A., Isern J., 1996, ApJ, 472, 783 Dufour P., Blouin S., Coutu S., Fortin-Archambault M., Thibeault C., Bergeron P., Fontaine G., 2017, in Tremblay P. E., Gaensicke B., Marsh T., eds, Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series Vol. 509,

A., Fuentes J.

R.,

2024a, arXiv e-prints,

```
20th European White Dwarf Workshop. p. 3 ( arXiv:1610.00986 ), doi:10.48550/arXiv.1610.00986 Fleury L., Caiazzo I., Heyl J., 2022, MNRAS, 511, 5984 Fuentes J. R., Cumming A., Castro-Tapia M., Anders E. H., 2023, ApJ, 950, 73 Fuentes J. R., Castro-Tapia M., Cumming A., 2024, ApJ, 964, L15 García-Berro E., Ritossa C., Iben Icko J., 1997, ApJ, 485, 765 García-Berro E., et al., 2012, ApJ, 749, 25 Ginzburg S., Fuller J., Kawka A., Caiazzo I., 2022, MNRAS, 514, 4111 Hansen C. J., Kawaler S. D., Trimble V., 2004, Stellar interiors : physical principles, structure, and evolution. Springer, doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-9110-2 Hardy F., Dufour P., Jordan S., 2023a, MNRAS, 520, 6111 Hardy F., Dufour P., Jordan S., 2023b, MNRAS, 520, 6135 Hermes J. J., Kepler S. O., Castanheira B. G., Gianninas A., Winget D. E., Montgomery M. H., Brown W. R., Harrold S. T., 2013, ApJ, 771, L2 Hollands M. A., et al., 2020, Nature Astronomy, 4, 663 Isern J., Mochkovitch R., García-Berro E., Hernanz M., 1997, ApJ, 485, 308 Isern J., García-Berro E., Külebi B., Lorén-Aguilar P., 2017, ApJ, 836, L28 Jermyn A. S., Schwab J., Bauer E., Timmes F. X., Potekhin A. Y., 2021, ApJ, 913, 72 Jermyn A. S., et al., 2023, ApJS, 265, 15 Kilic M., Bergeron P., Blouin S., Bédard A., 2021, MNRAS, 503, 5397 Kilic M., et al., 2023a, MNRAS, 518, 2341 Kilic M., Córsico A. H., Moss A. G., Jewett G., De Gerónimo F. C., Althaus L. G., 2023b, MNRAS, 522, 2181 Kilic M., Bergeron P., Blouin S., Jewett G., Brown W. R., Moss A., 2024, ApJ, 965, 159 Kippenhahn R., Weigert A., Weiss A., 2012, Stellar Structure and Evolution. Springer, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-30304-3 KunzR.,Fey M.,Jaeger M., Mayer A., Hammer J. W., Staudt G., Harissopulos S., Paradellis T., 2002, ApJ, 567, 643 Lauffer G. R., Romero A. D., Kepler S. O., 2018, MNRAS, 480, 1547 Livio M., Truran J. W., 1994, ApJ, 425, 797 MacDonald J., Mullan D. J., 2004, MNRAS, 348, 702 MacGregor K. B., Cassinelli J. P., 2003, ApJ, 586, 480 Medin Z., Cumming A., 2010, Phys. Rev. E, 81, 036107 Mehta A. K., Buonanno A., Gair J., Miller M. C., Farag E., deBoer R. J., Wiescher M., Timmes F. X., 2022, ApJ, 924, 39 Mestel L., 1952, MNRAS, 112, 583 Miller D. R., Caiazzo I., Heyl J., Richer H. B., Tremblay P.-E., 2022, ApJ, 926, L24 Miller D. R., Caiazzo I., Heyl J., Richer H. B., El-Badry K., Rodriguez A. C., Vanderbosch Z. P., van Roestel J., 2023, ApJ, 956, L41 Mochkovitch R., 1983, A&A, 122, 212 Montgomery M. H., Dunlap B. H., 2024, ApJ, 961, 197 Murai T., Sugimoto D., H¯ oshi R., Hayashi C., 1968, Progress of Theoretical Physics, 39, 619 Paxton B., Bildsten L., Dotter A., Herwig F., Lesaffre P., Timmes F., 2011, ApJS, 192, 3 Paxton B., et al., 2013, ApJS, 208, 4 Paxton B., et al., 2015, ApJS, 220, 15 Paxton B., et al., 2018, ApJS, 234, 34 Paxton B., et al., 2019, ApJS, 243, 10 Potekhin A. Y., Chabrier G., 2000, Phys. Rev. E, 62, 8554 Pshirkov M. S., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 499, L21 Rakavy G., Shaviv G., Zinamon Z., 1967, ApJ, 150, 131 Schmidt G. D., Bergeron P., Liebert J., Saffer R. A., 1992, ApJ, 394, 603 Schreiber M. R., Belloni D., Gänsicke B. T., Parsons S. G., Zorotovic M., 2021, Nature Astronomy, 5, 648 Schwab J., 2021a, ApJ, 906, 53 Schwab J., 2021b, ApJ, 916, 119 Shen K. J., Blouin S., Breivik K., 2023, ApJ, 955, L33 Siess L., 2006, A&A, 448, 717 Siess L., 2010, A&A, 512, A10 Stevenson D. J., 1980, Journal de Physique, 41, C2, 61 Temmink K. D., Toonen S., Zapartas E., Justham S., Gänsicke B. T., 2020, A&A, 636, A31
```

```
Thejll P., Shipman H. L., MacDonald J., Macfarland W. M., 1990, ApJ, 361, 197 Tremblay P.-E., et al., 2019, Nature, 565, 202 Truran J. W., Livio M., 1986, ApJ, 308, 721 van Horn H. M., 1968, ApJ, 151, 227 Vennes S., Kawka A., 2008, MNRAS, 389, 1367 Wolf B., Bauer E., Schwab J., 2023, wmwolf/MesaScript: Updates for the GitHub era, doi:10.5281/zenodo.7847597, https://zenodo.org/records/7847597 Wu C., Xiong H., Wang X., 2022, MNRAS, 512, 2972
```

This paper has been typeset from a T E X/L

```
A T E X file prepared by the author.
```