## Multi-wavelength Signatures of Supernova Shock Breakout from Red Supergiants in Two Dimensions

Wun-Yi Chen （ 陳 文 翊 ） , 1, 2, 3 Ke-Jung Chen, 2,3 Keiichi Maeda, 4

Masaomi Ono, 2,5 Po-Sheng Ou （ 歐 柏 昇 ） , 2, 6 and Friedrich K. R¨ opke 7,3,8

1 National Taiwan University, Graduate Institute of Astrophysics, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.

2 Academia Sinica, Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Taipei 106319, Taiwan, R.O.C.

3 Heidelberger Institut f¨ ur Theoretische Studien, Schloss-Wolfsbrunnenweg 35, 69118 Heidelberg, Germany

4 Department of Astronomy, Kyoto University, Kitashirakawa-Oiwake-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan

5 Astrophysical Big Bang Laboratory (ABBL), RIKEN Pioneering Research Institute (PRI), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan

6 Department of Physics, National Taiwan University, No.1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd., Taipei 10617, Taiwan, R.O.C.

7 Zentrum f¨ ur Astronomie der Universit¨ at Heidelberg, Astronomisches Rechenzentrum, M¨ onchhofstr. 12-14, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

8 Zentrum f¨ ur Astronomie der Universit¨ at Heidelberg, Institut f¨ ur Theoretische Astrophysik, Philosophenweg 12, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

## ABSTRACT

We present new two-dimensional radiation hydrodynamic simulations of supernova shock breakout from red supergiants using the CASTRO code. Our progenitors are 20 and 25 M ⊙ solar-metallicity stars evolved from the zero-age main sequence with MESA and exploded in one dimension using FLASH . We consider a range of circumstellar media (CSM) produced by stellar winds to investigate how pre-explosion mass-loss affects shock breakout. The multigroup flux-limited diffusion scheme in CASTRO captures the interaction between the explosion shock, its radiation precursor, and the surrounding CSM. We find that strong radiation precursors, generated by radiation leakage behind the shock, can drive fluid instabilities and move the effective photosphere outward before the shock reaches the stellar surface. The resulting breakout emissions reach peak luminosities of ∼ 10 44 erg s -1 with full width at half maximum durations of 1-3 hr, fainter and longer than previous 1D models. The light-curve colors gradually evolve from blue to red after the peak. The 25 M ⊙ model with explosion energy E ∼ 1 . 69 × 10 51 erg produces ∼ 10-30% higher maximum luminosity than the 20 M ⊙ model with E ∼ 1 . 09 × 10 51 erg. The dense CSM further extends the breakout rise time by increasing the photon diffusion. These results provide new constraints on red supergiant atmospheres and mass-loss histories prior to core collapse. Although our selected wavelength ranges fall outside the observational bands of missions such as Einstein Probe and ULTRASAT, our study still provides valuable insights into the color evolution of shock breakout and can help guide the interpretation of future observations.

Keywords: Supernovae - Radiative transfer simulations - Stellar winds - Massive stars - Stellar mass loss - Shocks

## 1. INTRODUCTION

The first electromagnetic signal from a supernova (SN) emerges when the shock approaches the stellar surface with its optical depth reduced to τ ∼ c v s , where c is the speed of light and v s is the velocity of the shock. The shock breakout of SNe encodes key information about their progenitor stars, the explosion mechanisms, and surrounding environments, which are available only during the earliest phase of explosion (see, e.g., K. Schawinski et al. 2008; S. M. Couch et al. 2011; S. Gezari et al. 2015; E. Waxman &amp; B. Katz 2017). Detections of this transient phenomenon become increasingly promising through direct observations from wide-field X-ray telescopes on timescales of ≳ 0 . 1 hours (hr) and UV follow-up observations lasting up to a day (A. J. Bayless et al. 2022; G. Hosseinzadeh et al. 2023; M. Shrestha et al. 2024), as well as indirect methods using light echoes and gravitational lensing (E. Dwek &amp; R. G. Arendt 2008; Y. Suwa 2017). Depending on the progenitor radius and circumstellar medium (CSM) density, shock breakout signals from red supergiants (RSGs) can reach ∼ 10 44 erg s -1 and last for several hours to days, making them easier to detect than shock breakouts from blue supergiants (BSGs) and Wolf-Rayet stars (WRs), which only last for several tens of minutes (A. M. Soderberg et al. 2008; A. Suzuki et al. 2016; A. Kozyreva et al. 2020; Gonz´ alez-Tor` a, G. et al. 2023).

To explain the prolonged shock breakout signatures observed in some SNe (R. A. Chevalier &amp; C. M. Irwin 2011; S. Gezari et al. 2015; O. Yaron et al. 2017), a dense CSM in the vicinity of the progenitor is often required, as supported by previous onedimensional (1D) studies (E. Lovegrove et al. 2017; L. Dessart et al. 2017; A. Kozyreva et al. 2022) and recently also by three-dimensional (3D) simulations of envelope pulsations in RSGs (J.-Z. Ma et al. 2025) as well as yellow supergiants (J. A. Goldberg et al. 2025). A sufficiently dense CSM provides large optical depths that regulate the emission from CSM breakouts, enabling shock breakout light curves (LCs) to last for several hours. Furthermore, recent 3D simulations of shock breakouts based on 3D RSG envelope structure have shown that clumpy atmospheric structures can increase photon diffusion times, thereby prolonging the breakout LC (J. A. Goldberg et al. 2022). Together, the clumpy envelope and dense CSM shift the energetic photons emerging from the shock breakout of RSGs to longer wavelengths, producing radiation that spans from the infrared to soft X-rays (B. Katz et al. 2010; A. G. Tolstov et al. 2013; B. Margalit 2022).

Multidimensional and multigroup RHD simulations are required to model the complicated coevolution of gas and radiation during shock breakout in RSGs, where strong mixing occurs during the breakout and shock-CSM interaction phases (B. Katz et al. 2010; W.-Y. Chen et al. 2024). For example, our previous work (W.-Y. Chen et al. 2024) presented the first two-dimensional (2D) multigroup RHD simulations for SN 1987A, demonstrating the dimensional effect and color evolution of the shock breakout. However, our previous models are not directly applicable to RSGs, whose stellar structure differs from that of the BSG used in our SN 1987A study. Meanwhile, multidimensional RHD studies of RSG shock breakout either employ grey radiation transport and cannot track color evolution (e.g., J. A. Goldberg et al. 2022) or estimate color light curves only after breakout in long-term 3D simulations (D. Vartanyan et al. 2025). Therefore, we extend multigroup RHD modeling to RSGs using 2D simulations with CASTRO (A. S. Almgren et al. 2010; A. Almgren et al. 2020) to advance our understanding of shock breakout for RSGs.

We first introduce the progenitor models and numerical methods in § 2. Then, we present the simulation results in § 3, and discuss their astrophysical implications in § 4. Finally, we conclude with a summary of our findings in § 5.

## 2. NUMERICAL METHOD

## 2.1. CASTRO

We perform our 2D multi-wavelength radiation hydrodynamics (RHD) simulations of RSG shock breakout using the CASTRO code. The CASTRO code (A. S. Almgren et al. 2010; A. Almgren et al. 2020) is a public code designed for astrophysical simulations, and it solves the equations of compressible RHD using a higher-order Godunov scheme for hyperbolic radiation fluid and frequency-space advection. Photon diffusion and source-sink terms are treated with a first-order backward Euler method. The code employs a co-moving frame multigroup flux-limited diffusion (MGFLD) formulation (W. Zhang et al. 2011, 2013), and includes self-gravity through a Poisson solver (M. P. Katz et al. 2016). CASTRO supports adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) to resolve the fine structure of fluid instabilities emerging in astrophysical flows.

The RHD module in CASTRO evolves gas and radiation temperatures independently; the gas and radiation temperatures within a given cell can diverge and allow for a nonlocal thermal equilibrium. We use an approximate flux limiter from C. D. Levermore &amp; G. C. Pomraning (1981) to close the radiation momentum equation, relating the radiation flux to the local optical depth. Our frequency groups are logarithmically spaced and range from ∼ 10 14 Hz to ∼ 3 × 10 17 Hz, corresponding to the photon wavelength that spans from ∼ 10 5 ˚ A (infrared) to 10 ˚ A (X-ray). The exact range is model-dependent and follows the group selection strategy of E. Lovegrove et al. (2017) based on the evolution of the radiation energy.

Electron scattering dominates the opacity during shock breakout; therefore, our model assumes temperature-independent opacity κ e = 0 . 32 (cm 2 g -1 ) with assumptions of electron fraction Y e = 0 . 85. We assume that the inelastic scattering fraction f = 10 -4 contributes to absorption κ a = f × κ e (W.-Y. Chen et al. 2024), suggested by W. Zhang et al. (2013); E. Lovegrove et al. (2017). We adopt an ideal-gas equation of state with a constant adiabatic index γ = 5 / 3 and evolve radiation separately using MGFLD. Ionization and recombination effects are not included.

## 2.2. Progenitor Stars 2.2.1. 1D Stellar and Supernova Models

Our 1D RSG progenitors take 20 M ⊙ and 25 M ⊙ solar-metallicity (Z ⊙ ) stars from P.-S. Ou et al. (2023), which contain a large grid of stellar models with MESA (B. Paxton et al. 2011, 2013, 2015, 2018, 2019). These progenitor masses are broadly consistent with previous studies on the explosion of RSG shocks, including the 15 and 25 M ⊙ models in E. Lovegrove et al. (2017) and the ∼ 19 M ⊙ model in J. A. Goldberg et al. (2022). Our progenitors approach the upper mass limit of typical RSG progenitors found for type II SNe ( ´ O. Rodr´ ıguez 2022), although this boundary remains a topic of debate in stellar evolution theory and observational studies (S. J. Smartt et al. 2009; K. Chen &amp; T. Dorn-Wallenstein 2024; E. R. Beasor et al. 2025).

The 20 M ⊙ star evolved to a final mass of ∼ 16 M ⊙ with a radius of 7 . 69 × 10 13 cm (1105 R ⊙ ) after ∼ 8 Myr and the 25 M ⊙ star evolved to a final mass of 17 M ⊙ with a radius of 8 . 34 × 10 13 cm (1200 R ⊙ ) after 6.4 Myr, before they died. Once the star's iron core starts to collapse, we explode the star with the 1D FLASH code (B. Fryxell et al. 2000). Similarly to M. Ono et al. (2020, 2024), the explosion is initiated by instantaneously injecting thermal and kinetic energies around the interface between the iron core and the silicon-rich layer of the progenitor star. The bulk iron core is assumed to collapse into a neutron star, treated as a point-like gravity source. As the SN shock propagates, the computational domain (covered by uniform 1024 cells) is gradually expanded to capture the shock front and the ejecta structure. We use the 19-isotope APPROX reaction network to follow nuclear burning (S. E. Woosley &amp; T. A. Weaver 1995; F. X. Timmes 1999). This network evolves mass fractions of 1 H , 3 He, 4 He, 12 C, 14 N, 16 O, 20 Ne, 24 Mg, 28 Si, 32 S, 36 Ar, 40 Ca, 44 Ti, 48 Cr, 52 Fe, 54 Fe, 56 Ni, protons, and neutrons. It includes alpha-chain reactions, a heavy-ion reaction network, hydrogen burning cycles, photodisintegration of heavy nuclei, and energy loss due to thermal neutrinos. The explosion energies with the synthesized 56 Ni masses for the 20 M ⊙ and 25 M ⊙ stars are 1 . 09 × 10 51 erg (4 × 10 -2 M ⊙ 56 Ni) and 1 . 69 × 10 51 erg (1 . 58 × 10 -1 M ⊙ 56 Ni), respectively. We follow the shock propagation until it reaches beyond the H/He shell boundaries as shown in Figure 1 .

Next, we map the resulting 1D FLASH profiles onto 2D grids of CASTRO , with the assumption of black-body spectra and local thermal equilibrium. We then connect the progenitor to the CSM and apply velocity perturbations with amplitude ∼ 30% of the local fluid speed within the stellar envelope to mimic convective motions (K.-J. Chen et al. 2013). This perturbation amplitude is comparable to previous studies that introduced ∼ 30% velocity perturbations (S. Nagataki et al. 1998) or ∼ 25 % density perturbations (J. Mao et al. 2015) to model mixing in SN explosions. Although these envelope perturbations trigger fluid instabilities, their impact on the resulting LCs is minor compared to the breakout dynamics. Furthermore, we set the perturbation in the CSM to zero because its origins are highly uncertain.

Although our 1D progenitor stars and their explosion profiles are globally spherical, neglecting multidimensional effects during the core-collapse and early explosion phases (e.g., A. Suzuki et al. 2016; K. Nakamura et al. 2022; T. Wang &amp; A. Burrows 2024), the subsequent explosion shock modeled in 2D CASTRO runs can drive strong mixing and generate significant multidimensional features.

The size of our 2D cylindrical box is 10 15 cm on the r axis and 2 × 10 15 cm on the z axis, resolved with fixed grids of 4096 × 8192. We apply reflective boundary conditions along the symmetry at r = 0 ( z axis) and outflow boundary conditions elsewhere. Our 2D simulations adopt cylindrical symmetry, in which the 3D space is mapped onto a 2D domain by eliminating the azimuthal dimension. In this setup, symmetry about the z -axis must be preserved, and we therefore impose reflective boundary conditions to properly model the stellar interior. The remaining outer boundaries are set to outflow to allow the ejecta to freely expand following the explosion. We evolve each model for ∼ 48-72 hr, following the shock as it propagates through the hydrogen envelope, breaks out of the stellar surface, and produces rising and fading LCs prior to the onset of hydrogen recombination of envelope.

## 2.2.2. Stellar winds from RSGs

We assume a fiducial RSG wind mass-loss rate ˙ M ∼ 6 × 10 -6 M ⊙ yr -1 with the constant wind velocity of v w ∼ 3 . 6 × 10 6 cms -1 ( Gonz´ alez-Tor` a, G. et al. 2023) and calculate the corresponding CSM density based on the radial distance r from the star:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where α is a scaling factor. By adopting α of 1.0 and 5.0 times the fiducial rate, we investigate the impact of CSM on SN shock breakout (N. Smith 2014). We note that the actual CSM structure around RSGs can be complicated and contain a densely confined shell or clumpy disk, as suggested by observations (O. Yaron et al. 2017; D. Hiramatsu et al. 2023; J. T. van Loon 2025). L. Dessart et al. (2017) used 1D RHD simulations to study shock breakout through a dense CSM, reproducing the narrow spectral lines in SN 2013fs. They suggested that prolonged breakout emission could result from an extended atmosphere or slow wind, although the outcome depends sensitively on the density gradient between the envelope and inner CSM, as well as radiation interaction within. Since 1D models cannot capture the mixing of shock-CSM collisions, multidimensional simulations are essential to resolve the resulting structures and emission features (W.-Y. Chen et al. 2024).

We summarize the model naming: R20 , R25 , R20T , and R25T in Table 1, where R stands for R SG and the numbers represent the progenitor ZAMS mass. The capital letter T represents a T hick CSM.

## 2.3. Light Curve Calculations

To retrieve the observational signatures, we calculate the color LCs based on our RHD simulations following the method of W.-Y. Chen et al. (2024). Specifically, Note -α is the scaling parameter for the CSM density profile determined by the stellar wind based on Equation (1).

Figure 1. 1D density and radial velocity profiles for R20 and R25 when the shock reaches the hydrogen envelope. At this moment, the corresponding shock velocity is v = 6 . 35 × 10 8 cms -1 for R20 and v = 6 . 8 × 10 8 cms -1 for R25 . The original stellar radii of R20 and R25 are R ∗ = 7 . 6 × 10 13 cm and R ∗ = 8 . 3 × 10 13 cm, respectively.

<!-- image -->

Table 1. Model Summary

| Model  Progenitor star mass  CSM density via  α  R20  20  M  ⊙  1.0  R25  25  M  ⊙  1.0  R20T  20  M  ⊙  5.0  R25T  25  M  ⊙  5.0   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

we extract the frequency-dependent radiation flux ( F ν ) and compute the effective luminosity as L ν = 4 πr 2 F ν for a distant observer located at r &gt; r ( τ = 2 / 3) based on the flux at r ≈ 2 × 10 14 cm. We calculate angle-dependent LCs at five viewing angles: 15 ◦ , 30 ◦ , 45 ◦ , 60 ◦ , and 75 ◦ , assuming cylindrical symmetry to project the 2D data onto a pseudo-3D photosphere. Light-travel-time corrections (LTTCs) are applied to each emitting surface element and smooth the LCs. In general, LCs vary with viewing angles, and we select LCs with a viewing angle of 45 ◦ for model comparison. The duration of the LC is defined as the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the luminosity, consistent with observational interpretations (R. A. Chevalier &amp; C. M. Irwin 2011) and the shock crossing time (J. A. Goldberg et al. 2022).

## 2.4. Effect of Atmosphere-CSM Density Gradient

To ensure numerical stability, we introduce a buffer region with a power-law density profile extending from the stellar surface to the inner CSM, with a width of ≈ 4 × 10 12 cm. This buffer places the stellar atmosphere slightly out of hydrostatic equilibrium, leading to a mild expansion. The left panel of Figure 2 shows that the envelope expands slowly with v ≤ 10 4 cms -1 , negligible compared to the shock velocity v s ≥ 10 8 cms -1 . The luminosity of this expansion, shown in the right panel of Figure 2 , is negligible compared to the breakout radiation. Therefore, the buffer has only a minimal impact on modeling shock breakout.

We also find that the boundaries of the 2D simulation domain can introduce minor numerical artifacts, producing slightly enhanced velocities close to the z axis. Nevertheless, these effects remain small and the global shock morphology remains nearly spherical.

## 3. RESULTS

## 3.1. Gas Dynamics of Shock Breakout

We first show the evolution of density and velocity from our models in Figure 3 . As shown in the left column of Figure 3 , the shock initially resides in optically thick regions well below the photosphere. The SN shocks start to break out and emit photons when they approach the stellar surface, where the local optical depth drops below τ ≲ c/v s . Right before the breakout occurs, the escaping radiation forms a radiation precursor (RP) ahead of the shock front, and it accelerates the overlaying CSM to ∼ 5-30 % speed of light depending on the explosion energy and CSM properties. Due to strong radiative cooling, the gas structure behind the RP is subject to fluid instabilities characterized by large density and velocity inhomogeneities. The resulting mixing alters the photosphere of shock breakout (K. Schawinski et al. 2008; W.-Y. Chen et al. 2024).

To examine the gas dynamics, we show the radial profiles of density, velocity, and temperature extracted from different viewing angles and epochs in Figure 4 and Figure 5 . Our 2D simulations exhibit smooth density transitions and temperature gradients across the forward shock (FS) compared to the initial shock structure shown in Figure 1 .

Figure 2. The snapshot of gas and radiation energy densities before the shock reaches the stellar surface for R20 . Cyan and red vectors represent the velocity and radiation flux, respectively. The pink dashed line indicates the location of the photosphere. Rayleigh-Taylor fingers emerge around the contact discontinuity near ∼ 4 × 10 13 cm. The atmosphere expands with a velocity that is negligible compared to the shock velocity.

<!-- image -->

Between the FS and the contact discontinuity, the emerging Rayleigh-Taylor fingers generate mild angular fluctuations. The RP accelerated structure (RPS) amplifies the inhomogeneous and anisotropic emission as the shock evolves. Approximately 2 hr before reaching the maximum luminosity, the gas in RPS is accelerated to ≳ 10 9 cms -1 in models R20 and R25 , while in the dense CSM models R20T and R25T , the RPS velocities reach ∼ 3 × 10 8 cms -1 . The mixing produces clumpy structures in both the stellar atmosphere and the overlaying CSM, resulting in inhomogeneous optical depths and altering the photosphere properties. After the luminosity reaches its peak, the RPS inhomogeneities continue to evolve, and the FS begins to collide with the inner CSM. In summary, multidimensional RHD facilitates radiation leakage from FS, enhances RPS formation, and substantially alters shock breakout LCs similar to W.-Y. Chen et al. (2024).

Figure 3. The evolution of the shock breakout for R20 , R20T , R25 , and R25T shown in each row. Each column, from left to right, represents breakout phases at pre-breakout, maximum luminosity, and post-breakout. The pink dashed line marks the photosphere. In general, the stellar surface remains intact, but RT instabilities have developed within the envelope at the pre-breakout phase. When the breakout occurs and its emission reaches its peak, the velocity contour shows large velocity fluctuations in the CSM, indicating the RPS has started to develop and affects the locations of the photosphere. Some of the CSM can be accelerated by the radiation up to v ∼ 10 10 cms -1 in R20 and R25 but v ∼ 10 9 cms -1 in R20T and R25T . The dense CSM can enlarge the radius of the photosphere and delay the timing of shock breakout. The velocity contours look noisy because of the small-scale velocities driven by the RHD instabilities.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4. Evolution of the 1D density, velocity, and temperature profiles for R20 (left) and R25 (right) based on viewing angles of 15 ◦ (dotted), 60 ◦ (dashed), and angle-averaged (solid). Colors indicate key epochs: ∼ 30 hr pre-maximum luminosity (blue), ∼ 2 hr pre-maximum (orange), maximum luminosity (green), and post-breakout (red). As time evolves, angle-dependent profiles start to deviate significantly due to the developing RPS that causes large fluctuations in velocity and temperature of the CSM.

<!-- image -->

## 3.2. LCs of Shock Breakout

Shock breakout signals encode key information about the stellar radius ( R ∗ ) and envelope properties of the SN progenitor star. A commonly estimated duration of shock breakout is the light-travel time t ∼ R ∗ /c (B. Katz et al. 2010; E. Lovegrove et al. 2017; Y. Suwa 2017). However, in reality, the shock breakout is affected by the envelope properties that make its emission a continuous process, rather than an instantaneous flash from the surface. It begins with photon leakage from behind the shock front at optical depths τ ∼ c/v s ∼ 10 2 -10 3 , proceeds through the formation of the RPS at τ ∼ 2 / 3, and ends once the trapped radiation energy is released. The breakout duration is therefore governed by the optical depth between the explosion shock and the RPS. It is sensitive to hydrodynamic mixing, the extent of the stellar atmosphere, and the CSM density structure.

Figure 5. Evolution of the 1D density, velocity, and temperature profiles for R20T (left) and R25T (right) based on viewing angles of 15 ◦ (dotted), 60 ◦ (dashed), and angle-averaged (solid). Colors indicate key epochs: ∼ 30 hr pre-maximum luminosity (blue), ∼ 2 hr pre-maximum (orange), maximum luminosity (green), and post-breakout (red). Similar to Figure 4 , as time evolves, angle-dependent profiles start to deviate more due to the developing RPS that causes large fluctuations in velocity and temperatures of CSM. However, the amount of deviations in angle-dependent profiles of R20T / R25T is less than that of R20 / R25 due to the dense CSM.

<!-- image -->

We present the color LCs from our simulations in Figure 6 . To facilitate comparison among different models, the color LCs for a given model are temporally aligned with the time of the maximum luminosity. All light curves exhibit three distinct evolutionary phases: rise, peak, and decline. The breakout emission is dominated by ultraviolet radiation with characteristic wavelengths of ≈ 50-200 ˚ A. The maximum UV luminosity reaches ∼ (1-3) × 10 44 erg s -1 for all models, with FWHM durations of approximately 1-3 hr. The pre-shock blackbody emission ( ≪ 10 40 erg s -1 ) is negligible compared to the breakout luminosity ( ≳ 10 43 -10 44 erg s -1 ). The maximum luminosities and LC durations are summarized in Table 2.

In Figure 6 , R20 and R25 both show a rapid rise in LCs and a gradual decay with FWHM durations of ∼ 1-3 hr. Short-wavelength (soft X-ray/UV) emission rises and decays more sharply, whereas radiation of longer wavelengths rises and decays more gradually. The maximum luminosities of R25 exceed those of R20 by ∼ 1030 %, consistent with a larger R ∗ and explosion energy in R25 . The durations of the FWHM of ∼ 1-3 hr are longer than the analytic estimates of around ∼ 0.5-1 hr (B. Katz et al. 2010; E. Nakar &amp; R. Sari 2010), but align well with multidimensional RSG breakout studies that include radiative diffusion effects (J. A. Goldberg et al. 2022).

For models with dense CSM, R20T and R25T , exhibit ∼ 50 % lower maximum luminosities, and they peak 2-4 hr later than R20 and R25 . LCs of R20T and R25T display smoother profiles and a mild pre-maximum shoulder at ∼ 2-3 hr before the major peak, driven by the heating of RPS and enhanced photon trapping in the dense CSM. The dense CSM prolongs effective diffusion time and shifts the emission toward longer wavelengths.

Figure 7 presents the bolometric LCs of all models. The LCs computed from different viewing angles show minor variations, reflecting small-scale inhomogeneities caused by mixing from RPS. Interestingly, models with dense CSM exhibit extended LC profiles, characterized by an early-rising bump preceding the main peak. Overall, the multidimensional radiation-hydrodynamic simulations naturally reproduce the diversity of breakout LCs arising from variations in progenitor size and CSM density.

## 4. DISCUSSION

## 4.1. Effect of Progenitor Stars

As shown in Figure 6 , the LCs of shorter-wavelength ( λ ≤ 100 ˚ A) evolve more rapidly than those of longer-wavelength ( λ ≳ 300 ˚ A) because the high-energy photons from the FS quickly heat the CSM to form RPS and shift redder. Furthermore, the longer-wavelength radiation later streams from the cooling of the shocked envelope, which prolongs LCs. We also show the evolution of the spectral energy distribution (SED) of R20 in Figure 8 . Before approaching the peak luminosity, the wavelength of dominant photon energy stays at λ ∼ 100-150 ˚ A and the corresponding Note -Center ∗ gives the central wavelength of each selected radiation group used for R20 , R25 , and R25T , while R20T adopts different values for the numerical stability shown in the parentheses.

Figure 6. Multigroup LCs of all models at θ = 45 ◦ . For comparison, the location of maximum luminosity has been shifted to t = 0. Colors indicate the central wavelengths for each band. The luminosity starts to rise ∼ 2-4 hr before reaching its peak, where the bands with shorter wavelength radiation emerge and peak earlier than those of longer wavelengths. R25 have higher luminosity compared to R20 . The LCs of R20T and R25T are broader and less luminous than those of R20 and R25 . Due to a dense CSM, the post-maximum emission of R20T can be even overtaken by the red colors.

<!-- image -->

Table 2. Characteristics of Multigroup LCs

| R20  R25  R20T  R25T  No.  Center  ∗  ( ˚  A)  Peak  (erg s  -  1  )  FWHM  (hr)  Peak  (erg s  -  1  )  FWHM  (hr)  Peak  (erg s  -  1  )  FWHM  (hr)  Peak  (erg s  -  1  )  FWHM  (hr)  1  615.63 (1912.32)  9  .  96  ×  10  42  2.72  1  .  31  ×  10  43  3.51  7  .  22  ×  10  42  5.63  9  .  60  ×  10  42  7.29  2  461.66 (1159.42)  1  .  82  ×  10  43  2.70  2  .  54  ×  10  43  3.06  1  .  41  ×  10  43  5.08  1  .  88  ×  10  43  5.03  3  346.19 (702.94)  3  .  15  ×  10  43  2.72  4  .  60  ×  10  43  2.68  2  .  59  ×  10  43  4.48  3  .  44  ×  10  43  4.22  4  259.61 (426.19)  5  .  04  ×  10  43  2.77  7  .  67  ×  10  43  2.25  4  .  36  ×  10  43  3.86  5  .  78  ×  10  43  3.71  5  194.68 (258.39)  7  .  25  ×  10  43  2.29  1  .  15  ×  10  44  2.04  6  .  52  ×  10  43  3.39  8  .  79  ×  10  43  3.26  6  145.99 (156.66)  9  .  44  ×  10  43  2.09  1  .  56  ×  10  44  1.89  8  .  39  ×  10  43  3.10  1  .  22  ×  10  44  2.92  7  109.48 (94.98)  1  .  14  ×  10  44  2.10  1  .  86  ×  10  44  1.65  9  .  12  ×  10  43  2.74  1  .  48  ×  10  44  2.50  8  82.10 (57.59)  1  .  38  ×  10  44  2.17  1  .  92  ×  10  44  1.48  7  .  72  ×  10  43  2.67  1  .  54  ×  10  44  2.34  9  61.56 (34.91)  1  .  62  ×  10  44  2.60  1  .  90  ×  10  44  1.54  4  .  87  ×  10  43  2.46  1  .  37  ×  10  44  2.07  10  46.17 (21.17)  1  .  85  ×  10  44  2.69  2  .  02  ×  10  44  1.89  2  .  10  ×  10  43  2.32  1  .  06  ×  10  44  2.01  11  34.62 (12.83)  2  .  44  ×  10  44  1.23  3  .  43  ×  10  44  1.59  5  .  90  ×  10  42  2.37  1  .  05  ×  10  44  1.84   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

flux increases by a factor of 100 to the peak within 1.5 hr. After passing the peak luminosity, the wavelength of dominant photon energy gradually shifts to ∼ 300 ˚ A and the corresponding flux decreases by a factor of 10 compared to the peak within 3.7 hr.

Figure 7. Bolometric LCs for all models viewed at θ = 45 ◦ , the semi-transparent lines within the same color show other viewing angles for the same model. For comparison, the location of maximum luminosity has been shifted to t = 0. Models with a denser CSM exhibit earlier radiation heating, beginning ∼ 8 hr before reaching their maximum luminosity. The rise times to maximum luminosity are 4.8, 5.6, 7.1, and 7.7 hr for R20 , R25 , R20T , and R25T , respectively. The subplot shows the zoom-in around the maximum luminosities, showing the order of peak brightness as R25 &gt; R20 &gt; R25T &gt; R20T .

<!-- image -->

Comparing the color LCs of shock breakout helps clarify the explosion energy and the stellar structure of progenitor stars (J. A. Goldberg et al. 2022). As shown in Figure 7 , the bolometric LCs of R25 are approximately 30 % brighter than those of R20 , reflecting its higher explosion energy. Furthermore, Table 2 indicates that the shorter-wavelength emission of R20 (30 ≲ λ ≲ 100 ˚ A) persists longer, whereas its longer-wavelength emission ( λ ≳ 300 ˚ A) declines more quickly compared to R25 . These differences arise from both the explosion energy and the structure of the hydrogen envelope.

Studies by S.-C. Yoon &amp; M. Cantiello (2010); J. Fuller (2017) imply that the eruptive mass loss of massive stars can significantly alter the RSG structure prior to the onset of SNe. For example, steep density gradients in the atmosphere produce sharper, more luminous breakouts, while shallower gradients produce a dimmer emission (E.

Lovegrove et al. 2017; P.-S. Ou et al. 2023). If an RSG contains an extensive and optically thin layer attached to its original envelope, it can also prolong the breakout LCs by increasing the photon diffusion time (T. J. Moriya et al. 2015). Furthermore, the clumpy envelope can significantly alter the signatures of shock breakouts. Recent 3D RSG models show that large-scale convective motion in the envelope and the generation of clumpy structures can increase the durations of the breakout (J. A. Goldberg et al. 2022). Our time-resolved multigroup LCs offer diagnostics to break down these structural degeneracies into the observables of shock breakout.

Furthermore, our RSG models exhibit distinct shock breakout signatures compared to those of Wolf-Rayet (WR) stars and blue supergiant (BSG) models with CSM interaction. WR breakouts, such as SN 2008D, show durations of ∼ 0.1 hr in the presence of dense CSM (S. M. Couch et al. 2010, 2011; N. Sapir et al. 2013; G. Svirski &amp; E. Nakar 2014), while BSG models produce ∼ 0.5 hr X-ray peaks (W.-Y. Chen et al. 2024). For example, the SN 1987A progenitor, with a radius of 3 × 10 12 cm and a shock width of ∼ 10 12 cm, yields maximum luminosities ∼ 10 46 erg s -1 and FWHM durations of ∼ 0.5 hr (L. Ensman &amp; A. Burrows 1992; W.-Y. Chen et al. 2024). In contrast, breakouts in RSGs are typically longer and dimmer due to their extended, low-density envelopes, which cause the shock to decelerate and heat up the envelope over a longer timescale (B. Katz et al. 2010). Observational constraints from K. Schawinski et al. (2008) show UV breakout luminosities of ∼ 10 44 erg s -1 with durations of several hours, in contrast to compact progenitors such as SN 2008D that exhibit X-ray bursts of ∼ 10 46 erg s -1 over ∼ 100 seconds (A. M. Soderberg et al. 2008). Due to an extensive hydrogen envelope in RSG, the breakout emission is converted from X-ray to UV, and the LC duration extends to several hours.

## 4.2. Effect of CSM Profiles

RSGs typically undergo substantial mass loss before the iron core collapse. In some cases, multiple giant eruptions expel part of the envelope shortly before the explosion, producing dense CSM that can alter the observed SN LCs (S. Gezari et al. 2015; G. Gr¨ afener &amp; J. S. Vink 2016). Previous 1D RHD studies have shown that shock and dense CSM interactions can prolong the LCs of shock breakout and produce higher luminosities due to a large photosphere radius with more radiation energy through shock heating (E. O. Ofek et al. 2010; R. A. Chevalier &amp; C. M. Irwin 2011). To fit with the late-time shock breakout observations, 1D models usually require an extremely-high mass-loss rate of ˙ M ∼ 10 -2 M ⊙ yr -1 (B. Margalit 2022; M. Hu et al. 2025). 1D models of L. Dessart et al. (2017) demonstrate that such winds can produce redder, broader LCs with pre-maximum shoulders. In contrast, our multidimensional simulations show that RPS and mixing naturally enhance the effective photon diffusion time, yielding similarly extended breakout durations and morphological features without requiring such extreme wind densities. Consequently,

Figure 8. Evolution of spectral energy distribution (SED) for R20 during the shock breakout. The SED is based on the radiation flux of different photon energy groups extracted at r = 9 × 10 13 cm at the viewing angle θ = 45 ◦ . Colored profiles represent different epochs of SED relative to the luminosity peak. We use the color circles to mark the location of peak flux for each SED, and a black dashed line with an arrow shows the evolution of SED peaks at different times. Before the luminosity peak, the peak flux of λ ∼ 120-200 ˚ A rises sharply in flux within ∼ 1 hr. After the luminosity peak, the flux peak of SED shifts to longer wavelengths of λ ∼ 200-350 ˚ A and the magnitude of peak flux decreases gradually.

<!-- image -->

1D models that neglect multidimensional mixing tend to underestimate LC durations and overestimate peak luminosities (see discussion in J. A. Goldberg et al. 2022).

Adense CSM increases the photospheric radius; meanwhile, it absorbs some fraction of the radiation energy from the RP to drive its expansion. As a result, the total escaping radiation is reduced due to the higher effective optical depth, leading to a lower peak luminosity during shock breakout.

In our multidimensional simulations, we assume a spherically symmetric dense CSM structure for models R20T and R25T . As shown in Figure 7 , comparing R20 and R25 with their CSM counterparts ( R20T and R25T ) reveals that models with dense CSM produce broader and dimmer LCs. For example, the photospheric radii of R20 and R20T are 8 . 1 × 10 13 cm and 1 . 1 × 10 14 cm, respectively. The dense CSM also reduces the photospheric temperature from T ∼ 2 × 10 5 K in R20 to ∼ 6 × 10 4 K in R20T . Consequently, the LCs of R20T are dominated by longer-wavelength emission relative to those of R20 , as shown in Figure 6 .

The LC durations can be estimated from the shock crossing time at the breakout radius (e.g., E. Waxman &amp; B. Katz 2017):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where v is the gas velocity in the photosphere, τ = c/v is the optical depth, and l = 1 / ( κρ ) is the mean free path of the photon. This yields a breakout duration of ∼ 0 . 61 hr for R20 and ∼ 0.72 hr for R20T , corresponding to a ∼ 20 % increase. This trend is consistent with the averaged durations of color LCs, which are 2 . 37 hr for R20 and 3 . 12 hr for R20T .

Asimilar comparison between R20T and R25T gives estimated breakout durations of 0 . 72 hr and 0 . 8 hr, respectively. Again, this agrees with the averaged duration of color LCs, which increases from 3 . 12 hr in R20T to 3 . 34 hr in R25T .

The RPS modifies the breakout timescale by early RP leakage at the rising phase and increases the effective optical depth through CSM mixing. To quantify this effect on the bolometric LCs ( Figure 7 ), we perform a linear fit relating the breakout rise time, estimated from the onset and the peak of breakout emission, to the RSG stellar radius and its mass-loss rate

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where R ∗ /c is the LTT in hours. The intercept (4.63 hr) accounts for the dynamical and geometric contributions, while the coefficient 0.75 represents the increase in diffusion time due to the denser CSM.

Our 2D LCs agree with the shock breakout observation in terms of LC durations, for example, SNLS-04D2dc, PS1-13arp, and SN 2016gkg (K. Schawinski et al. 2008; S. Gezari et al. 2015; M. C. Bersten et al. 2018). In contrast, previous 1D models would require orders-of-magnitude higher mass-loss rates for creating a dense CSM (S. Ginzburg &amp; S. Balberg 2014; F. F¨ orster et al. 2018) or tailored stellar structures with an inflated envelope or convective atmosphere (T. J. Moriya et al. 2015; J. A. Goldberg et al. 2022) to yield similar durations.

## 4.3. Important Caveats

Multigroup simulations offer observational diagnostics for identifying extended breakout signatures of RSG explosions. Although our 2D simulations mitigate the mixing deficiency present in 1D models, which often produces an artificially thin shell at the shock front, their dynamics still differ from true 3D behavior, where turbulent energy cascades from large to small scales (K.-J. Chen et al. 2023). However, 3D effects have a limited impact on shock breakout signals without highly asymmetric explosions. Our 2D results are consistent with 3D shock breakout simulations considering the clumpy envelope (J. A. Goldberg et al. 2022). We note that the FLD

approximation adopted in this study may become less accurate near the photosphere and in optically thin regions, which represents one of the main caveats of our approach.

We adopted simple explosion conditions by using 1D spherical progenitor stars and explosion models, as well as constant stellar winds for CSM. In reality, the explosion can be highly asymmetric with clumpy CSM as suggested by O. Yaron et al. (2017); T.-W. Chen et al. (2025). Moreover, the constant electron scattering opacity may be oversimplified when radiation is transported to cooler, denser CSM regions, where hydrogen recombination and gas metallicity may significantly influence bound-bound and bound-free absorptions.

Although our multigroup light curves primarily cover the extreme-UV to soft X-ray regime, they capture the critical photospheric cooling phase that bridges current and future wide-field surveys. In particular, our simulations resolve the spectral peak shifting from ∼ 100 ˚ A toward longer wavelengths ( Figure 8 ). Current and upcoming space observatories such as Einstein Probe (EP; ∼ 3-25 ˚ A; W. Yuan et al. 2025; H. Cheng et al. 2025) and ULTRASAT ( ∼ 2300-2900 ˚ A; Y. Shvartzvald et al. 2024) will be able to probe shock breakouts in great detail. Unfortunately, our selected energy ranges fall outside the observational bands of EP and ULTRASAT, preventing direct quantitative predictions for these missions. Nevertheless, our study provides valuable insights into the color evolution of shock breakout and can still help guide the interpretation of future observations.

Our multidimensional simulations demonstrate that fluid instabilities of the RPS maintain a prolonged effective diffusion time and alter color evolution. This implies that inferring progenitor properties by fitting 1D templates to observations may introduce systematic biases (G. P. Srinivasaragavan et al. 2025). Our results therefore highlight the necessity of using multidimensional RHD models to correctly interpret the multi-band time delays and spectral energy distributions of events like EP250827b (H. Sun et al. 2025).

## 5. CONCLUSIONS

We present the first 2D multigroup RHD simulations of RSG shock breakouts for 20 M ⊙ and 25 M ⊙ solar-metallicity progenitors, explicitly accounting for radiation precursor structures (RPS) across a range of CSM densities. The multidimensional geometry greatly improves the treatment of RPS by enabling more realistic radiation transport and mixing processes that are absent in 1D calculations. Our results show that strong radiation precursors originating from radiation leakage behind the explosion shock can drive fluid instabilities and shift the photosphere location prior to shock emergence.

The resulting shock breakout emissions reach peak luminosities of ∼ 10 44 erg s -1 with full-width half-maximum durations of 1-3 hr, substantially dimmer and longer than those from blue supergiant progenitors, which typically peak at ∼ 10 46 erg s -1

with durations of ∼ 0 . 5 hr. The corresponding LC colors evolve gradually from blue to red after the peak. We find that the 25 M ⊙ model with an explosion energy of E ∼ 1 . 69 × 10 51 erg produces ∼ 10-30% higher peak luminosities than the 20 M ⊙ model with E ∼ 1 . 09 × 10 51 erg. If a dense CSM surrounds the progenitor, the rising time of the breakout luminosity is extended due to the increased photon diffusion time in the denser medium.

Our results also demonstrate that multidimensional effects make shock breakout much more sensitive to CSM properties than predicted by previous 1D or analytic models, which typically yield rise times of ≲ 1 hr for RSGs (E. Lovegrove et al. 2017; B. Margalit 2022; J. A. Goldberg et al. 2022). The LCs from our 2D simulations show better agreement with observations than previous 1D models, which often require invoking extreme values of ˙ M ≳ 10 -3 M ⊙ yr -1 to account for delayed breakout signals (M. Tanaka et al. 2016; F. F¨ orster et al. 2018; G. Hosseinzadeh et al. 2023). Therefore, previous 1D models likely overestimate the required mass-loss rate to reproduce the observed breakout LCs.

Our results provide new insights into the radii and atmospheric structures of red supergiants, offering a promising avenue for probing their mass-loss histories and the pre-explosion conditions of massive stars. Future work will explore more complex CSM geometries and perform fully three-dimensional RHD simulations with improved opacity treatments to further refine our understanding of shock breakout physics and the diverse circumstellar environments associated with massive star explosions.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This research is supported by the National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan, under grant No. MOST 110-2112-M-001-068-MY3, NSTC 113-2112-M-001-028, 114-2811-M-001-094, and the Academia Sinica, Taiwan, under a career development award under grant No. AS-CDA-111-M04. KC acknowledges the support of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. WC acknowledges support of the National Taiwan University Scholarship for Direct Pursuit of Doctoral Degree, the Scholarship of the Chung Hwa Rotary Education Foundation (Rotary International District 3490, Sanchung-Sanyang Rotary Club), and the 2025 National Science and Technology Council-Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdienst (NSTC-DAAD) Summer Institute Programme. KM acknowledges support from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI grant Nos. 24KK0070 and 24H01810. Our computing resources were supported by the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science User Facility operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231, and the KAWAS Cluster at the Academia Sinica Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics (ASIAA). The software, FLASH , used in this work was developed in part by the DOE NNSA- and DOE office of Science-supported Flash Center for Computational Science at the University of Chicago and the University of Rochester. The work of FKR is supported by the Klaus Tschira Foundation, by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) - RO 3676/7-1, project number 537700965, and by the European Union (ERC, ExCEED, project number 101096243). Views and opinions expressed are, however, those of the authors only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.

## REFERENCES

Almgren, A., Sazo, M. B., Bell, J., et al. 2020, Journal of Open Source Software, 5, 2513, doi: 10.21105/joss.02513

Almgren, A. S., Beckner, V. E., Bell, J. B., et al. 2010, ApJ, 715, 1221, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/715/2/1221

Bayless, A. J., Fryer, C., Brown, P. J., et al. 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 931, 15, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac674c

Beasor, E. R., Smith, N., &amp; Jencson, J. E. 2025, ApJ, 979, 117,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad8f3f

Bersten, M. C., Folatelli, G., Garc´ ıa, F., et al. 2018, Nature, 554, 497,

doi: 10.1038/nature25151

Chen, K., &amp; Dorn-Wallenstein, T. 2024, in American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 243, American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, 205.01

Chen, K.-J., Heger, A., &amp; Almgren, A. S. 2013, Astronomy and Computing, 3, 70, doi: 10.1016/j.ascom.2014.01.001

Chen, K.-J., Whalen, D. J., Woosley, S. E., &amp; Zhang, W. 2023, ApJ, 955, 39, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ace968

Chen, T.-W., Yang, S., Srivastav, S., et al. 2025, The Astrophysical Journal, 983, 86, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adb428

Chen, W.-Y., Chen, K.-J., &amp; Ono, M. 2024, ApJ, 976, 147,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad7de3

Cheng, H., Zhang, C., Ling, Z., et al. 2025, Experimental Astronomy, 60, 15, doi: 10.1007/s10686-025-10025-9

Chevalier, R. A., &amp; Irwin, C. M. 2011, ApJL, 729, L6,

doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/729/1/L6

Couch, S. M., Pooley, D., Wheeler, J. C., &amp; Milosavljevi´ c, M. 2011, ApJ, 727, 104, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/727/2/104

Couch, S. M., Wheeler, J., Pooley, D., &amp;

Milosavljevic, M. 2010, in American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 215, American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts #215, 430.03

Dessart, L., Hillier, D. J., &amp; Audit, E. 2017, A&amp;A, 605, A83,

doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201730942

Dwek, E., &amp; Arendt, R. G. 2008, The Astrophysical Journal, 685, 976,

doi: 10.1086/589988

Ensman, L., &amp; Burrows, A. 1992, ApJ, 393, 742, doi: 10.1086/171542

Fryxell, B., Olson, K., Ricker, P., et al. 2000, ApJS, 131, 273,

doi: 10.1086/317361

Fuller, J. 2017, MNRAS, 470, 1642, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1314

F¨ orster, F., Moriya, T., Maureira, J., et al. 2018, Nature Astronomy, 2, doi: 10.1038/s41550-018-0563-4

Gezari, S., Jones, D. O., Sanders, N. E., et al. 2015, ApJ, 804, 28,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/804/1/28

Ginzburg, S., &amp; Balberg, S. 2014, ApJ, 780, 18,

doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/780/1/18

Goldberg, J. A., Jiang, Y.-F., &amp; Bildsten, L. 2022, ApJ, 933, 164,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac75e3

Goldberg, J. A., Jiang, Y.-F., Bildsten, L., &amp; Cantiello, M. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2508.12486, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2508.12486

| Gonz´ alez-Tor` a, G., Wittkowski, M., 2023, A&amp;A, 669, A76,  Davies, B., Plez, B., &amp; Kravchenko, K. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202244503 Gr¨ afener, G., &amp; Vink, J. S. 2016, MNRAS, 455, 112, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv2283 Hiramatsu, D., Tsuna, D., Berger, E., et al. 2023, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 955, L8, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acf299 Hosseinzadeh, G., Farah, J., Shrestha, M., et al. 2023, ApJL, 953, L16, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ace4c4 Hu, M., Wang, L., &amp; Wang, X. 2025, ApJ, 984, 44, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adc802 Katz, B., Budnik, R., &amp; Waxman, E. 2010, The Astrophysical Journal, 716, 781, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/716/1/781 Katz, M. P., Zingale, M., Calder, A. C., et al. 2016, ApJ, 819, 94, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/819/2/94 Kozyreva, A., Klencki, J., Filippenko, A. V., et al. 2022, ApJL, 934, L31, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac835a Kozyreva, A., Nakar, E., Waldman, R., Blinnikov, S., &amp; Baklanov, P. 2020, MNRAS, 494, 3927, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa924 Levermore, C. D., &amp; Pomraning, G. C. 1981, ApJ, 248, 321, doi: 10.1086/159157 Lovegrove, E., Woosley, S. E., &amp; Zhang, W. 2017, ApJ, 845, 103, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa7b7d Ma, J.-Z., Justham, S., Pakmor, R., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2510.14875, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2510.14875 Mao, J., Ono, M., Nagataki, S., et al. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 808, 164, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/808/2/164 Margalit, B. 2022, ApJ, 933, 238, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac771a Moriya, T. J., Sanyal, D., &amp; Langer, N. 2015, A&amp;A, 575, L10, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201424925 Nagataki, S., Shimizu, T. M., &amp; Sato, K.  1998, ApJ, 495, 413, doi: 10.1086/305258  Nakamura, K., Takiwaki, T., &amp; Kotake,  K. 2022, MNRAS, 514, 3941,  doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1586  Nakar, E., &amp; Sari, R. 2010, ApJ, 725, 904, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/725/1/904  Ofek, E. O., Rabinak, I., Neill, J. D., et al. 2010, ApJ, 724, 1396, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/724/2/1396  Ono, M., Nagataki, S., Ferrand, G., et al. 2020, ApJ, 888, 111, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab5dba  Ono, M., Nozawa, T., Nagataki, S., et al. 2024, ApJS, 271, 33,  doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ad1a08  Ou, P.-S., Chen, K.-J., Chu, Y.-H., &amp; Tsai, S.-H. 2023, The Astrophysical Journal, 944, 34,  doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aca96e  Paxton, B., Bildsten, L., Dotter, A., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192, 3,  doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/192/1/3  Paxton, B., Cantiello, M., Arras, P., et al. 2013, ApJS, 208, 4,  doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/208/1/4  Paxton, B., Marchant, P., Schwab, J., et al. 2015, ApJS, 220, 15,  doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/220/1/15  Paxton, B., Schwab, J., Bauer, E. B., et al. 2018, ApJS, 234, 34, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aaa5a8  Paxton, B., Smolec, R., Schwab, J., et al. 2019, ApJS, 243, 10,  doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab2241  Rodr´ ıguez, ´ O. 2022, MNRAS, 515, 897, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1831  Sapir, N., Katz, B., &amp; Waxman, E. 2013, ApJ, 774, 79,  doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/774/1/79  Schawinski, K., Justham, S., Wolf, C., et al. 2008, Science, 321, 223, doi: 10.1126/science.1160456  Shrestha, M., Bostroem, K. A., Sand, D. J., et al. 2024, ApJL, 972, L15, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad6907  Shvartzvald, Y., Waxman, E., Gal-Yam, A., et al. 2024, ApJ, 964, 74, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad2704   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Smartt, S. J., Eldridge, J. J., Crockett, R. M., &amp; Maund, J. R. 2009, MNRAS, 395, 1409,

[doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.14506.x](http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.14506.x)

Smith, N. 2014, ARA&amp;A, 52, 487, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081913040025

Soderberg, A. M., Berger, E., Page, K. L., et al. 2008, Nature, 454, 246,

[doi: 10.1038/nature07134](http://doi.org/10.1038/nature07134)

Srinivasaragavan, G. P., Li, D., Hall,

X. J., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2512.10239,

[doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2512.10239](http://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2512.10239)

Sun, H., Li, W.-X., Liu, L.-D., et al. 2025, Nature Astronomy, 9, 1073, doi: 10.1038/s41550-025-02571-1

Suwa, Y. 2017, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 474, 2612, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx2953

Suzuki, A., Maeda, K., &amp; Shigeyama, T. 2016, Astrophysical Journal, 825, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/825/2/92

Svirski, G., &amp; Nakar, E. 2014, ApJL, 788, L14, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/788/1/L14

Tanaka, M., Tominaga, N., Morokuma, T., et al. 2016, ApJ, 819, 5,

[doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/819/1/5](http://doi.org/10.3847/0004-637X/819/1/5)

Timmes, F. X. 1999, ApJS, 124, 241, doi: 10.1086/313257

Tolstov, A. G., Blinnikov, S. I., &amp; Nadyozhin, D. K. 2013, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 429, 3181,

doi: 10.1093/mnras/sts577

van Loon, J. T. 2025, Galaxies, 13, 72, doi: 10.3390/galaxies13040072

Vartanyan, D., Tsang, B. T.-H., Kasen, D., et al. 2025, ApJ, 982, 9,

doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adb1e4

Wang, T., &amp; Burrows, A. 2024, ApJ, 962, 71, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad12b8

Waxman, E., &amp; Katz, B. 2017, in Handbook of Supernovae, ed. A. W. Alsabti &amp; P. Murdin (Springer, Cham), 967, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-21846-5 33

Woosley, S. E., &amp; Weaver, T. A. 1995, ApJS, 101, 181, doi: 10.1086/192237

Yaron, O., Perley, D. A., Gal-Yam, A., et al. 2017, Nature Physics, 13, 510, doi: 10.1038/nphys4025

Yoon, S.-C., &amp; Cantiello, M. 2010, ApJL, 717, L62,

doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/717/1/L62

Yuan, W., Dai, L., Feng, H., et al. 2025, Science China Physics, Mechanics, and Astronomy, 68, 239501,

doi: 10.1007/s11433-024-2600-3

Zhang, W., Howell, L., Almgren, A., Burrows, A., &amp; Bell, J. 2011, ApJS, 196, 20,

doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/196/2/20

Zhang, W., Howell, L., Almgren, A., et al.

2013, ApJS, 204, 7,

doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/204/1/7