## Persistent collective trend in stock markets

Emeric Balogh

Babe¸ s-Bolyai University, Department of Theoretical Physics, RO-400084 Cluj-Napoca, Romania

Ingve Simonsen ∗

Department of Physics, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), NO-7491 Trondheim, Norway

B´ alint Zs. Nagy

Babe¸ s-Bolyai University, Faculty of Economics and Business Administration RO-400591 Cluj-Napoca, Romania

Zolt´ an N´ eda

Babe¸ s-Bolyai University, Department of Theoretical Physics, RO-400084 Cluj-Napoca, Romania

(Dated: October 31, 2018)

Empirical evidence is given for a significant difference in the collective trend of the share prices during the stock index rising and falling periods. Data on the Dow Jones Industrial Average and its stock components are studied between 1991 and 2008. Pearson-type correlations are computed between the stocks and averaged over stock-pairs and time. The results indicate a general trend: whenever the stock index is falling the stock prices are changing in a more correlated manner than in case the stock index is ascending. A thorough statistical analysis of the data shows that the observed difference is significant, suggesting a constant-fear factor among stockholders.

PACS numbers:

The world is once again experiencing a major financial-economic crisis, the worst since the crash of Oct. 1929 that initiated the great depression of the 1930s. Many citizens are concerned for obvious reasons; we are facing global recession; banks and financial institutions go bankrupt; companies struggle to get credit and many are forced to reduce their workforce or even go out of business. Interest rates are increasing while private savings invested in the stock market evaporate. Large parts of our contemporary societies are deeply affected by the new financial reality.

The current financial crisis is one particular dramatic example of collective effects in stock markets [1-3, 6]; during crises nearly all stocks drop in value simultaneously. Fortunately, such extreme situations are relatively rare. What is less known, however, is that during more normal 'non-critical' periods, collective effects do still represent characteristics of stock markets that in particular influence their short time behavior. One such effect will be addressed in this publication, where our aim is to present empirical evidence for an asymmetry in stock-stock correlations conditioned by the size and direction of market moves. In particular, we will present empirical results showing that when the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) index ('the market') is dropping, then there exists a significantly stronger stock-stock correlation than during times of a raising market. Our results indicate that such enhanced (conditional) stock-stock correlations are not only relevant during times of dramatic market crashes, but instead represents features of markets during more 'normal' periods.

Distribution of returns is traditionally used as one of the proxies for the performance of stocks and markets over a certain time history [1-3]. In the economics, finance and econometrics literature the problem of market sentiment and investor confidence is usually addressed by the use of various indicators. These indicators are either derived from objective market data [4], or obtained by conducting questionnaire-based surveys among professional and individual investors [5]. In the present study we consider thus the first approach, since we believe that the market data (prices and returns) are more objective proxies than questionnaire-inferred data.

The basic quantity of interest is the logarithmic return, defined as the (natural) logarithm of the relative price change over a fixed time interval ∆ t , i.e. :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p ( t ) denotes the asset price at time t [1-3]. In addition to this basic quantity, it is also desirable to have available a time-dependent proxy where the asset performance is gauged over a non-constant time interval. One such approach is the so-called inverse statistics approach [7-10] recently introduced and adapted to finance from the study s32

∗ Electronic address: Ingve.Simonsen@phys.ntnu.no; URL: http://web.phys.ntnu.no/ ~ ingves

s32

s32

FIG. 1: Inverse statistics results for logarithmic return levels of ρ = ± 5% for the DJIA index (data between 1991 and 2008). The figures show the gain-loss asymmetry; open green triangles represents ρ &gt; 0, while filled red circles refer to ρ &lt; 0. On the log-linear scale (a) the asymmetry is more evident, while on log-log scale (b) the power-law nature of the tail of the distribution is observable. The dashed line indicates the slope -3 / 2.

<!-- image -->

of turbulence [11, 12]. The main idea underlying this method is to not fi x the time interval (or window), ∆ t in Eq. (1), but instead to turn the question around and ask for what is the (shortest) waiting time, τ ρ = t -t 0 , needed to reach a given (fixed) return level, ρ , for the first time when the initial investment was made at time t 0 (see Ref. [7] for details). Hence, the inverse statistics approach concerns itself with the study of the distribution of waiting times [13] that in the following will be denoted by p ( τ ρ ).

Recently, this method of analysis has been applied to the study of various single stocks and market indices, both from mature and emerging markets, as well as to foreign exchange data and even artificial markets [7-10, 14-21]. The waiting time histograms possess well-defined and pronounced ( ρ -dependent) maxima [7] followed by long power law tails, p ( τ ρ ) ∼ ρ -α , with α ≃ 3 / 2 (Figs. 1) a value that is a consequence of the uncorrelated increments of the underlying asset price process [13].

Studies of single stocks, for given (moderate) positive and negative levels of returns, ±| ρ | , have revealed, almost symmetric waiting time distributions (Figs. 2) [15, 21, 24]. Unexpectedly, however, stock index data seem not to share this feature. They do instead give raise to asymmetric waiting time distributions (Fig. 1a) for return levels | ρ | for which the corresponding single stock distributions were symmetric [15, 24]. This asymmetry is expressed by negative return levels being reached sooner than those corresponding to positive levels (of the same magnitude of ρ ). This effect was termed the gain-loss asymmetry [7] and has later been observed for many major stock indices [7, 8, 18, 19, 23, 25]. It is here important to note that the gain-loss asymmetry is not a consequence of the generally long-term positive trend (or drift) of the data since this was removed by considering an average with a suitable window size on the prices. The long-term positive trend will affect long waiting times and would induce shorter waiting times for the positive return levels. However, empirically one finds that the waiting times of indices are shortest for negative return levels -the opposite of what is to be expected from the long term trend effect. In passing we note that recently it has been found that also single stocks may show some degree of gain-loss asymmetry when the level of return, | ρ | , is getting sufficiently large [21, 22]. However, it still remains true that for not too large return levels, e.g. | ρ | = 0 . 05, the waiting time distributions for single stocks are symmetric to a good approximation [21].

The presence of this asymmetry may seem like a paradox since the value of a stock index is essentially the (weighed) average of the individual constituting stocks. Even so, one does observe an asymmetric waiting time distribution for the index comprised of (more-or-less) symmetric single stocks. How can this be rationalized? Recently, a minimal (toy) model - termed the fear factor model - was constructed for the purpose of explaining this apparent paradox [24]. The key ingredient of this model is the so-called collective fear-factor, a concept similar to synchronization [30]. At certain times, controlled by a 'fear-factor', the stocks of the model all move downwards, while at other times they move independently of each other. This is done in a way that the price processes of the single stocks are (over a long time period) guaranteed to produce symmetric waiting time distributions (and uncorrelated price increments). The fear-factor model, that qualitatively reproduces well empirical findings, introduces collective downward movements among the constituting stocks. The model synchronizes downward stock moves, or in other words, it has stronger stock-stock correlations during dropping markets than during market raises. This means that the fear-factor of the stockholders is stronger than their optimism-factor on average. This is consistent with the findings of Kahneman and Tversky [31], reported in the economics literature, that demonstrate that the utility loss of negative returns is larger than the utility gain for positive returns in the case of most investors.

s32

s32

FIG. 2: Same as Fig. 1(a) but now for the stocks (a) General Motors and (b) McDonald's Corp., both being part of the DJIA index. Notice that gain-loss asymmetry is not observed in this case.

<!-- image -->

Recently, the idea of the fear-factor model [24] was reconsidered and generalized by Siven et al. [25] by allowing for longer time periods of stock co-movement (correlations). These authors also find that the gain-loss asymmetry is a long timescale phenomena [25], and that it is related to some correlation properties present in the time series [21]. It was also proposed that the gain-loss asymmetry is in close relationship with the asymmetric volatility models (E-GARCH) used by econometricians [26].

Furthermore, also additional explanations for the gain-loss asymmetry have been proposed in the literature. Those include the leverage effect [2, 27-29], and regime switching models [22]. So far, it is fair to say that the cause of the gain-loss asymmetry is still partly debated in the literature.

The key idea of the fear factor model [21, 24] is the enhanced stock-stock correlations during periods of falling market. Up to now this idea has not been supported by empirical data. In this Letter, we conduct such a delicate statistical analysis, and we are able to show, based on empirical data, that indeed there exist a stronger stock-stock correlations during falling as compared to rising market.

Let r x ∆ t ( t ) denote the logarithmic return of stock x (from the index under study) between time t and t +∆ t (the time unit in the DJIA data is one trading day). In order to facilitate the coming discussion, we introduce the following notation for an arithmetic average taken over a set, say A = { A ( t ) } t 2 t = t 1 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where |A| denotes the cardinality of the set, i.e. the number of elements in A . If no explicit limits are given for the set (like in { A ( t ) } t ), all possible values will be assumed. In terms of this notation, a Pearson-type correlation can then be computed between each stock pair ( x, y ) resulting in the following (equal time) stock-stock correlation function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where σ α ∆ t ( t ; δt ) signifies the volatility of stock α ( α = x, y ) at time t (and time window δt ), and is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Note that S ( x,y ) ( t, δt, ∆ t ) contains two time scales; δt is the time window over which the average in Eq. (3) is calculated, while ∆ t is the time interval used to define returns ( cf. Eq. (1)).

By definition, the stock-stock correlation function, S ( x,y ) ( t, δt, ∆ t ), is specific to the asset pair ( x, y ), and does therefore not represent the market as a whole. However, in order to obtain a representative level of stock-stock correlation for the market (index) as a whole, we propose to average S ( x,y ) ( t, δt, ∆ t ) over all possible stock pairs ( x, y ) contained in the index. In this way, we are lead to introducing the market component correlation function

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In passing, we note that the average contained in Eq. (5) potentially should be weighted so that the contribution to the correlation function S 0 ( t, δt, ∆ t ) from a stock pair ( x, y ) is weighted with a factor that is proportional to the sum of the weights associated with the two stocks and used to construct the value of the index. Typically this weight corresponds to the capitalization of the company in question. Since we here, however, are studying the DJIA - for which all constituting stocks have the same weight in the index (an atypical situation) - this possibility has not been considered here and neither has the weight factor been included in the definition of S 0 ( t, δt, ∆ t ).

The market component correlation function, as defined by Eq. (5), measures the overall level of stock-stock correlations of the index (market) under investigation independent of the market is raising or falling. However, what we have set out to study, is if there exists any significant difference between these two cases. To this end, we introduce what we below will refer to as the conditional market component correlation function , C 0 ( ρ, δt, ∆ t ), that measures the typical value of the market component correlations S 0 ( t, δt, ∆ t ) given that the (logarithmic) return of the index itself, r δt ( t ) is above (below) a given return threshold value ρ . Mathematically, the conditional market component correlation function is defined by the following conditional time average

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a time-dependent conditional market component correlation function has been introduced as:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A comparison of C 0 (+ | ρ | , δt, ∆ t ) and C 0 ( -| ρ | , δt, ∆ t ), should in principle be able to reveal potential difference in the level of stock-stock correlations during periods of raising and falling market conditions. If it is found that C 0 ( ρ, δt, ∆ t ) is symmetric with respect to the sign of ρ , the stock-stock correlations do not depend (very much) on the direction of the market. On the other hand, if an asymmetry is observed in C 0 ( ±| ρ | , δt, ∆ t ) for a given | ρ | , this clearly indicates that stock-stock correlations are dependent on market direction. Such results, being interesting in it own right, can practically be used in risk and portfolio management. Moreover, such results can be used as valuable input for developing more sophisticated portfolio theories aiming at designing the optimal portfolio. The weights of securities in an optimal portfolio as modeled by Markowitz [32] depend on the correlations and covariance matrices between the returns of those securities and these correlations assume a uniform attitude towards risk. Our results suggest that these correlation matrices should take into account the asymmetry in the correlations for the positive and negative returns and, therefore, are consistent with behavioral portfolio theory [33] that suggests different attitudes towards risk in different domains for the same investor.

Given that subtle nature of the correlations that we here are trying to detect, we will introduce an additional time average - now to be performed over the time scale δt that all previously introduced correlation functions depend. The averaged conditional market component correlation function is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where δt 1 and δt 2 &gt; δt 1 are time-scales over which stock-stock correlations are relevant (given the type of data being analyzed). The average over δt in Eq. (7) is performed only with the purpose of improving the statistics. For stock indices containing a large number of stocks ( e.g. SP500 and NASDAQ), this average may not be needed. However, for the DJIA that currently contains only 30 stocks, this average is of advantage.

The needed formalism is by now introduced, and we are ready to use it for the empirical analysis. Here we are focusing on the DJIA, as mentioned previously, and the data to be analyzed were obtained from Yahoo Finance [34]. The data set consists of daily closing prices of the 30 DJIA stocks as well as the DJIA index itself. It covers an 18 years period from May 1991 to September 2008. Note that this period includes the development of the dot-com bubble in the late 1990's and its subsequent burst in 2000, the 1997 mini-crash (as a consequence of the Asian financial crisis of 1997), the collapse of the Long-Term Capital Management (as a consequence of the Russian financial crisis of 1998), the early 2000's recession as well as the worldwide economic-financial crisis of 2007-2008.

With these data and the formalism presented previously, the averaged conditional market component correlation function, C ( ρ, ∆ t ), can be calculated. It is presented in Fig. 3 for a range of positive and negative return levels, ±| ρ | , where it has been assumed that ∆ t = 1day, δt 1 = 10day and δt 2 = 35day. Figure 3 shows a pronounced asymmetry between positive and negative (index) return levels, ±| ρ | . The stock-stock correlations, as given by C ( ρ, ∆ t ), are systematically stronger whenever the market is dropping ( ρ &lt; 0) than when it is raising ( ρ &gt; 0). This is found to be the case for the whole range of considered levels of return | ρ | . It also worth noting that in the limit | ρ |→ 0 there is a substantial difference between the conditional market component correlation for the positive and negative returns:

s32

<!-- image -->

s32

FIG. 3: The average conditional market component correlations, C ( ρ, ∆ t ), between the stock components for various return rates, ρ , of the DJIA stock index. Open green triangles correspond the positive return levels ( ρ &gt; 0), while filled red circles signifies negative return levels ( ρ &lt; 0). The stronger correlation in case of negative returns are readily visibly from this plot. In obtaining these results, it was assumed that δt 1 = 10 day, δt 2 = 35day, and ∆ t = 1day. For values of | ρ | larger than about 0 . 15, the statistics became poor. This was in particular the case for positive values of ρ .

lim | ρ |→ 0 + [ C ( -| ρ | , ∆ t ) -C ( | ρ | , ∆ t )] ≈ 0 . 07 = 7%. For the largest positive levels shown, it is noted that the statistical quality of the data is seen to become poor.

Hence, the empirical results of Fig. 3 support the primary assumption underlying the fear-factor model [24]; stocks are on average more strongly correlated (or synchronized) among themselves during falling than raising market conditions.

The effects that we are studying here are rather subtle features, and several averaging had to be considered in order to identify it. Hence, it is important to have confidence in the results, and to make sure that they are not artifacts of the averaging procedure. Moreover, one also has to prove that the obtained difference is a general feature of the stock market and is not due to one (or a few) special events where e.g. the market crashes. To address these issues, additional analysis is required:

Firstly, we revisited the averaging procedure over stock-stock pairs used in defining Eq. (5). The aim was to show that the difference obtained in the measured correlations between the stocks for positive and negative levels of index return was indeed present for the majority of the stock pairs. For this purpose, for each pair of stocks ( x, y ) of the index, the average C ( x,y ) ( ρ, ∆ t ) = 〈 { C ( x,y ) ( ρ, δt, ∆ t ) } δt 2 δt = δt 1 〉 was considered, where the conditional stock-stock correlation function, C ( x,y ) ( ρ, δt, ∆ t ), is defined from S ( x,y ) ( t, δt, ∆ t ) in a completely analogous way to how C 0 ( ρ, δt, ∆ t ) was obtained from S 0 ( t, δt, ∆ t ) in Eq. (6b).

̸

The distributions of the conditional stock-stock correlation function, C ( x,y ) ( ρ, ∆ t ), including all possible stocks pair ( x = y ) of the DJIA, is presented in Figs. 4 for some representative levels of index return | ρ | = 0 . 03, 0 . 05 and 0 . 10. The results of Figs. 4 indicate that the stock-stock correlations for a negative index return levels, -| ρ | , plotted with green shades is for the majority of the stock pairs stronger than the stock-stock correlations for the corresponding positive level, and this observation applies equally for all the index return levels considered. An alternative way for illustrating this difference is to plot the distribution of the relative difference χ ρ = [ C ( x,y ) ( -| ρ | , ∆ t ) -C ( x,y ) ( | ρ | , ∆ t )] / | C ( x,y ) ( | ρ | , ∆ t ) | (Figs. 5). The clear asymmetry of this distribution respective to 0 is an indication that the stock-stock correlations for a negative index return level is in general stronger than the stock-stock correlations for the corresponding positive level.

The indications obtained from Figs. 4 and Figs. 5 that the conditional stock-stock correlations are stronger for negative index return levels can also be confirmed more quantitatively by a statistical test. More precisely, we want to see what is the chance that two random samples from the same distribution would yield the observed difference in the mean. A Wilcoxon-type non-parametric z -test [35] was performed and the results of the test are presented in Table I. The negative value of z suggests that the stock-stock correlations for the negative change in the index are indeed bigger than those for the positive changes. The value of p is the probability that finite samples from the same ensemble would yield the hypothesized differences in the mean. The parameter p is thus a measure of the significance s32

s32

s32

s32

<!-- image -->

̸

FIG. 4: The distribution, p ( C ( x,y ) ), of the correlation function C ( x,y ) ( ρ, ∆ t ) based on all possible company pairs ( x, y ) within the DJIA stock index ( x = y ). The dashed areas correspond to ρ &gt; 0, while the shaded areas refer to ρ &lt; 0. The distributions are given for various values of the return level ρ as indicated in each panel (∆ t = 1 day in all cases).

s32

s32

s32

<!-- image -->

s32

FIG. 5: Distribution of the quantity χ ρ = [ C ( x,y ) ( -| ρ | , ∆ t ) -C ( x,y ) ( | ρ | , ∆ t )] / | C ( x,y ) ( | ρ | , ∆ t ) | obtained on the basis of the DJIA stock index for different return levels, ρ , as indicated in the figures. We recall that in the case no asymmetry, the distribution, p ( χ ρ ), will be symmetric around χ = 0 (vertical dashed lines).

level, smaller values correspond to higher significance for the obtained differences in the mean. The results presented in Table I show that the difference in conditional stock-stock correlations is indeed significant.

TABLE I: Results of the Wilcoxon non-parametric z -test for difference in conditional stock-stock correlations ( C ( x,y ) ( ρ, ∆ t )). The negative z -values suggest that C ( x,y ) ( -| ρ | , ∆ t ) &gt; C ( x,y ) ( | ρ | , ∆ t ). The value of p is the probability that a finite sample taken from the same ensemble would yield the hypothesized difference in the mean.

| &#124;  ρ  &#124;  z  p  0.03  -  18  .  87  2  .  0  ·  10  -  79  0.05  -  18  .  16  9  .  1  ·  10  -  74  0.10  -  10  .  85  1  .  8  ·  10  -  27   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Secondly, we wanted to make sure that the observed asymmetry in C 0 ( ρ, δt, ∆ t ) = 〈{ C ( ρ, t, δt, ∆ t ) } t 〉 [Eq. (6)] was not caused by a few isolated events - like large market drops - but instead represented a feature of the market that was present at (more-or-less) all times. For this purpose, we went back and studied more carefully the time-dependent conditional market correlation function C ( ρ, t, δt, ∆ t ) (before the time average). More precisely, in order to improve the statistics, the following average was computed 〈 { C ( ρ, t, δt, ∆ t ) } δt 2 δt = δt 1 〉 ≡ C t ( ρ, ∆ t ). For fixed values of the index s32

s32

s32

s32

FIG. 6: Distribution of the correlations C t ( ρ, ∆ t ) ≡ 〈 { C ( ρ, t, δt, ∆ t ) } δt 2 δt = δt 1 〉 for different return levels, ±| ρ | . Here the green shaded areas correspond to ρ &gt; 0 while red is used to indicate ρ &lt; 0. In obtaining these results it was assumed that δt 1 = 10day, δt 2 = 35day, and ∆ t = 1day.

<!-- image -->

return level | ρ | , and the time windows δt 1 = 10 days, δt 2 = 35 days and ∆ t = 1 day, we compared the two distributions p [ C t (+ | ρ | , ∆ t )] and p [ C t ( -| ρ | , ∆ t )]. An asymmetry in C 0 ( ρ, δt, ∆ t ) being caused by a few isolated events in C t ( ρ, ∆ t ), will produce almost identical distributions for the two cases ±| ρ | that only differ by some infrequent 'outliers' that are large enough to move the mean. On the other hand, a more systematic difference in C t ( ρ, ∆ t ) for + | ρ | and -| ρ | will produce distinctly differences between the p [ C t (+ | ρ | , ∆ t )] and p [ C t ( -| ρ | , ∆ t )] distributions.

In Figs. 6 we present the empirical distributions p [ C t ( ρ. ∆)] of the DJIA for some typical positive and negative values of the index return level. These empirical results point towards the two distributions p [ C t (+ | ρ | , ∆ t )] and p [ C t ( -| ρ | , ∆ t )] being different. To quantitatively show that they differ significantly, again a non-parametric Wilcoxon significance test was performed. However, in order to conduct this test it is necessary to have the same number of data points in the histograms for positive and negative index return values. Since the C t ( ρ, ∆)-data did not had this property we had to ensure this condition. We first identified the set with the smallest number of elements (usually this was the set corresponding the negative returns), and then from the other set, the same number of elements were randomly selected. Here, our assumption was that the random selection will not alter the normalized distribution. Results obtained by this procedure for the same values of | ρ | used to produce Figs. 6 are given in Table II. The extremely small values obtained for p suggest, as pointed out previously, that the difference between the two distributions, p [ C t (+ | ρ | , ∆ t )] and p [ C t ( -| ρ | , ∆ t )], is indeed significant also for this averaging step.

TABLE II: Results of the Wilcoxon non-parametric z test for the difference in the mean of the distributions p [ C t (+ | ρ | , ∆ t )] and p [ C t ( -| ρ | , ∆ t )], presented in Figs. 6

| &#124;  ρ  &#124;  z  p  0.03  -  33  .  99  1  .  1  ·  10  -  79  0.05  -  16  .  62  4  .  3  ·  10  -  62  0.10  -  8  .  0  1  .  0  ·  10  -  16   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Thirdly, and finally, we address the level of conditional market correlation ( C 0 ( ρ, δt, ∆ t )) as a function of the size of the time-window δt for ±| ρ | (and ∆ t = 1day). The empirical results of this kind are depicted on Figs. 7. One observes that systematically, and independent of δt and ρ (at lest for the values we have considered), one finds that the conditional market correlations are the higher for negative index return levels ( -| ρ | ) as compared to the corresponding positive ones (+ | ρ | ); i.e. C 0 ( -| ρ | , δt, ∆ t ) &gt; C 0 (+ | ρ | , δt, ∆ t ). This suggests that the sign of the difference does not depend on the values considered for δt 1 and δt 2 , used in performing the average over δt .

In conclusion, we have conducted a set of statistical investigations on the DJIA and its constituting stocks, which confirm that during falling markets, the stock-stock correlations are stronger than during market raises (gain-loss asymmetry phenomenon). This has been possible to measure empirically due to the design of a robust statistical measure - the conditional market correlation function ( C 0 ( ρ, δt, ∆ t )).

In particular, we have performed statistical tests that show that the observed asymmetry in the empirical conditional s32

s32

s32

<!-- image -->

s32

FIG. 7: Conditional market correlation, C 0 ( ρ, δt, ∆ t ), as a function of the time-window δt (with ∆ t = 1day) for different values of the return level ±| ρ | . Green open triangles correspond to ρ &gt; 0 while filled red circles refer to ρ &lt; 0.

(market) correlation function is indeed significant, and not an artifact of the considered averaging procedure since it is clearly present in each averaging step. This empirical result gives confidence in the fear-factor hypothesis, which explains successfully the gain-loss asymmetry observed in the major stock indices.

From the perspective of finance, we note that a relatively small segment of the financial literature examines models which have the potential to describe, explain and possibly forecast the phenomena which lead to stock market bubbles and their subsequent crashes [5]. The more technical and quantitative approaches either follow the general equilibrium models of macroeconomics [37] or the game-theoretical methodology [38].

The latter approaches try to model mathematically (many times using toy models) the interactions between agents and their expectations about each other's behavior and the market average. Many times market micro-structure plays a significant role in these models: the so-called frictions (the different taxes and transaction costs, liquidity constraints and other limits to arbitrage) are the factors that produce market crashes. The role of portfolio insurance (selling short the stock index futures, [39]) in crashes is also strongly debated. However, the complex relationship between the micro-structure factors, market sentiment, herding of investors and stock market crashes is still poorly understood.

In such view our results can have important consequences in theoretical and practical aspects of portfolio management and also in risk management of investment banks, investment funds, other financial institutions as well as regulators and decision makers concerned with the spillover of stock market crashes into the real economy. As it was pointed out earlier, the standard, mean-variance based portfolio theory views risks as symmetric measures (variance, covariance, etc .) assuming the stability of these risks as well as their symmetry in case of positive and negative returns. Investment banks, insurance companies and other financial institutions widely use for risk management software based on the methodology of VaR (Value at Risk), a measure of worst-case scenario losses that is intensively questioned since today's financial crisis began. VaR models the case of symmetrical risks, relying in most cases on past distributions (especially on the normal distribution). Over-reliance on VaR lead the risk managers to the following mistakes: ( i ) It leads to the opening and maintaining of risky and overly leveraged positions; ( ii ) It focused on the manageable risks with probabilities close to the center of the probability distributions and it lost track of the extreme events from the tails of the distributions; ( iii ) Utilization of VaR leads to a false sense of security among risk managers. We believe that new measures must be considered instead of VaR. These measures should also take into account the fear-factor which produces bigger systematic risks in cases of stock market crashes than during market booms. As a follow up, it will be worthy to study whether a growing distance between the negative and positive correlations is a sign of diminishing investor confidence in the periods before a market crash.

## Acknowledgments

One of the authors (I.S.) is grateful for constructive discussions with J.D. Farmer and M.H. Jensen on the matter of this Letter. This research was supported in part by a KMEI-Interdisciplinary Computer Modelling research grant and the work of E.B. is supported by a Scientific Excellence Bursary from BBU. I.S. acknowledges the support from the European Union COST Actions P10 ('Physics of Risk') and MP0801 ('Physics of Competition and Conflicts').

- [1] N.F. Johnson, P. Jefferies and P.M. Hui, Financial Market Complexity (Oxford University Press, 2003).
- [2] J.P. Bouchaud and M. Potters, Theory of Financial Risks: From Statistical Physics to Risk Management (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000).
- [3] R.N. Mantegna and H.E. Stanley, An Introduction to Econophysics: Correlations and Complexity in Finance (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000).
- [4] Z. Bodie, A. Kane, A. J. Marcus, Investments, 8th edition , (McGraw Hill New York, 2008)
- [5] R.J. Shiller, Irrational exuberance , 2nd ed. (Princeton University Press, 2005).
- [6] D. Sornette, Why Stock Markets Crash: Critical Events in Complex Financial Systems (Princeton University Press, 2002).
- [7] I. Simonsen, M.H. Jensen and A. Johansen, Eur. Phys. J. 27 , 583-586 (2002).
- [8] M.H. Jensen, A. Johansen and I. Simonsen, Physica A 234 , 338-343 (2003).
- [9] M.H. Jensen, A. Johansen, F. Petroni and I. Simonsen, Physica A 340 , 678-684 (2004).
- [10] M.H. Jensen, A. Johansen and I. Simonsen, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B 17 , 4003-4012 (2003).
- [11] M.H. Jensen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 , 76-79 (1999).
- [12] Wei-Xing Zhou, D. Sornette, and Wei-Kang Yuan Physica D 214 , 55 (2006).
- [13] S. Redner, A guide to first-passage processes (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001).
- [14] Wei-Xing Zhou, and Wei-Kang Yuan Physica A 353 , 433 (2005).
- [15] A. Johansen, I. Simonsen and M. H. Jensen, Physica A 370 , 64 (2006).
- [16] I. Simonsen, P.T.H. Ahlgren, M.H. Jensen, R. Donangelo, and K. Sneppen Eur. Phys. J. B 57 , 153 (2007).
- [17] M. Zaluska-Kotur, K. Karpio, and A. Orsuppress lowska, Acta Phys. Pol. B 37 , 3187 (2006).
- [18] K. Karpio, M.A. Zasuppress luska-Kotur, and A. Orsuppress lowski, Physica A 375 , 599 (2007).
- [19] C.Y. Lee, J. Kim, and I. Hwang, J. Kor. Phys. Soc. 52 , 517 (2008).
- [20] M. Grudziecki, E. Gnatowska, K. Karpio, A. Orsuppress lowska, and M. Zasuppress luska-Kotur, Act. Phys. Pol. A 114 , 569 (2008).
- [21] J.V. Siven and J.T. Lins, Phys. Rev. E 80 , 057102 (2009).
- [22] P.T.H. Ahlgren, H. Dahl, M.H. Jensen, and I. Simonsen, What Can Be Learned from Inverse Statistics? (Springer-Verlag, 2010) Book chapter to appear.
- [23] Johansen, I. Simonsen, and M.H. Jensen, Unpublished work.
- [24] R. Donangelo, M.H. Jensen, I. Simonsen and K. Sneppen, J. Stat. Mech. 2006 , L11001 (2006).
- [25] J.V. Siven, J.T. Lins, J.L. Hansen, J. Stat. Mech. 2009 , P02004 (2009).
- [26] D.B. Nelson, Econometrica, 59 , 347 (1991).
- [27] J.-P. Bouchaud, A. Matacz, M. Potters, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 , 228701 (2001).
- [28] P.T.H. Ahlgren, M.H. Jensen, I. Simonsen, R. Donangelo, and K. Sneppen Physica A 383 , 1 (2007).
- [29] J.V. Siven and J.T Lins, Gain/loss asymmetry in time series of individual stock prices and its relationship to the leverage effect arXiv:0911.4679v2, 2009.
- [30] S. Strogatz, Physica D 143 , 1 (2000).
- [31] D.Kahneman and A. Tversky, Econometrica 47 , 313-327 (1979).
- [32] H.M. Markowitz, Journal of Finance 7 , 77-91 (1952).
- [33] H. Shefrin and M. Statman (2000), The Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 35 , 127-151 (2000).
- [34] The analyzed data are freely available from the Yahoo: http://finance.yahoo.com.
- [35] F. Wilcoxon, Biometrics 1 , 80-83 (1945).
- [36] J.V. Siven, J.T Lins, and J.L. Hansen, J. Stat. Mech. 2009 , P02004 (2009)
- [37] O.J. Blanchard, Econ. Lett. 3 , 387 (1979).
- [38] M. Brunnermeier, Asset Pricing Under Asymmetric Information (Princeton University Press, 2001).
- [39] M.J. Brennan and E.S. Schwartz, J. Bus. 62 , 455 (1989).