## Michael Milken: The Junk Dealer

## Ravi Kashyap

## SolBridge International School of Business / City University of Hong Kong

July-04-2019

Keywords: Milken; Junk Bond; Junk Dealer; Magic Trick; Drexel Lambert Burnham

JEL Codes: G18 Government Policy and Regulation; G24 Investment Banking · Venture Capital · Brokerage · Ratings and Ratings Agencies; B26 Financial Economics

## Contents

| 1  Abstract  2  2  The Price of Junk  2  2.1  To Yield or Not To Yield  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  4  3  Milken was Milk'em LBOs (Leveraged Buyouts)  4  3.1  High School Spirits of A Dynamic Duo .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5  3.2  A Sweet Deal: Wild Wild West, Starting From the East  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  5  3.3  Rescuing Fallen Angels  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  6  3.4  No Easy Credit: A Blessing to Some  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7  3.5  The Tipping Point  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  7  4  Milken's Magic  8  4.1  The Pledge of Michael Milken .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  8  4.2  The Turn of Michael Milken .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  9  4.3  The Prestige of Michael Milken  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  9  5  The Rise and Fall  10  5.1  Milken the Felon (or Not?)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  11  5.2  Client Loyalty, A Capital Crime (?)  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12  5.3  What would you do? What is your verdict?  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12  6  Acknowledgments and End-notes  13   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 7 References

## 8 Appendix of Additional Illustrations

## 1 Abstract

We take a closer look at the life and legacy of Micheal Milken. We discuss why Michael Milken, also know as the Junk Bond King, was not just any other King or run-of-the-mill Junk Dealer, but 'The Junk Dealer'. We find parallels between the three parts to any magic act and what Micheal Milken did, showing that his accomplishments were nothing short of a miracle. His compensation at that time captures to a certain extent the magnitude of the changes he brought about, the eco-system he created for businesses to flourish, the impact he had on the wider economy and also on the future growth and development of American Industry. We emphasize two of his contributions to the financial industry that have grown in importance over the years. One was the impetus given to the Private Equity industry and the use of LBOs. The second was the realization that thorough research was the key to success, financial and otherwise. Perhaps an unintended consequence of the growth in junk bonds and tailored financing was the growth of Silicon valley and technology powerhouses in the California bay area. Investors witnessed that there was a possibility for significant returns and that financial success could be had due to the risk mitigation that Milken demonstrated by investing in portfolios of so called high risk and low profile companies. We point out the current trend in many regions of the world, which is the birth of financial and technology firms and we suggest that finding innovative ways of financing could be the key to the sustained growth of these eco-systems.

## 2 The Price of Junk

The life and legacy of Micheal Milken, his meteoric rise and subsequent fall from fame, can be summarized by the words, 'Someone's Garbage is Someone Else's Treasure'. His compensation (salary and bonus) from 1983 to 1984 jumped from $43 million to $123 million reaching a peak of $500 million USD in 1987 (Bruck 1989; Sobel 2000; End-note 2). During this time, the Junk Bond Market grew from almost non-existent to more than $125 billion USD (Figure 1; Altunbaş, Gadanecz &amp; Kara 2006a, 2006b; End-note 5).

We take a closer look at the larger than life accomplishments of Micheal Milken and his subsequent rapid decline. We discuss why Michael Milken, also know as the Junk Bond King, was not just any other King or run-of-themill Junk Dealer, but 'The Junk Dealer'. We find parallels between the three parts to any magic act and what Micheal Milken did, showing that his accomplishments were nothing short of a miracle. His compensation at that time captures to a certain extent the magnitude of the changes he brought about, the eco-system he created for businesses to flourish, the impact he had on the wider economy and also on the future growth and development of American Industry. We emphasize two of his contributions to the financial industry that have grown in importance over the years. One was the impetus given to the Private Equity industry and the use of LBOs (leveraged buyouts: Kaplan &amp; Stromberg 2009; End-notes 3, 4). The second was the realization that thorough research was the key to success, financial and otherwise. Perhaps an unintended consequence of the uptick in junk bonds and tailored financing was the growth of silicon valley and technology powerhouses in the California bay area. Investors witnessed that there was a possibility for significant returns and that financial success could be had due to the risk mitigation that Milken demonstrated by investing in portfolios of so called high risk and low profile companies. We point out the current trend in many regions of the world, which is the birth of financial and technology firms, and we suggest that finding innovative ways of financing could be the key to the sustained growth of these eco systems.

A big influence on how Michael Milken approached investing and in particular how he assessed the risk of managing portfolios of junk bonds can be attributed to the book, Corporate Bond Quality and Investor Experience (Hickman 1958). Looking at his roots, tell us that he probably had honorable intentions to begin with and lost his way along the journey. We discuss whether he had crossed a certain point of no return, where he had to do whatever he had to, so as to sustain his creation. Some of the topics we discuss are: The Price of Junk (section 2); Milken was Milk'em LBOs (Leveraged Buyouts) (section 3); Rescuing Fallen Angels (section 3.3); Milken's Magic: The Pledge; The Turn; The Prestige (section 4); The Rise and Fall (section 5); Milken the Felon (or Not?) (section 5.1); Client Loyalty, A Capital Crime (?) (section 5.2); What would you do? What is your verdict? (section 5.3)

Figure 1: The Market for Junk

<!-- image -->

## 2.1 To Yield or Not To Yield

Bonds are an attractive way to raise capital since there is no need to give out firm ownership. The key terminology about bonds which most of us know, or are sort of familiar with, such as principal, coupon and maturity of a bond are explained in (Ross, Westerfield &amp; Jaffe 2013). The following equation (eq 1) summarizes the relation between bond prices and discount rates, which are closely related to interest rates and can also factor in the risk of defaults on a loan taken by a firm. Clearly we see that there is an inverse relationship between interest rates and bond prices.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Here, C is the coupon amount; F is the face value; T is the time to maturity; r is the discount rate for the cash flows that accrue to the investor in the bond. It is the return the bond holder would obtain by holding the bond till maturity with all payments made as scheduled and reinvested at the same rate. It can be viewed as the required return on the bond and is also known as the yield to maturity.

Another central aspect of the working of bond markets was the role played by the credit rating agencies: Fitch, Moody's and S&amp;P. These rating agencies evaluated companies on their financial health and assigned them lettergrade credit ratings of between C and AAA. Firms that were rated low (companies in the B range and below were deemed as having credit risk, that is an inability to meet the payments on their loans; Kashyap 2019 provides a discussion of the role perceptions play when we create rankings) by these agencies had significant difficulties raising capital and bonds issued by these companies were known as junk bonds. (White 2010) is a recent exploration of how the financial regulatory structure propelled these three credit rating agencies to the center of the U.S. bond markets and thereby virtually guaranteed that when these rating agencies did make mistakes, those mistakes would have serious consequences for the financial sector.

## 3 Milken was Milk'em LBOs (Leveraged Buyouts)

'Finance is an art. Not Yes or No, Right or Wrong. It is an art form, an understanding of who should be the companies of the future, and how to structure transactions. It is an art form greatly misunderstood.' ----- Michael Milken, August 25, 1986 (End-note 11). With this fundamental belief, Michael Milken created an eco system for junk bonds that flourished beyond anyone's expectations. Suffice it to say he was making the most of the situation (End-note 12)

## 3.1 High School Spirits of A Dynamic Duo

Michael Milken was born in Los Angeles, California on the 4th of July 1946, the American Independence Day. He was voted 'most spirited' and 'friendliest' class member in the class of 1964, at which time he was also crowned prom king. Being too short to join the basketball team, he joined the cheerleading squad, creating controversy at times, for example, by leading vigorous cheers when his team was ahead 42 to nothing. This should make us reminiscence a bit about basketball, which was created by guys, who were 5' 7', tall and is being played by guys, who are 7' 5' tall, with the same basket height. We can infer from this that he was personable, well liked and had a competitive nature.

The rest of what people said may or may not be entirely correct, depending on when they said it, before or after, Milken's rise and fall from fame. 'He was extremely bright, with a prodigious memory and a very competitive spirit. While less athletic than his brother, he exhibited a leadership charisma very early in life. Some called him a boy wonder' (Bruck 1989; Sobel 2000; End-note 2). Lori Ann Hackel, his high school sweetheart, who later became his wife, was school princess (End-note 13) and voted 'most likely to succeed' (End-note 14).

## 3.2 A Sweet Deal: Wild Wild West, Starting From the East

California has inspired a few hundred Songs (End-note 15), that should tell us something about the kind of motivational effects it has on people ... Perhaps, a lot? In an op-editorial written at age 24 in 1970, which Milken submitted to (and was rejected by) the New York Times, he said, 'Unlike other crusaders from Berkeley, I have chosen Wall Street as my battleground for improving society because it is here that governments, institutions and industries are financed.' This suggests that he was starting out with the right intentions about doing good for society. The alternative viewpoint could be that at that age, he knew he would go on to create a multi-billion dollar industry, get involved in numerous scams and regulatory inquiries and thought it appropriate to send out misleading messages even before he started. It would be simpler to grant him the benefit of doubt.

He left graduate school and headed to Drexel Firestone, which later became Drexel Burnham Lambert. Drexel President I.W. Tubby Burnham offered Milken, 'One Dollar for Every Three Dollars' (Sobel 2000) when he started the job. That is, Milken could keep one dollar for three dollars profit he made for the company and that deal stayed the same when Milken was playing with billions. The kind of deal that would be unheard of these days.

Milken went back to his roots and relocated to Beverly Hills, California. He initially got an opportunity to be involved in some non-financial restructuring. As operations analyst, Milken surveyed the various business units and found a hierarchy topped by sales, then by traders in the middle, then researchers on the bottom. Buyers for products existed, but sales staff was inadequate to develop and distribute new products. Only research could create a broader market. Thus, over time, he placed an emphasis on research, which was to obtain a proper understanding of companies, their capital needs and risk factors. As he rose within the organization, research came to dominate the organizational order.

## 3.3 Rescuing Fallen Angels

Milken became the primary player in the secondary junk bond market. He then moved to primary market offerings. The higher risk of default on low grade bonds was compensated by the higher interest that they paid (Figures 2, 3; Livingston &amp; Williams 2007; End-note 6). The market overestimated the cost of companies failing to meet payments on their obligations. Thus bond prices were too low and the quality yield spreads correspondingly too high. If fewer bonds actually defaulted than were expected to default, then a diversified portfolio comprising such bonds would outperform a portfolio of investment-grade bonds. The low grade bond market consisted of 'fallen angels': bonds that had been listed as investment grade but had been downgraded. Milken took an interest in these companies that had fallen on hard times. In his eyes, these companies had strong assets to back their balance sheets and could generate strong earnings. The importance of his team's approach to understanding the value of companies with extensive research needs to be emphasized here.

Figure 2: Spread The Junk

<!-- image -->

Figure 3: Drexel Underwriting Fees

<!-- image -->

## 3.4 No Easy Credit: A Blessing to Some

In 1977, only a handful of non-investment grade companies issued bonds. Paradoxically, the most innovative companies, those with the highest returns on capital and fastest rates of growth, had the least access to capital. Only 6% of roughly 11,000 corporations were investment grade. Suffice it to say that banks were not giving any easy credit to corporations in the wild 1970s. This is ironic since Milken's team gave him full credit, 'Someone like Mike comes along once every five hundred years' (Bruck 1989; End-note 16).

## 3.5 The Tipping Point

From 1977 to 1981 new issues of junk bonds were less than $1.5 billion per year. We can identify the tipping point (Gladwell 2006; End-note 17) somewhere after this time since from 1982 to 1987 there were junk bonds everywhere (Figure 1). (Figure 4) shows that interest rates were at an all time high around 1980 adding to the issue of limited capital and high interest payments for companies with low investment ratings. In 1983, Drexel issued $1.1 billion in junk bonds for MCI Communications, another major milestone in the ascent of Milken. By positioning themselves in the middle of buyers and sellers, Milken and Drexel controlled the market. Drexel also bought back the bonds they underwrote. This show of faith was instrumental to building credibility and trust, key ingredients in financial transactions. 60% of Drexel profits in 1985 with underwriting fees of 3% to 4% came from junk bonds.

Figure 4: Interest Rates and Inflation

<!-- image -->

## 4 Milken's Magic

Every great magic trick consists of three parts or acts (End-note 18). The first part is called "The Pledge". The magician shows you something ordinary: a deck of cards, a bird or a man. He shows you this object. Perhaps he asks you to inspect it to see if it is indeed real, unaltered, normal. But of course... it probably isn't. The second act is called "The Turn". The magician takes the ordinary something and makes it do something extraordinary. Now you're looking for the secret... but you won't find it, because of course, you're not really looking. You don't really want to know. You want to be fooled. But you wouldn't clap yet because making something disappear isn't enough; you have to bring it back. That's why every magic trick has a third act, the hardest part, the part we call "The Prestige".'

Let us now try to identify these three parts in whatever Milken did. If we are able to convince ourselves that these three acts do exist, then Milken becomes a Magician.

## 4.1 The Pledge of Michael Milken

This is the simplest or the most basic and obvious aspect of what Milken did. He intervened to match buyer and seller and depended on an intricate network of reciprocal obligation. He would sell the junk bonds of Corporation X only if it agreed, at least tacitly, to buy the junk bonds of Corporate Y at an advantageous time. He thought of himself as a retailer. The duty of a retailer is to talk to a customer and see what they want. It became clear to Milken that customers needed products that were not available at that time. The solution was staring them in the face, they had to create those products. Pledge also means a promise and Milken was a man of his word, 'In my entire career on Wall Street I have never backed out of a transaction once I have agreed to stand up to it, no matter how onerous it might be', (Bruck 1989; End-note 2).

## 4.2 The Turn of Michael Milken

Milken helped connect entrepreneurs, growing businesses and companies in new and unproven industries with investors. He was responsible for the democratization of credit through the infusion of new capital. It was widely believed around this time that companies did not need billions in assets and strong credit ratings, all they needed was Michael Milken. Milken identified a large market without liquidity and provided it. There was an explosive growth in the junk bond market and Drexel became a leading player in this market. Other firms struggled to duplicate this success, as Milken was the focal point (Figure 5; Livingston &amp; Williams 2007; End-note 19). In addition, the easy access to capital might have brought about stable growth and economic calm to American industry in sharp contrast to the preceding decades (Brunner 1983; Conte, Karr, Clack &amp; Hug 2001; End-note 20).

Figure 5: Hirfindahl-Hirschman Index for Junk Bonds

<!-- image -->

## 4.3 The Prestige of Michael Milken

Junk Bonds were used for LBOs and new firms emerged focused on LBOs, creating the modern private equity (PE) industry. Milken (indirectly through the PE firms), by eliminating corporate largess created by conglomerates, might have generated large gains for shareholders and the wider economy as a whole. A lot of these after effects can be studied under the category of unintended consequences which are common in finance and everywhere else as well (Kashyap 2016, 2016). The American economy has been transformed since the increase of junk bonds through the widespread use of LBOs. The following sources chronicle the spread of this phenomenon globally and the impact it has had on the global economic landscape: (Bruton, Dattani, Fung, Chow &amp; Ahlstrom 1999; Leeds &amp; Sunderland

2003; Froud &amp; Williams 2007; Banerjee 2008; Cumming, Fleming, Johan &amp; Takeuchi 2012; Lerner, Leamon &amp; Hardymon 2012).

An important question that arises and hints at a big involvement of clever financial innovations is: How much of the Silicon Valley technology boom was due to junk bonds or more subtly, due to the use of tailored and novel means of financing? Investors witnessed that there was a possibility for significant returns and that financial success could be had due to the risk mitigation that Milken demonstrated by investing in so called high risk and low profile companies. (Ooms, Werker, Caniëls, &amp; Van Den Bosch 2015) suggest that regions' development paths emerge from agglomeration patterns and research orientation. They categorize data from thirty-six European regions according to research orientation and agglomeration. Clearly, they fail to identify the importance of innovative financing as a contributing factor. (Klepper 2010) analyze the factors behind the historical clustering of the two industries in Detroit and Silicon Valley and consider some of the effects of capital structure and financing. (Saxenian 2001; End-note 21) compare Silicon Valley with the Route 128 beltway around Boston, Massachusetts using an alternative network approach and provide important insights into the local sources of competitive advantage (also, Hulsink, Manuel &amp; Bouwman 2007). (Phillips 2001) is a study regarding law firms in the Silicon valley region between 1946 to 1996. For other regions in the world that are likened to Silicon valley, see: (Mathews 1997; Patni 1999; Saxenian &amp; Hsu 2001; Park 2012).

We provide additional illustrations in Appendix 8 that chronicle the growth of silicon valley and more recently other technology centers around the world. (Figures 6, 7; End-note 7) show the number of fastest growing electronic firms and the total employment in technology firms in Silicon Valley and Route 128. (Figures 8, 9; End-note 8) show the population density of law firms and the number of law firms that were founded and failed. (Figures 10, 11, 12, 13; End-note 9) show the number of transistor and IC firms that entered and exited the US markets; also shown are the percentage share of IC and transistor firms across Los Angeles, Boston, New York and Silicon Valley. (Figure 14; End-note 10) shows the growth of Silicon Valley in terms of the number of firms in various constituent industries from 1950 to 2000.

In all these figures, it is easily seen that there is increased activity during the years when junk bonds and Micheal Milken were at their peak.

## 5 The Rise and Fall

Milken cherished his privacy and kept a low profile. His deals were complex and secretive. He was an outsider in the clubby wall street community. At this peak, he was committing more money than KKR, a leading PE firm (Fischel 1995; End-notes 2, 22). Using the Elbow is a foul in Soccer, but in an LBO many people get the Elbow (they are laid off from their jobs). Since self financing is tough, debt financing made up between 60% to 90% of the transactions used to acquire majority ownership in public companies. This led to growing negative sentiment against the junk bond industry by the American public. Some of these dynamics are portrayed in the classic movie Wall Street, where Gordon Gekko played by Michael Douglas is an iconic corporate raider (End-note 23). This surge in growing negative sentiment was despite another corner with changing attitudes which held the belief in agency theory and the responsibility of business: Managers should run the business to benefit stock holders (Ross 1973; Eisenhardt 1989).

## 5.1 Milken the Felon (or Not?)

With a lot of negative press and attention, the industry attracted the attention of regulators. In the late 1980s federal authorities investigated the business practices of one of Milken's clients, the prominent financier and arbitrager Ivan Boesky (End-note 24). Boesky was well-known and respected in the business world, though he was nicknamed 'Ivan the Terrible' for being a ruthless investor (End-note 25). Though as the story unfolds, we will see that Ivan just turned out to be a terrible insider. We all flout the connections we have in high places. But we need to realize that people in high places are nobody's friends; though everyone calls them friends. This aspect of lack of cooperation among rational individuals is studied in game theory under the heading prisoner's dilemma (Osborne &amp; Rubinstein 1994; End-note 26).

In 1986, Boseky was accused by federal regulators of insider trading. Boesky paid a $100 million penalty, and provided authorities with information on other white collar crimes. This information led authorities to investigate Milken in 1986 and 1987. Based on their findings, in late 1988 federal regulators charged both Drexel and Milken in civil court for a range of legal violations. Rudolph Giuliani, politically ambitious, took extreme measures and invoked RICO Act (Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations - meant for organized crime; End-note 27). Drexel paid a $650 million fine and pleaded guilty to six felonies. Milken did not settle initially and was indicted on 100 criminal charges. Finally he settled down with a $600 million fine and six charges (described by some as technical violations, or, honest mistakes with an immaterial impact, with economic around cost of $318,082).

The following questions about Milken bubble to the surface as we try to come to terms with what he did and how much of those were actually crimes:

1. Was he a greedy hustler? or Was he doing what he believed in and just making a lot of money, perhaps, some of it through questionable means?
2. Had he crossed the point of no return? If he stopped what he was doing, perhaps, his entire creation could come crashing down. He was instrumental to the eco system he had created and realizing his pivotal role, he had to keep going.

3. He traded for the firm and many times when he traded for his own account, was it only when the firm did not back him on certain deals?
4. He awarded interests in his investment partnerships to portfolio managers in return for investing in his funds. Is this a question of simple incentives or was it much more?

## 5.2 Client Loyalty, A Capital Crime (?)

Judge Kimba M. Wood's remark when sentencing Milken to ten years in prison was: Milken profited from his crimes, 'not necessarily by lining your pockets directly and immediately, but by increasing your clients loyalty to you, hence, increasing, your edge over competitors and increasing the likelihood that clients would pay for your services in the future' (End-note 28).

Unless the remark above was taken out of context, 'increasing client loyalty . . . ' seems like the fundamental objective of any business. Or perhaps, Judge Kimba Wood is referring to Utopian business entities, where there is no competition but only co-operation (or to be more realistic and less utopian, maybe just a combination of competition and co-operation, termed co-opetition: Brandenburger &amp; Nalebuff 1996). Perhaps such firms did exist before, and we just need to find or establish them again.

## 5.3 What would you do? What is your verdict?

We need to remember this before passing our judgment: There are no good or bad people; just seemingly tough situations and mediocre role models. We conclude with the following observations in Milken's Defense:

1. Big companies were not competitive, so they were forced to trim (Budros 1999; Moen 1999; Gandolfi 2014).
2. Milken and his team were matching capital to entrepreneurs who could use it effectively. As he recounted, once the dust had settled on his legal case and he was serving his sentence, he was proud of most of what they accomplished (Michaels &amp; Berman 1992).
3. After most Mergers and Acquisitions, companies find ways to increase synergies and improve their bottomline. Aprimary strategy for accomplishing this is workforce reduction (O'Shaughnessy &amp; Flanagan 1998; Gutknecht &amp; Keys 1993; Krishnan &amp; Park 2002; Krishnan, Hitt &amp; Park 2007). Fact: The vast majority of mergers were not financed with junk bonds. LBOs accounted for only 15% to 25% (the peak 25% happened in 1988) of all completed mergers (Smith 1992).

## 6 Acknowledgments and End-notes

1. Naresh Pandey provided excellent assistance with gathering the numerical illustrations used in this paper from various sources. This paper developed over many years to supplement classroom discussions regarding Michael Milken, Junk Bonds and Private Equity. Dr. Yong Wang, Dr. Isabel Yan, Dr. Vikas Kakkar, Dr. Fred Kwan, Dr. William Case, Dr. Srikant Marakani, Dr. Qiang Zhang, Dr. Costel Andonie, Dr. Jeff Hong, Dr. Guangwu Liu, Dr. Humphrey Tung and Dr. Xu Han at the City University of Hong Kong; the faculty members of SolBridge International School of Business and numerous seminar participants provided encouragement to explore and where possible apply cross disciplinary techniques. The views and opinions expressed in this article, along with any mistakes, are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of either of my affiliations or any other agency.
2. The following sources have been used to get a good understanding of Michael Milken's Background: The Predators' Ball: the inside story of Drexel Burnham and the rise of the junk bond raiders (Bruck 1989); Dangerous dreamers: the financial innovators from Charles Merrill to Michael Milken (Sobel 2000); Harvard Business School Case, Michael Milken: The Junk Bond King by Nicholas, Tom, and Matthew G. Preble: "Michael Milken: The Junk Bond King." Harvard Business School Case 816-050, March 2016.; California State University Northridge Case, Michael Milken - The Junk Bond King: California State University Northridge Case; Wikipedia Link on Michael Milken: Michael Milken, Wikipedia Link
3. Private equity typically refers to investment funds, generally organized as limited partnerships, that buy and restructure companies that are not publicly traded. Private equity is, strictly speaking, a type of equity and one of the asset classes consisting of equity securities and debt in operating companies that are not publicly traded on a stock exchange. However, the term has come to be used to describe the business of taking a company into private ownership in order to restructure it before selling it again at a hoped-for profit. Private Equity, Wikipedia Link
4. A leveraged buyout (LBO) is a financial transaction in which a company is purchased with a combination of equity and debt, such that the company's cash flow is the collateral used to secure and repay the borrowed money. Leveraged Buyout, Wikipedia Link
5. Figure 1 was prepared using data from (Altunbaş, Gadanecz &amp; Kara 2006a).
6. Figures 2, 3, 1, 5 were prepared using data from (Livingston &amp; Williams 2007).

7. Figures 6, 7 were prepared using data from (Saxenian 2001). The fastest growing companies chart (Figure 6) is based on the 100 fastest-growing electronics firms in the United States of America.
8. Figures 8, 9 were prepared using data from (Phillips 2001).
9. Figures 10, 11, 12, 13 were prepared using data from (Klepper 2010).
10. Figure 14 was prepared using data from (Hulsink, Manuel &amp; Bouwman 2007).
11. 'Financing is an art form. One of the challenges is how to correctly finance a company. In certain periods of time, more covenants need to be put into deals. You have to be sure the company has the right covenant -to allow it the freedom to grow, but also to insure the integrity of the credit. Sometimes a company should issue convertible bonds instead of straight bonds. Sometimes it should issue preferred stock. Each company and each financing is different, and the process can't be imitative.' Good Reads Quote
12. Milk It: To extract the most out of a situation. An abbreviated version of 'milk it for all it's worth' Milk It, Urban Dictionary; We adapt milk it to our situation and write the following, 'Michael Milken was Milking Them (Milk'em) Junk Bonds'; Also there is a famous song somewhat related to this theme called Milk'em: Ghostface Killah &amp; Trife Da God - Milk 'em Song; Milk'em Lyrics
13. Again, here we cannot be sure what this really means since we are unsure when this was said and by whom. For one, who is not a school princess. Also, we need to keep in mind that people are known to say nice things to a lady whose husband is earning 500 million dollars a year.
14. While there is still a lot of ambiguity, voted most likely to succeed is a recorded fact and does indicate that the person was likely to be ambitious and capable.
15. The following is a list of Songs about California: Songs About California
16. Again, we need to be mindful that many would say nice things to someone who is instrumental in ensuring that they earn very high compensations.
17. A tipping point is defined as "the moment of critical mass, the threshold, the boiling point". The Tipping Point, Wikipedia Link
18. The Prestige is a 2006 psychological thriller film directed adapted from a novel of the same name; The Prestige (Film), Wikipedia Link; The Prestige on IMDb: Prestige on IMDB
19. The Herfindahl index (also known as Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, HHI, or sometimes HHI-score) is a measure of the size of firms in relation to the industry and an indicator of the amount of competition among them. It

is defined as the sum of the squares of the market shares of the firms within the industry (sometimes limited to a certain number of the largest firms), where the market shares are expressed as fractions. The result is proportional to the average market share, weighted by market share. As such, it can range from 0 to 1.0, moving from a huge number of very small firms to a single monopolistic producer. Increases in the Herfindahl index generally indicate a decrease in competition and an increase of market power, whereas decreases indicate the opposite. Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, Wikipedia Link

20. The early 1980s recession was a severe global economic recession that affected much of the developed world in the late 1970s and early 1980s. Clearly, numerous factors contribute to complex events such as recessions. Following are some sources that summarize the main events around this time: (Day 1993; Murray 2008); Early 1980s Recession, Wikipedia Link
21. Route 128, the Yankee Division Highway, is a state highway in the U.S. state of Massachusetts. The area along the western part of Route 128 is home to a number of high-technology firms and corporations. This part of Route 128 was dubbed "America's Technology Highway". In the 1980s, the area was often compared to California's Silicon valley. Massachusetts Route 128, Wikipedia Link
22. KKR &amp; Co. Inc. (formerly known as Kohlberg Kravis Roberts &amp; Co. and KKR &amp; Co. L.P.) is a global investment firm that manages multiple alternative asset classes, including private equity, energy, infrastructure, real estate, credit, and, through its strategic partners, hedge funds. Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, Wikipedia Link
23. Wall Street is a 1987 American drama film, directed and co-written by Oliver Stone, which stars Michael Douglas, Charlie Sheen, and Daryl Hannah. The film tells the story of Bud Fox (Sheen), a young stockbroker who becomes involved with Gordon Gekko (Douglas), a wealthy, unscrupulous corporate raider. Wall Street (1987 Film), Wikipedia Link
24. Ivan Frederick Boesky (born March 6, 1937) is a former American stock trader who became infamous for his prominent role in an insider trading scandal that occurred in the United States during the mid-1980s. Ivan Boesky, Wikipedia Link
25. Ivan IV Vasilyevich (25 August 1530 - 28 March 1584), commonly known as Ivan the Terrible ("Ivan the Formidable" or "Ivan the Fearsome"), was the Grand Prince of Moscow from 1533 to 1547 and the first Tsar of Russia from 1547 to 1584. Ivan The Terrible, Wikipedia Link
26. The prisoner's dilemma is a standard example of a game analyzed in game theory that shows why two completely rational individuals might not cooperate, even if it appears that it is in their best interests to do so. Prisoner's Dilemma, Wikipedia Link

27. Rudolph William Louis Giuliani (born May 28, 1944) is an American politician, attorney, businessman, and public speaker who served as the 107th Mayor of New York City from 1994 to 2001. Rudy Giuliani, Wikipedia Link
28. The Milken Sentence; Excerpts From Judge Wood's Explanation of the Milken Sentencing: NY Times Article, Nov 22, 1990

## 7 References

1. Altunbaş, Y., Gadanecz, B., &amp; Kara, A. (2006a). Banks' and Financial Institutions' Decision to Participate in Loan Syndications. In Syndicated Loans (pp. 101-125). Palgrave Macmillan, London.
2. Altunbaş, Y., Gadanecz, B., &amp; Kara, A. (2006b). The evolution of syndicated loan markets. The Service Industries Journal, 26(6), 689-707.
3. Banerjee, A. (2008). Private equity in developing nations. Journal of Asset Management, 9(2), 158-170.
4. Brandenburger, A. M., &amp; Nalebuff, B. J. (1996). Co-opetition. Crown Business.
5. Bruck, C. (1989). The Predators' Ball: the inside story of Drexel Burnham and the rise of the junk bond raiders. Penguin Group USA.
6. Budros, A. (1999). A conceptual framework for analyzing why organizations downsize. Organization Science, 10(1), 69-82.
7. Brunner, K. (1983). The Recession of 1981/1982 in the Context of Postwar Recessions.
8. Bruton, G. D., Dattani, M., Fung, M., Chow, C., &amp; Ahlstrom, D. (1999). Private equity in China: Differences and similarities with the Western model. The Journal of Private Equity, 2(2), 7-13.
9. Conte, C., Karr, A. R., Clack, G., &amp; Hug, K. E. (2001). Outline of the US Economy. US Department of State, Office of International Information Programs.
10. Cumming, D., Fleming, G., Johan, S., &amp; Takeuchi, M. (2012). Legal protection, corruption and private equity returns in Asia. In Entrepreneurship, Governance and Ethics (pp. 173-193). Springer, Dordrecht.

11. Day, K. (1993). S &amp; L Hell: The people and the politics behind the $1 trillion savings and loan scandal. WW Norton &amp; Company.
12. Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Agency theory: An assessment and review. Academy of management review, 14(1), 57-74.
13. Fischel, D. R. (1995). Payback: the conspiracy to destroy Michael Milken and his financial revolution. New York: HarperBusiness.
14. Froud, J., &amp; Williams, K. (2007). Private equity and the culture of value extraction. New Political Economy, 12(3), 405-420.
15. Gandolfi, F. (2014). Why do firms downsize?. Journal of Management Research (09725814), 14(1).
16. Gutknecht, J. E., &amp; Keys, J. B. (1993). Mergers, acquisitions and takeovers: Maintaining morale of survivors and protecting employees. Academy of Management Perspectives, 7(3), 26-36.
17. Hickman, W. B. (1958). Corporate bond quality and investor experience. NBER Books.
18. Hulsink, W., Manuel, D., &amp; Bouwman, H. (2007). Clustering in ICT: From Route 128 to Silicon Valley, from DEC to Google, from hardware to content. ERIM Report Series Reference No. ERS-2007-064-ORG.
19. Kaplan, S. N., &amp; Stromberg, P. (2009). Leveraged buyouts and private equity. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(1), 121-46.
20. Kashyap, R. (2015). A Tale of Two Consequences. The Journal of Trading, 10(4), 51-95.
21. Kashyap, R. (2016). Hong Kong-Shanghai Connect/Hong Kong-Beijing Disconnect? Scaling the Great Wall of Chinese Securities Trading Costs. The Journal of Trading, 11(3), 81-134.
22. Kashyap, R. (2019). For Whom the Bell (Curve) Tolls: A to F, Trade Your Grade Based on the Net Present Value of Friendships with Financial Incentives. The Journal of Private Equity, 22(3), 64-81.
23. Klepper, S. (2010). The origin and growth of industry clusters: The making of Silicon Valley and Detroit. Journal of Urban Economics, 67(1), 15-32.
24. Krishnan, H. A., &amp; Park, D. (2002). The impact of work force reduction on subsequent performance in major mergers and acquisitions: an exploratory study. Journal of Business Research, 55(4), 285-292.
25. Krishnan, H. A., Hitt, M. A., &amp; Park, D. (2007). Acquisition premiums, subsequent workforce reductions and post-acquisition performance. Journal of Management Studies, 44(5), 709-732.

26. Leeds, R., &amp; Sunderland, J. (2003). Private equity investing in emerging markets. Journal of applied corporate finance, 15(4), 111-119.
27. Lerner, J., Leamon, A., &amp; Hardymon, F. (2012). Venture capital, private equity, and the financing of entrepreneurship.
28. Livingston, M., &amp; Williams, G. (2007). Drexel Burnham Lambert's bankruptcy and the subsequent decline in underwriter fees. Journal of Financial Economics, 84(2), 472-501.
29. Mathews, J. A. (1997). A Silicon Valley of the East: Creating Taiwan's semiconductor industry. California Management Review, 39(4), 26-54.
30. Michaels, J. W., &amp; Berman, P. (1992). My story--Michael Milken. Forbes, 149(6), 78-92.
31. Murray, C. (2008). Losing ground: American social policy, 1950-1980. Basic books.
32. Moen, Ø. (1999). The relationship between firm size, competitive advantages and export performance revisited. International Small Business Journal, 18(1), 53-72.
33. Ooms, W., Werker, C., Caniëls, M. C., &amp; Van Den Bosch, H. (2015). Research orientation and agglomeration: Can every region become a Silicon Valley?. Technovation, 45, 78-92.
34. Osborne, M. J., &amp; Rubinstein, A. (1994). A course in game theory. MIT press.
35. O'Shaughnessy, K. C., &amp; Flanagan, D. J. (1998). Determinants of layoff announcements following M&amp;As: An empirical investigation. Strategic management journal, 19(10), 989-999.
36. Park, S. C. (2012). Competitiveness of East Asian science cities: discourse on their status as global or local innovative clusters. Ai &amp; Society, 27(4), 451-464.
37. Patni, A. (1999). Silicon valley of the east. Harvard International Review, 21(4), 8.
38. Phillips, D. J. (2001). The promotion paradox: Organizational mortality and employee promotion chances in Silicon Valley law firms, 1946-1996. American Journal of Sociology, 106(4), 1058-1098.
39. Ross, S. A. (1973). The economic theory of agency: The principal's problem. The American economic review, 63(2), 134-139.
40. Ross, S. A., Westerfield, R., &amp; Jaffe, J. F. (2013). Corporate finance. McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
41. Saxenian, A. (2001). Inside-out: regional networks and industrial adaptation in Silicon Valley and Route 128. The sociology of economic life, 2, 357-375.

42. Saxenian, A., &amp; Hsu, J. Y. (2001). The Silicon Valley-Hsinchu connection: technical communities and industrial upgrading. Industrial and corporate change, 10(4), 893-920.
43. Smith, R. C. (1992). After the Ball. The Wilson Quarterly (1976-), 16(4), 31-43.
44. Sobel, R. (2000). Dangerous dreamers: the financial innovators from Charles Merrill to Michael Milken. Beard Books.
45. Gladwell, M. (2006). The tipping point: How little things can make a big difference. Little, Brown.
46. White, L. J. (2010). Markets: The credit rating agencies. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 211-26.

## 8 Appendix of Additional Illustrations

Figure 6: Fastest Growing Electronics Firms in Silicon Valley and Route 128

<!-- image -->

Figure 7: Total High Tech Employment in Silicon Valley Firms

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 8: Population Density Silicon Valley Law Firms

Figure 9: Founding Failures Silicon Valley Law Firms

<!-- image -->

Figure 10: Entry and Exit of Integrated Circuit Firms

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Figure 11: Percentage of Integrated Circuit Firms

Figure 12: Entry and Exit of Transistor Firms

<!-- image -->

Figure 13: Percentage of Transistor Firms

<!-- image -->

Figure 14: Growth of Silicon Valley from 1950 to 2000

<!-- image -->