## Using detrended deconvolution foreign exchange network to identify currency status

Pengfei Xi 1, * , Shiyang Lai 1 , Xueying Wang 1 , Weiqiang Huang 1

1. School of Business Administration, Northeastern University, P.R. China;

Abstract : This article proposed a hybrid detrended deconvolution foreign exchange network construction  method  (DDFEN),  which  combined  the  detrended  cross-correlation  analysis coefficient (DCCC) and the network deconvolution method together. DDFEN is designed to reveal the 'true' correlation of currencies by filtering indirect effects in the foreign exchange networks (FXNs). The empirical results show that DDFEN can reflect the change of currency status  in  the  long  term  and  also  perform  more  stable  than  traditional  network  construction methods.

Key  words :  Exchange  rate;  Network  deconvolution;  Detrended  cross-correlation  analysis; Currencies status

## 1. Introduction

In  recent  years,  using  FXNs  to  analyze  the  international  currency  market  has  become  a thriving  topic  in  economics  research.  However,  due  to  the  complex  nature  of  the  foreign exchange (FX) relationships, it is almost impossible to operate practical analysis on the original FX correlation networks. To overcome this, Mcdonald et al. (2005) innovatively proposed a minimum  spanning  tree  (MST)  based  FXNs  construction  method  helping  to  simplify  the overcomplicate FX linkage system, which has caught a lot of researcher's attention (Kwapie ń et al., 2009; Li and Liao, 2019; Sinha and Kovur, 2014). But in fact, the MST based method just  give  an  oversimplified  solution  to  this  problem,  it  only  keeps  the  connection  of  each currency to its most relevant one and ignore all of the others, which inevitably cause much information loss. To further improve the construction method of FXNs, this paper introduced DDFEN to derive more diverse and realistic currency relationships.

To  achieve  our  purpose,  the  two  main  issues  we  need  to  concern  is  finding  the  right correlation level of each two currency pairs and omitting those links caused by indirect effects. Inspired by the work of Li et al. (2018), who argues that DCCC is a better way to calculate the correlation between currency pairs, we employed DCCC to get the original correlation network in order to reflect more reality FX correlation level. But the correlation shown between two currencies may be due to other currencies associated with both of them (Figure 1), in this regard, this  kind  of  relationship  is  indirect  and  not  'truly  exist'.  To  omit  these  links  in  FXNs,  the technical approach we adopt here to filter out this connection is network deconvolution. Feizi et  al.  (2013)  introduced  an  efficient  and  scalable  algorithm  for  deconvolving  an  observed network, which provided us with a prototype for weakening the indirect effects in FXN. To demonstrate  our  method  is  applicable,  we  utilized  the  past  ten  years  exchange  rate  data  to construct MST-based FXNs and DDFEN-based FXNs, using them to identify the change of CNY's status. Our empirical results show that, compared with traditional construction methods based  FXNs,  most  commonly  used  network  analysis  techniques  can  present  more  stable analysis results in DDFEN-based FXNs.

* Corresponding author Email address: xpf2017@stumail.neu.edu.cn (Pengfei Xi)

Figure 1. Example of indirect relationship in FXNs

<!-- image -->

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the details of the algorithm. Section 3 reports the empirical results, and the last section presents the conclusions.

## 2. Methodology and data description

Our methodology can be separate into three main parts, i.e., calculating the FX correlation matrix, adjusting the weight by network deconvolution algorithm, and finding the maximum threshold that guarantees full network connectivity.

With DCCC, we calculate the correlation between two currency pairs and for a window size w as { } n i { } n j

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where n represents the length of two currency pairs series. , and are the detrended covariance between profiles and detrended variances of and detrended variances of , respectively. ( ) DCCA F w , ( ) DFA i F w , ( ) DFA j F w { } n I { } n J { } n I { } n J

The profile of time series and is defined as { } n i } n j

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

^

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where and represent the mean value of each time series. i ^ j

We divide the profile of and into the sliding window of size w . In every position where the window slides, a time trend has been simply fitted by a linear regression, thus, fitted values (by least square method) of and for can be obtained easily. Based on all of these information, detrended variance is then defined as { } n i } n j b , I g b , J g b 1 w b g b £ £ + -

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

After that, the detrended variance of and , namely, and , can be achieved by calculating the average of and . { } n I { } n J , ( ) DFA i F w , ( ) DFA j F w 2 , ( , ) DFA i f w b 2 , ( , ) DFA j f w b

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Similarly, the detrended covariance of profiles is defined as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the detrended covariance between profiles and is calculated by { } n I { } n J

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

By  using  DCCC  for  the  input  currency  pairs  matrix,  we  looped  over  all  the  currency  pairs combinations and finally achieved the correlation matrix , for a window size w ( ) M w

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Having  obtained  the  currency  correlation  matrix through  DCCC,  we  use  network deconvolution algorithm to construct direct currency relationship network. The specific deconvolution steps as follows: ( ) M w

Decompose the currency correlation matrix to matrix of eigenvectors and diagonal ( ) M w U

matrix of eigenvalues (composed by eigenvalue ) such that th i i l

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Form a new diagonal matrix whose diagonal component is th i

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then the deconvolution correlation matrix is d M

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

To omit those links that weaken by deconvolution and make sure that all nodes in the network are not isolated, the way we determine the threshold can be summarized as follows:

First, find the maximum values in each row of , , where d M 1 2 { , ,..., } n s s s s =

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, get the minimum value in and denote it as . s min s

After that, calculate the percentage filtering threshold corresponding to : min s

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where is the size of the subset , is the size of the subset . Finally, using the percentage threshold, we keep the top of the correlation values in and obtain the DDFEN-based FXN, . ( , ) ( , ) min ({ | }) d i j d i j l M M ³s ( , ) ( , ) min { | } d i j d i j M M ³s ( , ) ({ }) d i j l M ( , ) { } d i j M q d M d M

According to some recent empirical studies (Dave and Kobayashi, 2018; Du and Zhang, 2018; Chan, 2017), the status of CNY is rising obviously in the last ten years. To test the ability of DDFEN on detecting the dynamic change of CNY ' s status, 70 countries' FX rate (quoted against USD) daily data of historical price-postings from March 27, 2010, to January 30, 2020, was chosen in this article as the dataset (from wind co database).

## 3. Empirical results

To compare with the traditional method, the empirical results of DDFEN-based FXNs and MST based FXNs are both presented in this section. We selected three important time markers which have been considered as remarkable events implying the rising of CNY's status (Dave and  Kobayashi,  2018;  Zhao,  2016)  to  test  the  performance  of  two  methods,  i.e.,  the implementation  of  the  official  document  of  China's  'One  Belt  and  One  Road'  policy (abbreviated as 'The B&amp;R') on March 28, 2015, the establishment of the New Development Bank (abbreviated as 'NDB') on March 27, 2013, and the holding of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (abbreviated as 'SCO') on June 15, 2011. In this experiment, a window length of w =200 days was rolled forward at t =60 days intervals. To measure the change of the status of CNY, four popular network indexes, which can reflect the importance of currencies in FXNs (Jo et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018), were chosen for comparison (Table 1).

Table 1. Four network indexes for node status

| Index  Formula  Description  Weighted Degree Centrality  Sum of the weighted edges connected to  node  i  except itself.  Authority  The sum of the hub scores of node  i  's  neighborhoods.  Closeness Centrality  The reciprocal of the average of the  distances from node  i  to all other nodes.  Betweenness Centrality  The  is the number of shortest  paths between  and  that pass  through  .  respects the number  of shortest paths between  and  .  ,  1  ( )  (  )  g  w  i  j  j  C  i  x  i  j  =  =  ¹  å  1  ( )  n  i  ij  k  i  A i  a  x h  =  =  =  å  ,  1  n  k  i  j  k  i  h  x  a  =  =  å  ,  1  ( )  C  j  i  i  j  n  C  i  d  ¹  -  =  å  ,  ,  (  )  (  )  i  j  B  i  k  j  i  j  g  k  C  k  g  ¹  ¹  =  å  ,  (  )  i  j  g  k  n  i  n  j  n  k  ,  i  j  g  n  i  n  j   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Note: , is the collection of all nodes in . , ( , ) i j d i j x M = V d M

Figure 1 presents the result of the Weighted Degree Centrality. The step line in the above subgraph (DDFEN) has a clear and stable growth trend. Meanwhile, its fluctuations coincide with the time markers we have chosen. On the contrary, the result from MST (subgraph below) doesn't show us any trends, and the changes of the step line are too random to say its fluctuation corresponding to our time markers. The results of other indexes (attached in the appendix A) are similar, and they show that DDFEN-based FXNs can reflect the status changes of CNY in most commonly used network analysis techniques. Comparing with MST, DDFEN has a clear advantage in accurate recognition of currency status.

Figure 2. CNY ranked by Weighted Degree Centrality

<!-- image -->

To further compare the stability of DDFEN and MST, we analyze the fluctuation level in different indexes. We  apply  the  least  square method  to  get  the detrended  volatility,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

is  the  fitted  value  from

general  linear  regression, n is  the  number  of  time  points).  According  to  the  results  of  our stability test (Table 2), the volatility of DDFEN is significantly lower than MST in each index, which indicates the stability of DDFEN in identifying currency status is much better than the traditional method.

Table 2. Fluctuation in CNY rankings over time

| Weighted Degree  Authority  Closeness Centrality  Betweenness Centrality  MST  15.583  20.182  17.749  18.198  DDFEN  7.030  6.158  14.267  14.487   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## 4. Conclusion

In this article, we introduced a hybrid FXNs construction method, namely, DDFEN, which combined the DCCC correlation matrix and the network deconvolution method together, to identify the dynamic changes of currency's status. By comparison, we argue that MST, the mainstream FXN construction technique, tends to oversimplify the correlations between each currency, which will lead to the loss of valuable information. In contrast, much closer to the real  currency  market,  DDFEN  regards  the  FX  rate  as  non-stationary  time  series  and  using DCCC to describe the correlation between FX rates. Besides, DDFEN only filters out indirect relationships between currencies and allow more connected paths exist between two currencies. Our empirical results show DDFEN-based FXNs are more stable than MST-based FXNs, and the dynamic change of CNY's status identified by DDFEN is quite close to general recognition. For  scholars  who  want  to  adopt  network  analysis  to  macroeconomics,  social  sciences,  and information science, DDFEN is equally applicable. It can be regarded as an effective approach to construct non-stationary sequence correlation networks.

## References

- Chan, S., 2017. Assessing China's recent capital outflows: policy challenges and implications. China Finance and Economic Review 5. doi:10.1186/s40589-017-0048-0.
- Dave,  B.,  Kobayashi,  Y.,  2018.  China's  silk  road  economic  belt  initiative  in  Central  Asia: economic and security implications. Asia Europe Journal 16, 267-281.
- Du, J., Zhang, Y., 2018. Does One Belt One Road initiative promote Chinese overseas direct investment? China Economic Review 47, 189-205. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chieco.2017.05.010.
- Feizi, S., Marbach, D., Médard, M., Kellis, M., 2013. Corrigendum: Network deconvolution as a general method to distinguish direct dependencies in networks. Nature biotechnology 33. doi:10.1038/nbt.2635.
- Jo, S.K., Kim, M.J., Lim, K., Kim, S.Y., 2018. Correlation analysis of the Korean stock market: Revisited  to  consider  the  influence  of  foreign  exchange  rate.  Physica  A:  Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 491, 852-868. doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2017.09.071.
- Kwapie ń , J., Gworek, S., Dro ż d ż , S., Górski, A., 2009. Analysis of a network structure of the foreign currency exchange market. Journal of Economic Interaction and Coordination 4, 55-72.
- Li, B., Liao, Z., 2019. Finding changes in the foreign exchange market from the perspective of currency network. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2019.123727.
- Li,  J.,  Shi,  Y.,  Cao,  G.,  2018.  Topology  structure  based  on  detrended  cross-correlation coefficient of exchange rate network of the belt and road countries. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 509, 1140-1151. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2018.06.059.
- Mcdonald,  M.,  Suleman,  O.,  Williams,  S.,  Howison,  S.,  Johnson,  N.,  2005.  Detecting  a Currency's Dominance or Dependence using Foreign Exchange Network Trees. Physical review. E, Statistical, nonlinear, and soft matter physics 72, 046106. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.72.046106.
- Sinha, S., Kovur, U., 2014. Uncovering the Network Structure of the World Currency Market: Cross-Correlations in the Fluctuations of Daily Exchange Rates, in: Abergel, F., Aoyama, H., Chakrabarti, B.K., Chakraborti, A., Ghosh, A. (Eds.), Econophysics of Agent-Based Models, Springer International Publishing, Cham. pp. 203-218.
- Zhao,  K.,  2016.  China's  Rise  and  its  Discursive Power  Strategy. Chinese  Political  Science Review 1, 539-564.

## Appendix A

Table A1. CNY ranked by Authority

<!-- image -->

Table A2. CNY ranked by Closeness Centrality

<!-- image -->

Table A3. CNY ranked by Betweenness Centrality

<!-- image -->