## On A Moving Average With Internal Degrees of Freedom

Linda Boudjemila University of Science and Technology Houari Boumedien Bab Ezzouar Algiers, Algeria, 16111

lariessai21@gmail.com Alexander Bobyl Ioffe Institute Polytechnicheskaya 26 St. Petersburg, Russia, 194021

bobyl@theory.ioffe.ru

Abstract -Anew type of moving average is developed. Whereas a regular moving average (e.g. of price) has a built-in internal time scale (time-window, exponential weight, etc.), the moving average developed in this paper has the weight as the product of a polynomial by window factor. The polynomial is the square of a wavefunction obtained from an eigenproblem corresponding to other observable (e.g. execution flow I = dV/dt , the number of shares traded per unit time). This allows to obtain an immediate 'switch' without lagging typical for regular moving average.

Index Terms -Radon Nikodym, fat tails, non-Gaussian noise

## I. INTRODUCTION

In the modern world, when conducting experiments and measurements, data processing is of critical importance [1], [2], [3], [4]. To solve various problems, the data obtained as a result of measurements or calculations are grouped and further processed [5], [6], [7], [8]. One of these options is timeseries. Timeserie data is widely available and used. A typical problem in data analysis to study timeserie properties and, possibly, trying to build a predictive model. Built model are typically of autoregression, Kalman filter[9], [10], [11], [12], [13], hidden Markov model[14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], and others[21]. In this work we consider timeserie data of M past observations, only past observations l = 1 . . . M are available. The value of M increases with every new observations coming. A typical data of this type is timeserie data of financial transactions. The most commonly available data is (Time, Execution Price, Shares Traded) sequence of transactions that we will be using for demonstration. The problem of moving average[22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28], [29] is considered. Whereas typically considered moving average has a builtin internal time scale (time-window, exponential weight, etc.), the moving average developed in this paper has the weight dµ = ψ 2 ( x ( t )) ω ( t ) dt with ψ ( x ) being a polynomial obtained from eigenvalue problem corresponding to a spike in other observable, such as execution flow I = dV/dt . This allows to obtain an immediate 'switch' without lagging. In previous work [30], [31] the 'switch' was obtained by applying an advanced technique of secondary sampling, where a calculated value was used as it were a new observable for sampling. In this work we have implemented 'switching' regime without Vadim Davydov Peter the Great St.Petersburg Polytechnic University Polytechnicheskaya 29 St. Petersburg Russia, 195251 davydov vadim66@mail.ru Vladislav Malyshkin Ioffe Institute Polytechnicheskaya 26 St. Petersburg, Russia, 194021

malyshki@ton.ioffe.ru

using secondary sampling and generalized previous results to be applied to a regular moving average. The main new result is the developments of a new concept - a moving average with internal degrees of freedom.

## II. BASIS SELECTION AND INTEGRATION MEASURE

Introduce the moments of basis polynomials Q m ( x ) (a polynomial of order m ) and integration measure dt ω ( t ) having the support t ∈ [ -∞ . . . t now ] :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The ω ( t ) is decaying exponent and x ( t ) is either linear or exponential function:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The moments of f are usually obtained from direct sampling of all available observations l = 1 . . . M in a timeserie:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the moments of a derivative df/dt can also be obtained from direct sampling:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Given a good choice of basis polynomials:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

one can calculate (with double precision arithmetic) the moments to a very high order m ≲ 50 (limited by the divergence of c jk m multiplication coefficinets (11)) in Laguerre basis and m ≲ 150 (limited by poorly conditioned matrices) in shifted Legendre basis; Chebyshev polynomials T m (2 x -1) also provide very stable calculations in shifted Legendre basis (Chebyshev polynomials have perfectly stable multiplication: all c jk m = 0 except c jk j -k = c jk j + k = 0 . 5 , j ≥ k ). All obtained results are invariant with respect to basis choice, Q m ( x ) = x m and the ones from (6) give identical results, but numerical stability can be drastically different[32], [33].

Fig. 1. An example of regular exponential moving average with τ = 256 s. Standard deviation is also calculated with the same τ and moving average ± standard deviation is plotted as a thin line in the same color. As τ increases - the moving average 'shifts to the right' ( τ -proportional time delay, lagging indicator). The data is for the AAPL stock on September, 20, 2012.

<!-- image -->

## III. ON AVERAGING OF PAST OBSERVATIONS

Consider familiar demonstration with a moving average. Let P τ be a regular exponential moving average. The average 〈·〉 is calculated with the weight (2):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The averaging dµ = ω ( t ) dt takes place between the past and t now using exponentially decaying weight ω ( t ) = exp( -( t now -t ) /τ ) . With τ increase, the contributing to integral interval becomes larger and moving average 'shifts to the right' ( τ -proportional time delay, lagging indicator). The (7) has no single parameter that can 'adjust' the time scale, see Fig. 1 for a demonstration. From this demonstration it is clear that all moving average dependencies are smooth, with the time scale of τ .

Consider a different approach. Introduce a wavefunction ψ ( x ) as a linear combination of basis function Q k ( x ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then an observable market-related value f , corresponding to the probability density ψ 2 ( x ) , is calculated by averaging timeserie sample with the weight dµ = ψ 2 ( x ( t )) ω ( t ) dt ; the expression corresponds to an estimation of Radon-Nikodym derivative[34].

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For averages we use bra-ket notation by Paul Dirac: 〈 ψ | and | ψ 〉 . The (9) is plain ratio of two moving averages, but the weight is not regular decaying exponent ω ( t ) from (2), but exponent multiplied by wavefunction squared as dµ = ψ 2 ( x ( t )) ω ( t ) dt , the ψ 2 ( x ) defines how to average a timeserie sample. Any ψ ( x ) function is defined by n coefficients α k , the value of an observable variable f in ψ ( x ) state is a ratio of two quadratic forms on α k (10). Regular moving average (7) corresponds to ψ ( x ) = const . Whereas typical approaches (Fourier, least squares, linear regression, wavelets, etc.) deals with vector of moments 〈 Q m f 〉 , m = 0 . . . n -1 , the quadratic forms ratio (10) operates with matrices 〈 Q j | f | Q k 〉 and 〈 Q j | Q k 〉 . The matrices can be obtained from 〈 Q m f 〉 , m = 0 . . . 2 n -2 , moments using multiplication operator:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The main idea of [33] is to consider a wavefunction (8) then to construct (10) quadratic forms ratio. A generalized eigenvalue problem is then considered with the two matrices from (10).

We established, that execution flow I = dV/dt (the number of shares traded per unit time), not trading volume V (the number of shares traded), is the driving force of the market: asset price is much more sensitive to execution flow I (dynamic impact), rather than to traded volume V (regular impact). This corresponds to the matrices 〈 Q j | I | Q k 〉 and 〈 Q j | Q k 〉 . These two matrices are volume- and time- averaged products of two basis functions. Generalized eigenvalue problem for operator I = dV/dt is then:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Our analysis shows that among the states ∣ ∣ ψ [ i ] 〉 of the problem (12) the state corresponding to the maximal eigenvalue among all λ [ i ] , i = 0 . . . n -1 , is the most important for market dynamics. Consider various observable characteristics in this state ∣ ∣ ψ [ IH ] 〉 .

In Fig. 2 a demonstration of several observables is presented: the price in ∣ ∣ ψ [ IH ] 〉 state (15), maximal eigenvalue λ [ IH ] of (12) problem, and minimal eigenvalue λ [ IL ] (for completeness).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From these observable one can clearly see that singularities in I cause singularities in price, and that a change in ∣ ∣ ψ [ IH ] 〉

Fig. 2. Price P , price P [ IH ] (15), and maximal/minimal eigenvalues of (12) for the AAPL stock on September, 20, 2012. The calculations in shifted Legendre basis with n = 12 and τ =256sec. The execution flow eigenvalues are scaled and shifted to 693 to fit the chart.

<!-- image -->

localization causes an immediate 'switch' in an observable. This switch is caused by the presence of n -1 internal degrees of freedom α k ( n coefficients (14), one less due to normalizing 1 = 〈 ψ | ψ 〉 ). Such a 'switch' is not possible in regular moving average (7) since it has no any internal degree of freedom, hence, all regular moving average dependencies are smooth.

## IV. ON LOCALIZATION CHANGES IN ∣ ∣ ψ [ IH ] 〉

Considered above the state ∣ ∣ ψ [ IH ] 〉 maximizes the number of shares traded per unit time on past observations sample; it determines the time scale. Let us consider in this state not the price and execution flow as we studied before, but simply time distance to 'now' T [ IH ] :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

to compare it with regular moving average T τ (were it an integral over dt the T τ would be a constant; the invergation with dV make it tracking the spikes in I ). As all the values of time (future and past) are known, the (16) carry information about ∣ ∣ ψ [ IH ] 〉 localization. When the value is small - a large dV/dt spike event happened very recently. When it is large - a large spike happened a substantial time ago, the value is an information when a large spike in dV/dt took place. In Fig. 3 the value of T [ IH ] (scaled by the factor 10 -3 and shifted up to fit the chart) is presented along with regular moving average T τ for τ = 256 s. One can clearly see that there is no smooth transition between the states, the 'switch' happens instantly, there is no τ -proportional time delay, what is typical for regular moving averages T τ and the one in Fig. 1. A linear dependence of T [ IH ] on time is also observed, this is an indication of stability of ∣ ∣ ψ [ IH ] 〉 state identification. The value of T [ IH ] is the time scale; typically it is easier to work with the density matrix ρ J ( ψ 2 ) obtained from ψ ( x ) = ψ [ IH ] ( x ) rather than with the time scale itself.

Fig. 3. T [ IH ] (multiplied by 10 -3 and shifted up to fit the chart) and regular moving average T τ for τ = 256 s. The AAPL stock on September, 20, 2012. The calculations in shifted Legendre basis with n = 12 for operator I = dV/dt .

<!-- image -->

## V. CONCLUSION

A moving average with the weight dµ = dV Φ( x ( t )) ω ( t ) is considered.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The ω ( t ) is decaying exponent (2); the polynomial Φ( x ) is obtained solely from observed execution flow I = dV/dt and has the form Φ( x ) = ψ [ IH ] 2 ( x ) , it corresponds to the maximal eigenvalue of (12) eigenproblem. Contrary to regular moving average (7) the developed approach has n -1 internal degrees of freedom what adjusts averaging weight according to spikes in other observable (such as execution flow I = dV/dt ). These internal degrees of freedom allow to obtain an immediate 'switch', what is not possible in regular moving average that always has τ -proportional time delay, lagging indicator. The comparison with regular moving average is most clear in Fig. 3: smooth regular moving average (blue line) vs. 'switching' moving average with internal degrees of freedom (green line).

## REFERENCES

- [1] A. Gelgor, J. Montalb´ an, D. Tkachenko, A. Mart´ ın, D. Puzko, Y. Batov, and P. Angueira, 'Flexible satellite direct-to-home services with layereddivision multiplexing,' IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting , vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 83-95, 2020. doi: 10.1109/TBC.2020.3031733
- [2] I. Petrov, A. Gelgor, and T. Lavrukhin, 'Elimination of Carrier Frequency Offset of Local Oscillator to Improve Accuracy of GNSS Positioning,' in Internet of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next Generation Networks and Systems , pp. 351-360, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-03065726-0˙31
- [3] P. Nguyen Tan Hoang and A. Gelgor, 'Optimization of shaping pulse by spectral mask to enhance DVB-S2,' in Internet of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next Generation Networks and Systems , pp. 649-660, 2019. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-30859-9˙56
- [4] V. V. Semenov, N. F. Nikiforov, and S. V. Ermak, 'Calculation of stationary magnetic resonance signal in optically oriented atoms induced by a sequence of radio pulses,' Soviet journal of Communications Technology and Electronics , vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 59 - 63, 2091.
- [5] O. Ponomareva, E. Nepomnyashchaya, E. Velichko, K. Victor, and A. Petukhov, 'Spectroscopic Method for Studying the Characteristics of Human Skin,' in 2021 International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Photonics (EExPolytech) , pp. 244-247, 2021. doi: 10.1109/EExPolytech53083.2021.9614773
- [6] R. V. Davydov and V. I. Antonov, 'Computer modelling of pulsed laser femtosecond ablation for metals,' in Journal of Physics: Conference Series , vol. 1135, no. 1, p. 012087, 2018. doi: 10.1088/17426596/1135/1/012087
- [7] R. Davydov, V. Antonov, and M. Angelina, 'Parameter control system for a nuclear power plant based on fiber-optic sensors and communication lines,' in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Photonics (EExPolytech) , pp. 42-45, 2019. doi: 10.1109/EExPolytech.2019.8906791
- [8] L. Boudjemila, B. Mahmoudi, K. Khenfer, V. Krasnoschekov, V. Y. Rud, V. Davydov, and L. Valiullin, 'Electrical characterization of nitride silicon layers SiN: x enriched in silicon at different stoichiometryPhotovoltaic application,' in Journal of Physics: Conference Series , vol. 1695, no. 1, p. 012204, 2020. doi: 10.1088/1742-6596/1695/1/012204
- [9] R. E. Kalman, 'A New Approach to Linear Filtering and Prediction Problems,' Journal of Basic Engineering , vol. 82, no. 1, pp. 35-45, 03 1960. doi: 10.1115/1.3662552
- [10] P. Shrivastava, T. K. Soon, M. Y. I. B. Idris, and S. Mekhilef, 'Overview of model-based online state-of-charge estimation using Kalman filter family for lithium-ion batteries,' Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , vol. 113, p. 109233, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2019.06.040
- [11] R. Dhaya, 'Analysis of adaptive image retrieval by transition Kalman filter approach based on intensity parameter,' Journal of Innovative Image Processing (JIIP) , vol. 3, no. 01, pp. 7-20, 2021. doi: 10.36548/jiip.2021.1.002
- [12] F. Farahi and H. S. Yazdi, 'Probabilistic Kalman filter for moving object tracking,' Signal Processing: Image Communication , vol. 82, p. 115751, 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.image.2019.115751
- [13] I. Ullah, Y. Shen, X. Su, C. Esposito, and C. Choi, 'A localization based on unscented Kalman filter and particle filter localization algorithms,' IEEE Access , vol. 8, pp. 2233-2246, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2961740
- [14] L. R. Rabiner, 'A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech recognition,' Proceedings of the IEEE , vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 257-286, 1989. doi: 10.1109/5.18626
- [15] K. Q. Tran, 'Exponential contraction of switching jump diffusions with a hidden Markov chain,' Statistics &amp; Probability Letters , vol. 178, p. 109191, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.spl.2021.109191
- [16] P. Cheng, M. Chen, V. Stojanovic, and S. He, 'Asynchronous fault detection filtering for piecewise homogenous Markov jump linear systems via a dual hidden Markov model,' Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 151, p. 107353, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.ymssp.2020.107353
- [17] S. Kuppusamy, Y. H. Joo, and H. S. Kim, 'Asynchronous control for discrete-time hidden markov jump power systems,' IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , 2021. doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2021.3062672
- [18] L. Wang, Z.-G. Wu, and Y. Shen, 'Asynchronous mean stabilization of positive jump systems with piecewise-homogeneous Markov chain,' IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs , vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 3266-3270, 2021. doi: 10.1109/TCSII.2021.3064388
- [19] S. Dayanik and K. Yamazaki, 'Detection and identification of changes of hidden Markov chains: asymptotic theory,' Statistical Inference for Stochastic Processes , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 261-301, 2022. doi: 10.1007/s11203-021-09253-5
- [20] Y. Khalifa, D. Mandic, and E. Sejdi´ c, 'A review of Hidden Markov models and Recurrent Neural Networks for event detection and localization in biomedical signals,' Information Fusion , vol. 69, pp. 52-72, 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.inffus.2020.11.008
- [21] G. Einicke, Smoothing, filtering and prediction: Estimating the past, present and future . Amazon Prime Publishing, 2012. ISBN 978-0-6485115-0-2. [Online]. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Garry-Einicke/publication/ 331419101 Smoothing Filtering and Prediction Estimating the Past Present and Future Second Edition/links/5c93022f92851cf0ae8bdd41/ Smoothing-Filtering-and-Prediction-Estimating-the-Past-Present-and-Future-Secondpdf
- [22] G.-F. Gu, W.-X. Zhou et al. , 'Detrending moving average algorithm for multifractals,' Physical Review E , vol. 82, no. 1, p. 011136, 2010. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.82.011136
- [23] H. H. van Rossum, 'Moving average quality control: principles, practical application and future perspectives,' Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (CCLM) , vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 773-782, 2019. doi: 10.1515/cclm2018-0795
- [24] R. K. Singh, M. Rani, A. S. Bhagavathula, R. Sah, A. J. RodriguezMorales, H. Kalita, C. Nanda, S. Sharma, Y. D. Sharma, A. A. Rabaan et al. , 'Prediction of the COVID-19 pandemic for the top 15 affected countries: Advanced autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model,' JMIR public health and surveillance , vol. 6, no. 2, p. e19115, 2020. doi: 10.2196/19115
- [25] K. Mabude, J.-C. Malela-Majika, P. Castagliola, and S. C. Shongwe, 'Generally weighted moving average monitoring schemes: Overview and perspectives,' Quality and Reliability Engineering International , vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 409-432, 2021. doi: 10.1002/qre.2765
- [26] X. Yang and Y. Ni, 'Least-squares estimation for uncertain moving average model,' Communications in Statistics-Theory and Methods , vol. 50, no. 17, pp. 4134-4143, 2021. doi: 10.1080/03610926.2020.1713373
- [27] Y. Lai and D. A. Dzombak, 'Use of the autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) model to forecast near-term regional temperature and precipitation,' Weather and Forecasting , vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 959-976, 2020. doi: 10.1175/WAF-D-19-0158.1
- [28] J. Kim, S. Kwak, and S. Choi, 'DC series arc detection algorithm based on adaptive moving average technique,' IEEE Access , vol. 9, pp. 94 42694 437, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3093980
- [29] S. Knoth, V. G. Tercero-G´ omez, M. Khakifirooz, and W. H. Woodall, 'The impracticality of homogeneously weighted moving average and progressive mean control chart approaches,' Quality and Reliability Engineering International , vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 3779-3794, 2021. doi: 10.1002/qre.2950
- [30] V. G. Malyshkin, 'Market Dynamics: On Directional Information Derived From (Time, Execution Price, Shares Traded) Transaction Sequences.' ArXiv e-prints , Mar. 2019. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/1903.11530. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1903.11530
- [31] V. G. Malyshkin and M. G. Belov, 'Market Directional Information Derived From (Time, Execution Price, Shares Traded) Sequence of Transactions. On The Impact From The Future,' arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04223 , 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2210.04223
- [32] B. Beckermann, 'On the numerical condition of polynomial bases: estimates for the condition number of Vandermonde, Krylov and Hankel matrices,' Ph.D. dissertation, Habilitationsschrift, Universit¨ at Hannover, 1996. [Online]. Available: http://math.univ-lille1.fr/ ∼ bbecker/abstract/ Habilitationsschrift Beckermann.pdf
- [33] V. G. Malyshkin and R. Bakhramov, 'Mathematical Foundations of Realtime Equity Trading. Liquidity Deficit and Market Dynamics. Automated Trading Machines.' ArXiv e-prints , oct 2015, http://arxiv.org/ abs/1510.05510. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1510.05510. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1510.05510
- [34] V. G. Malyshkin, 'On The Radon-Nikodym Spectral Approach With Optimal Clustering,' arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.00460 , 2019. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.00460. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1906.00460