## Estimation of the instantaneous volatility

Alexander Alvarez ∗ , Fabien Panloup † , Monique Pontier ‡ , Nicolas Savy §

November 26, 2024

## Abstract

This paper is concerned with the estimation of the volatility process in a stochastic volatility model of the following form: dX t = a t dt + σ t dW t , where X denotes the log-price and σ is a càdlàg semi-martingale. In the spirit of a series of recent works on the estimation of the cumulated volatility, we here focus on the instantaneous volatility for which we study estimators built as finite differences of the power variations of the log-price. We provide central limit theorems with an optimal rate depending on the local behavior of σ . In particular, these theorems yield some confidence intervals for σ t .

Keywords : Central limit theorem, Power variation, semimartingale.

AMS Classification (2000) : Primary 60F05; Secondary 91B70, 91B82.

## 1 Introduction

The financial market objects offering a great complexity of modelling, the development and the study of financial models has attracted a lot of attention in recent years. For such models, a key parameter is the volatility, which is of paramount importance. The fact that the volatility is not constant has been observed for a long time. Thus, since the famous but too stringent Black and Scholes model, many stochastic volatility models have been introduced. Among them, models where jumps occur are now widely spread in the literature (see e.g. [9] for a review and [10] for a list of recent studies on this topic), mainly because there are able to fit skews and smiles that can not be captured by continuous models.

In this paper, we deal with the following kind of model:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where W is a Brownian motion and σ is a càdlàg semi-martingale (assumptions will be made precise in the next section). At this stage, one can remark the main restriction of our model: jumps only occur in the volatility but not in the price. This restriction will be explained in the sequel. When such a model is discretely observed, a (now) classical tool for the estimation of the volatility is to make use of the power variations of order p (see next section for details) that have some convergence properties to the cumulated volatility process: ∫ t 0 | σ s | p ds (when p = 2 , this type of result is only the convergence of the quadratic variations to the angle bracket of the continuous semi-martingale X ). The study of such estimators of the integrated volatility and its use for the detection of jumps have been deeply studied in the last years (see for instance [7, 8, 23] for the continuous setting, [1, 2, 18, 19, 24, 23, 3, 15] for the discontinuous setting and the more recent papers [16, 22, 20]).

∗ La Habana University, alexalvarezh@gmail.com

† Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse et INSA Toulouse, fabien.panloup@.math.univ-toulouse.fr

‡ Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse et Université de Toulouse, monique.pontier@.math.univ-toulouse.fr

§ Institut de Mathématiques de Toulouse et Université de Toulouse, nicolas.savy@.math.univ-toulouse.fr

Unlike these works, the aim of this paper is to estimate rather the instantaneous volatility. Then, the natural idea is to study estimators which are built as 'derivatives' of the power variations. More precisely, the proposed estimator of the instantaneous volatility is a normalized relative increment of cumulative volatility estimator, this relative increment being taken on a smaller and smaller interval. We provide some central limit theorems for the σ t -estimator and we exhibit an optimal rate depending on the local behavior of σ . More precisely, if a Brownian component exists in σ , the best rate is of order n 1 / 4 and otherwise, it depends on the intensity of jumps. In particular, when the jump component has finite-variation, the optimal rate is of order n 1 / 3 . These central limits lead in particular to some confidence intervals for σ t and to an asymptotic control of the relative error between the estimator and σ t .

When jumps occur in the log-price X , it seems that we could extend some of the previous announced results by exploiting the fact that convergence properties for the power variations to the cumulated volatility still hold when p &lt; 2 . However, this extension generates some technicalities which are out of ours objectives.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the model we deal with, we present the different assumptions for this study and we state our main theorems: Central Limit Theorems for the instantaneous volatility. Section 3 is the proof of these theorems. From Theorem 3, we easily deduce a confidence interval for the instantaneous volatility, this is shown in Section 4. Moreover, we stress the fact that the confidence interval length increases with p . Finally, the volatility estimator is tested on some simulations in Section 5.

## 2 Setting and Main Results

We consider a stochastic process ( X t ) t ≥ 0 defined on a filtered probability space by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where W is an ( F t ) -adapted Wiener process on (Ω , F , ( F t ) , P ) which satisfies the usual conditions, a : R + → R and σ are some càdlàg ( F t ) -adapted processes. Furthermore, σ is assumed to be a positive process.

Let T be a positive number and assume that X is observed at times i ∆ n for all i = 0 , 1 , . . . , [ T ∆ n ] . In the sequel, we will assume that ∆ n - - - - - → n → + ∞ 0 .

In this paper, we want to estimate σ t using the asymptotic properties of the observed discrete increments of X . For p &gt; 0 , we denote by ˆ B ( p, ∆ n ) , the process of power variations of order p , i.e. the stochastic process defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ∆ n i X := X i ∆ n -X ( i -1)∆ n .

The sequence ( ̂ B ( p, ∆ n ) t ) n is now classically known as an estimator of ∫ t 0 σ p s ds . We are going to recall some existing results about the convergence of this sequence but before, we want to precise the assumptions on σ that will be necessary throughout the paper. We introduce the following assumptions depending on parameter q ∈ [1 , 2] which is related to the behavior of the small jumps of ( σ t ) :

( H 1 q ) : σ is a positive càdlàg semimartingale such that σ t = | Y t | where ( Y t ) satisfies:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where b , η 1 , η 2 are adapted càdlàg processes, µ denotes a random measure on R + × R with predictable compensator ν satisfying: ν ( dt, dy ) = dtF t ( dy ) and ( ∫ (1 ∧| y | q ) F t ( dy )) t ≥ 0 is a locally bounded predictable process.

The above assumption on the predictable compensator imply that ( σ t ) is quasi-left continuous and that the jump component has locally-finite q -variation. In order to obtain our main results, we actually need to introduce a little more constraining control of the jump component:

( H 2 q ) : For every T &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As an example, if ( Y t ) is a solution to the following SDE:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where b : R → R , ς : R ↦→ R , ς 2 : R ↦→ R and κ : R ↦→ R are some continuous functions with sublinear growth, ( ˜ W t ) t ≥ 0 is a Brownian motion and ( Z t ) t ≥ 0 is a centered purely discontinuous Lévy process independent of ( W t ) t ≥ 0 with Lévy measure π satisfying ∫ ( | y | q ∧ 1) π ( dy ) &lt; ∞ , q ∈ [1 , 2] , then Assumptions ( H 1 q ) and ( H 2 q ) hold.

Before going further, we also need to remind the definition of stable convergence that we denote by L s . We say that a sequence of random variables ( Y n ) converges stably to Y or Y n Ls ⇒ Y , if there exists an extension ( ˜ Ω , ˜ F , ˜ P ) of (Ω , F , P ) and a random variable Y defined on ( ˜ Ω , ˜ F , ˜ P ) such that for every bounded measurable random variable H , for every bounded continuous function f , E [ Hf ( Y n )] → ˜ E [ Hf ( Y )] when n → + ∞ where ˜ E denotes the expectation on the extension.

Now, we can recall two results (adapted to our context) about the asymptotic properties of ( ̂ B ( p, ∆ n ) t ) n , from Lépingle [17] (see also [15], Theorem 2.4) and Aït Sahalia and Jacod [3, Theorem 2] respectively. On the same topic, we can also quote [6, 8].

Proposition 1. Assume ( H 2 2 ) . Let p be a positive number and set m p := E [ | U | p ] where U ∼ N (0 , 1) . Then, locally uniformly in t ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proposition 2. Let p ≥ 2 and assume Assumption 1 of [3]. Then, the sequence of continuous processes ( Y ( n, p )) n ∈ N defined for any n ∈ N by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

converges stably to a random variable Y ( p ) on an extension ( ˜ Ω , ˜ F , ( ˜ F t ) , ˜ P ) of the original filtered space (Ω , F , ( F t ) , P ) such that, for any t ≥ 0 , conditionally on F , Y ( p ) t is a centered Gaussian variable with variance ˜ E [ Y ( p ) 2 t | F ] = ( m 2 p -m 2 p ) A (2 p ) t .

Looking at these results, it is natural to try to estimate σ p t by the following statistic: (Σ( p, ∆ n , h n ) t ) defined for every t ≤ ¯ T with ¯ T = T -h 1 by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Actually, this estimator is the mean of p -variations in a window of length h n where ( h n ) is assumed to be a non-increasing sequence of positive numbers such that h n tends to 0.

We are now able to state our main results.

Theorem 3. Let p = 2 or p ≥ 3 and let ( X t ) be a stochastic process solution to (1) . Assume ( H 1 2 ) and ( H 2 2 ) . Assume that ∆ n = o ( h n ) . Then, (i) If h n / √ ∆ n → 0 , ∀ t ∈ [0 , ¯ T ] ,

where, conditionally on F , U is a standard Gaussian random variable and ϕ 1 ( p, t, σ ) = m 2 p -m 2 p m 2 p σ 2 p t . (ii) If √ ∆ n /h n → β ∈ R + , ∀ t ∈ [0 , ¯ T ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ϕ 1 ( p, t, σ ) and U are defined as before and, ϕ 2 ( p, t ) = p 2 3 ( σ t ) 2 p -2 ‖ η ‖ 2 ( t )) with ‖ η ‖ 2 ( t ) = η 2 1 ( t ) + η 2 2 ( t ) .

Note that when the drift term a is null, the result is valid even if 2 &lt; p &lt; 3 . Otherwise, the drift contributes in a bias for the estimator that is not negligible in case 2 &lt; p &lt; 3 .

In the second result, we assume that there is no Brownian component in the volatility, i.e. that η 1 = η 2 = 0 and that the jump component has locally q -finite variation. In this case, we show that we can alleviate the constraint on the sequence ( h n ) (see also Remark 5).

Theorem 4. Let p = 2 or p ≥ 3 . and let ( X t ) be a stochastic process solution to (1) . Assume ( H 1 q ) and ( H 2 q ) with q ∈ [1 , 2] and suppose that η 1 = η 2 = 0 . Assume that ∆ n = o ( h n ) . Then, (i) If q ∈ (1 , 2] , if lim sup n → + ∞ h 1 / 2+1 /q n / √ ∆ n &lt; + ∞ , ∀ t ∈ [0 , ¯ T ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ϕ 1 ( p, t, σ ) and U are defined as in Theorem 3. (ii) Assume that q = 1 . If lim n → + ∞ h 3 n / ∆ n = 0 , (6) holds. If lim n → + ∞ h 3 n / ∆ n = β ∈ R ∗ + and if ( ∫ { 0 &lt; | y |≤ 1 } yF t ( dy )) t ≥ 0 is càglàd (left-continuous with right limits), then, ∀ t ∈ [0 , ¯ T ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Following Tauchen and Todorov [21] and according to concrete data, pure jump volatility process could be a more convenient model. In such a case, it seems that the right theorem to be applied is Theorem 4. In cases (i) in both Theorems, we get for all t &gt; 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where U ∼ N (0 , 1) and U is independent of F t . This result is enough to obtain an estimation of σ p t and to obtain a confidence interval for it, together the convergence rate.

Remark 5. It must be stressed here that the convergence rate depends on the balance between the frequency of observations and the length h n of the window. Hence, the following considerations justify the choice of a 'good pair" ( h n , ∆ n ) : let p = 2 or p ≥ 3 and assume ∆ n = o ( h n ) . Considering the window width h n , r n := h n ∆ n corresponds to the number of observations on the interval [ t, t + h n ] . Suppose ∆ n = 1 n and r n := n ρ , 0 &lt; ρ &lt; 1 , then h n = n ρ -1 . In this scheme, assuming ( H 1 2 ) , ( H 2 2 ) , Theorem 3 yields the following convergence rates:

- (i) ρ &lt; 1 2 yields a convergence rate of order n ρ/ 2 ,
- (ii) ρ ≥ 1 2 yields a convergence rate of order n (1 -ρ ) / 2 .

In case η 1 = η 2 = 0 , under Hypotheses ( H 1 q ) and ( H 2 q ) with 1 ≤ q ≤ 2 , Theorem 4 yields the following convergence rates:

- (i) if 1 &lt; q ≤ 2 , ρ ≤ 2 2+ q , yields a convergence rate of order n ρ/ 2 ,
- (ii) the same convergence rate occurs in case q = 1 , ρ ≤ 2 3 ; the best convergence rate is of order n 1 / 3 , obtained for ρ = 2 / 3 . As an example in such a case, let us choose r n = n 2 / 3 ∼ 300 . It means 300 data which can be the daily observations and globally n = 300 3 / 2 ∼ 5200 . This may correspond to a realistic data set.

## 3 Proofs

In every proofs C or C p are constants which can change from a line to another. In order to make the notations easier to handle, we will denote by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3.1 Decomposition of the error

Following [15], we first decompose Σ( p, ∆ n , h n ) t -σ p t as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r n = h n / ∆ n and

On the one hand, denoting by E n i -1 [ ∗ ] the conditional expectation with respect to F ( i -1)∆ n , one can notice that E n i -1 [∣ ∣ ∣ σ ( i -1)∆ n ∆ n i W √ ∆ n ∣ ∣ p ] = σ p ( i -1)∆ n m p , and it is easy to checks that

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, let us now decompose the second part of (9). Itô's formula applied to x → | x | p with p ≥ 1 yields for every i ≥ [ t/ ∆ n ] + 1 :

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3.2 Preliminary Lemmas

In this section, we establish a series of useful lemmas for the sequel of the proof. First, we show in Lemma 6 that it is enough to prove the main results under ( H 2 q ) and the following assumption:

- ( SH ) q a , b , η 1 , η 2 , and ∫ . 0 ∫ ( | y | q ∧ 1) F s ( dy ) ds are bounded and there exists M &gt; 0 such that F s ([ -M,M ] c ) = 0 a.s. ∀ s ≥ 0 .

Lemma 6. Assume that the conclusions of Theorem 3 and 4 hold for every ( X,σ ) satisfying ( SH ) q and ( H 2 q ) (with q ∈ [1 , 2] depending on the statement). Then, the conclusions hold for every ( X,σ ) satisfying ( H 1 q ) and ( H 2 q ) with q ∈ [1 , 2] .

The proof of this lemma is based on a classical localization procedure and is done in the Appendix (see Section 6).

As a consequence of the preceding lemma, we now work under ( SH ) q . In the following preliminary result, we state a series of useful properties on σ under this assumption.

Lemma 7. Assume ( SH ) 2 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

- (ii) For every 0 ≤ s ≤ t ≤ T such that | t -s | ≤ 1 , it exists a deterministic constant C T &gt; 0 such that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The proof of this lemma is based on standard tools and is also done in the appendix (see Section 6).

Finally, the last preliminary result is a corollary of a result by [11] on the stable-CLT for martingale increments adapted to our specific framework (in our case, the subset of concerned σ -fields are not ordered by the inclusion relation).

Lemma 8. Let (Ω , F , P ) denote a probability space. For n ≥ 1 , let ζ n 2 , ζ n 3 , . . . , ζ n k n denote some martingale increments with respect to the subσ -fields of F ¯ F n, 1 ⊂ ¯ F n, 2 ⊂ . . . ⊂ ¯ F n,k n . Set S n = ∑ k n i =2 ζ n i and G = ∩ n ≥ 1 ¯ F n, 1 . Assume that n → ¯ F n,k n is a non-increasing sequence of σ -fields such that ∩ n ≥ 1 ¯ F n,k n = G . Then, if the following conditions hold:

- (i) There exists a G -measurable random variable η such that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

then, ( S n ) converges stably to S where S is defined on an extension ( ˜ Ω , ˜ F , ˜ P ) and such that conditionally on F , the distribution of S is a centered Gaussian law with variance η .

Proof. First, we prove the lemma when the convergence in (14) and (15) holds a.s. Then, the random variable η being ∩ n ≥ 1 ¯ F n, 1 -measurable, we deduce from Corollary 2 of [11] that for every bounded G -measurable random variable Z , for every bounded continuous function f

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, let Y denote a bounded F -measurable random variable. Since S n is ¯ F n,k n -measurable,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Under the assumptions of the lemma, n → ¯ F n,k n is a non-increasing sequence and G = ∩ n ≥ 1 ¯ F n,k n . Thus, by the convergence theorem for reverse martingales,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The function f and the random variable Y being bounded, it follows from the dominated convergence Theorem that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, since E [ Y/ G ] is a bounded G -measurable random variable, we deduce from (16) that for every bounded continuous function f ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where S is defined on an extension ( ˜ Ω , ˜ F , ˜ P ) and such that conditionally on F , the distribution of S is a centered Gaussian distribution with variance η .

Assume now that the convergence in (14) and (15) only holds in probability. Following carefully the preceding proof, we observe that we only have to prove that (16) still holds: let Z denote a bounded G -measurable random variable and let f be a bounded continuous function. Then, n → E [ Zf ( S n )] is a bounded sequence. Let ( E [ Zf ( S n k )]) k denote a convergent subsequence . Using that it is enough to assume (15) for a countable family ( ε k ) and the fact that the convergence in probability implies the a.s convergence of a subsequence, it follows from a diagonalization procedure that there exists a subsequence ( m k ) of ( n k ) such that (14) and (15) hold a.s. Then, a second application of Corollary 2 of [11] yields for any subsequence ( m k ) :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This concludes the proof of the lemma.

## 3.3 The CLTs for the Brownian martingale terms

In this section, we focus on the main terms of the decomposition which satisfy a central limit theorem.

Proposition 9. Assume that ∆ n = o ( h n ) and ( SH ) 2 .

(i). Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where U ∼ N (0 , 1) , U is independent of F t and

(ii). In case of pure jump process, meaning we assume that η 1 = η 2 = 0 , then, Λ 4 = 0 and, for every t ∈ [0 , T ] ,

with f 2 ( t, p ) = ϕ 1 ( p, t, σ ) .

Proof. Actually, in case (ii), the proof is easier since it only deals with Λ n 2 , and is more or less included in what follows.

Let t &gt; 0 . Let { ( ξ n i ) , i = [ t/ ∆ n ] +2 , . . . , [( t + h n ) / ∆ n ] , n ≥ 1 } be the sequence of martingale increments defined by: ξ n = ξ n, 1 i + ξ n, 2 i with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We first notice that ∑ [ t + hn ∆ n ] i =[ t ∆ n ]+2 ( ξ n, 1 i + ξ n, 2 i ) = ρ n (Λ n 2 ( t ) + Λ n 4 ( t )) -ε n where ε n = ξ n [ t ∆ n ]+1 → 0 in probability. Second, let us show that Lemma 8 can be applied to the sequence ( ξ n i ) . Set k n := [( t + h n ) / ∆ n ] -[ t/ ∆ n ] . For every i ∈ { 2 , . . . , k n } , set ζ i,n = ξ [ t/ ∆ n ]+ i which is ( ¯ F n,i ) -adapted where ¯ F n,i := F ( i +[ t/ ∆ n ])∆ n for every i ∈ { 1 , . . . , k n -1 } and ¯ F n,k n := F t + h n . We observe that the sequence n → ¯ F n,k n = F t + h n is nonincreasing and that ∩ n ≥ 1 ¯ F n, 1 = ∩ n ≥ 1 ¯ F n,k n = F t since the filtration ( F t ) is right-continuous. Then, we deduce from Lemma 8 that in order to prove the proposition, it is now enough to check Conditions (14) and (15). These conditions will follow from the two following lemmas.

Lemma 10. Let f ( t, p ) defined by (18), then

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Three sums have to be computed:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(i) First

and since σ is càd,

Thus, by the definition of ρ n ,

(ii) Second,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with ψ s = p 2 | Y s | 2 p -2 [ η 2 1 ( s ) + η 2 2 ( s )] . One observes that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The function ψ is càd. Therefore, using (10) and the fact that η 1 and η 2 are bounded, we deduce from the dominated convergence theorem that for every t ∈ [0 , T ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from the definition of ρ n that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, since

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

we obtain that the order of ∑ [ t + hn ∆ n ] i =[ t ∆ n ]+2 E n i -1 [ ( ξ n, 2 i ) 2 ] is 1 3 ρ 2 n h n ψ t thus

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(iii) Finally, we consider the cross products E n i -1 [ ξ n, 1 i ξ n, 2 i ] . First of all, it is easily seen that, W and W 2 being independent, only the term in W of M will play a role. Thus we have:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with α i,n ( t ) = ( ρ n /r n ) 2 ∆ -p/ 2 n ([( t + h n ) / ∆ n ] -i +1) . Now, by Itô's formula,

Then, we have E n i -1 [ ξ n, 1 i ξ n, 2 i ] = T n, 1 i + T n, 2 i with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

First, let us focus on T n, 2 i . By an integration by parts, one obtains that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in the last line we used that for every s ∈ [( i -1)∆ n , i ∆ n ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, using Cauchy-Schwarz inequality

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then (10) yields:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Second, we focus on T n, 1 i . Using again that σ and η are càd, one obtains that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, by (23), (25) and (27), we obtain that,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, since E n i -1 [ sgn( W s -W ( i -1)∆ n ) | W s -W ( i -1)∆ n | p -1 ] = 0 we deduce that

then with (26) that Lemma 11. The following Lindeberg condition holds:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. Let us prove (28). We derive from the Cauchy-Schwarz and Chebyshev inequalities that,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the one hand, using (20),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and since σ is locally bounded, we obtain that there exists C ( ω ) such that for all t ≥ 0 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

If h n = o ( √ ∆ n ) (resp. √ ∆ n = O ( h n ) ), ρ 4 n /r 3 n = 1 /r n (resp. ρ 4 n /r 3 n = ∆ 3 / 2 n /h 5 n ). Thus, ∑ [ t + hn ∆ n ] i =[ t ∆ n ]+2 E n i -1 [ ( ξ n, 1 i ) 4 ] - - - - - → n → + ∞ 0 a.s. On the other hand, using (21)

Since ψ ( s ) ≤ C | σ t | 2 p -2 , it follows from (10) that sup s ∈ [0 ,T ] E [ ψ ( s ) 2 ] &lt; + ∞ . Now,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and one checks that this right-hand member tends to 0 in every cases. It follows that the Lindeberg condition is fulfilled.

These two lemmas conclude the proof of Proposition 9.

## 3.4 The remainder terms

We focus on Λ n 5 ( t ) , recalling:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We obtain the following results of convergence in probability.

Proposition 12. Assume ( SH ) q and ( H 2 q ) with q ∈ ]1 , 2] . Then, for every t ∈ [0 , T ] :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume that the previous assumptions hold with q = 1 and that ( ∫ { 0 &lt; | y |≤ 1 } yF t ( dy ) ) t ≥ 0 is càglàd. Let ( θ 0 t ) be defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then for every t ∈ [0 , T ] ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 13. Note that Assumption ( H 2 q ) is only necessary at this stage of the proof where a kind of regularity of the small jumps is needed.

Proof. It will be useful to notice that, for every ǫ &gt; 0 , A t = L ǫ ( t ) + M ǫ ( t ) + N ǫ ( t ) , with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where g p ( x ) = | x | p and for every f : R → R ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With these notations, the above proposition is a consequence of the following lemma.

Lemma 14. Assume ( SH ) q with q ∈ [1 , 2] . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

(i) For every ε &gt; 0 , there exists a.s. n 0 ( ω ) such that for every n ≥ n 0 ( ω ) ,

(ii) Assume moreover ( H 2 q ) with q ∈ [1 , 2] . For every δ &gt; 0 , there exists, ε δ &gt; 0 such that for every ε ≤ ε δ :

(iii) For every ε &gt; 0 , we have almost surely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume moreover that ( SH ) 1 and ( H 2 1 ) hold and that ( ∫ { 0 &lt; | y |≤ 1 } yF t ( dy ) ) t ≥ 0 is càglàd. Then, almost surely,

Proof. ( i ) Let T ε t denote the random time defined by T ε t ( ω ) := inf { s &gt; t, | ∆ Y s | ≥ ε } . For every δ &gt; 0 ,

Under ( SH ) 2 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It follows from the dominated convergence theorem that P [ T ε t = t ] = 0 . Thus, a.s. , there exists n 0 ( ω ) such that T t ( ω ) &gt; t + h n for every n ≥ n 0 ( ω ) . The result follows.

( ii ) On the one hand, by the Doob inequality for discrete martingales, we have for every q ∈ (1 , 2] ,

Then, using that ( ∑ | u i | ) q/ 2 ≤ ∑ | u i | q/ 2 (since q/ 2 ≤ 1 ) and Jensen's inequality, we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using Assumption ( SH ) q , we derive from Cauchy-Schwarz's inequality, (10), Assumption ( H 2 q ) and the dominated convergence Theorem that:

Thus, using that

it follows that for every q ∈ [1 , 2] , for every η &gt; 0 , there exists ε 1 η &gt; 0 such that for every ε ≤ ε 1 η ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, by the Taylor formula, we have

when p ≥ 2 . Then, using that ( H 2 q ) implies ( H 2 2 ) and ( H 2 2p ) , we obtain that for every η &gt; 0 , there exists ε 0 &gt; 0 such that for every ε ≤ ε 2 η ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, for every η &gt; 0 , there exists ε 2 η such that for every ε ≤ ε 2 η ,

Therefore, (ii) follows from (35) and (36).

(iii) Since θ s , Y s and ∫ ǫ ≤| y |≤ 1 yF s ( dy ) are locally bounded, there exists almost surely C T ( ω ) such that for every t ∈ [0 , T ] , for every n ≥ 1 , |L ǫ i ∆ n - L ǫ ( i -1)∆ n ∨ t | ≤ C T ( ω )∆ n . Assertion (33) follows. By construction and under the assumptions on σ and b , ( θ 0 s ) is càd. Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with R n i ( ε, t ) = -pσ p -1 t ∫ C n,i t ∫ | y |≤ ε yF s ( dy ) ds. Then, since

it follows that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, we deduce (34) from ( H 2 1 ) .

Lemma 15. Assume ( SH ) 2 . Then, there exists C p &gt; 0 such that for all t

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As a consequence, for every t ∈ [0 , ¯ T ] ,

Proof. Set σ n i = σ i ∆ n . Then, by a martingale argument, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As dX t = a t dt + σ t dW t , we have ∆ n i X = σ ( i -1)∆ n ∆ n i W + χ n i , with

Using a Taylor expansion of g ( x ) = | x | p on the interval [ σ ( i -1)∆ n ∆ n i W ; ∆ n i X ] , we have :

But | g ′ ( x ) | = O ( | x | p -1 ) thus using the relation | x + y | p ≤ C p ( | x | p + | y | p ) with C p a constant, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally there is a constant C p such that, for all t ≥ 0 :

First of all, the independence between σ ( i -1)∆ n and ∆ n i W and (10) yield:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

So it remains to give a majoration of E [ | χ n i | 2 p ] . Since a is bounded by M ,

Now, using inequality (13) and since p ≥ 1 , E [ | χ n i | 2 p ] ≤ C p . ( ∆ p +1 n +∆ 2 p n ) ≤ C. ∆ p +1 n . Thus (37) becomes:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

the constant C p does not depend on t and as p ≥ 2 , we have,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

which ends the proofs.

Proposition 16. Assume ( SH ) 2 . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

As a consequence, if p = 2 or p ≥ 3 , ‖ Λ n 3 ( t ) ‖ 1 ≤ C √ ∆ n and,

Proof. We begin the proof by the following remark. Scaling and independence properties of the Brownian motion and the Ito's formula yield

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Keeping in mind this representation of m p , we decompose the integrand of (38) as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, the result is a consequence of Lemmas 17 and 18 corresponding to A n 1 ,i and A n 2 ,i respectively.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Lemma 17. Assume ( SH ) 2 . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. First, we use Itô's formula to develop A n i :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with E n i -1 [ M n i ] = 0 . It follows that:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with R n i ( s ) := | X s -X ( i -1)∆ n | p -2 ∆ p 2 n -| ∫ s ( i -1)∆ n σ u dW u | p -2 ∆ p 2 n . Now, using that a is bounded, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

owing to Inequality (12). Hence, for every p ≥ 2 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Now, we observe that R n i ( s ) = 0 when p = 2 so the proof is ended in this case.

When p &gt; 2 , recall that for every ¯ q &gt; 0 and ∀ ( u, v ) ∈ R 2 ,

applying it with ¯ q = p -2 yields

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

First, let p ∈ (2 , 3] . Since a is uniformly bounded, Then, E [ σ 3 s ] uniformly bounded, Cauchy-Schwarz and inequality (12) yield

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Assume now that p &gt; 3 . First, for all s ∈ [( i -1)∆ n , i ∆ n ] , we derive from a bounded and CauchySchwarz inequality that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, we derive from (41), the preceding inequality and (42) that when p &gt; 3 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We now focus on A n 2 ,i .

Lemma 18. Assume ( SH ) 2 . Then,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Proof. In case p = 2 we deal with 1 ∆ n ∫ C n,i ( σ 2 s -σ 2 ( i -1)∆ n ) ds . Hence by Cauchy-Schwarz, (10) and (11), we deduce that,

When p &gt; 2 , first,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let us focus on B n 1 ,i and let ¯ q &gt; 1 and ¯ r &gt; 1 satisfying 1 ¯ q + 1 ¯ r = 1 and ¯ r &gt; 2 ∨ 2 p -2 . Using Hölder inequality, we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, on the one hand, applying again Holder's inequality applied with ˜ p = 2 / ¯ q ( &gt; 1 ) and ˜ q = ¯ q/ (¯ q -2) , we derive from (10) and (11),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, using (12),

Thus,

Hence, we have

∣ ∣ We now study B n 2 ,i . Set M n s = ∫ s ( i -1)∆ n ( σ u -σ ( i -1)∆ n ) dW u . By (40),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Hence, if p ≤ 3 , it follows from (13) and Cauchy-Schwarz inequality that

Assume now that p &gt; 3 . According to (47), we have two terms to manage with. On the one hand, by Cauchy-Schwarz and (13), we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, Cauchy-Schwarz and (13) applied with q = 2( p -2) ≥ 2 yield

Thus, it follows that when p &gt; 3 ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Finally, we derive the lemma from (46), (48), (49).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 3.5 Proof of main Theorems, a synthesis

Gathering the previous steps, Theorems 3 and 4 are now consequences of the classical following lemma:

Lemma 19. Let ( X n ) and ( Y n ) be some sequences of random variables defined on (Ω , F , P ) with values in a Polish space E . Assume that ( X n ) converges Ls to X and that ( Y n ) converges in probability to Y . Then, the sequence of random variables ( Z n = X n + Y n ) converges Ls to X + Y .

Indeed, focus for instance on statements (4) and (6). By Lemma 6, it is enough to prove these convergences under ( SH ) q and ( H 2 q ) . Then, on the one hand, using Proposition 12 (and the fact that sup n ≥ 1 ( √ h n / ∆ n ) h 1 /q n &lt; + ∞ under the assumptions), Lemma 15 and Proposition 16 with p ∈ { 1 / 2 } ∪ [3 , + ∞ [ , we deduce respectively that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

On the other hand, under the assumptions of Theorems 3 ( i ) and 4 ( i ) , one deduces from Proposition 9 ( i ) and ( ii ) respectively that,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Therefore, (4) and (6) follow from Lemma 19 applied with Y = 0 and from the decomposition of the error stated in Section 3.1. Using Proposition 9 ( i ) when √ ∆ n /h n → β ∈ R + , the same ideas lead to (5). Finally, applying Lemma 19 with Y = θ 0 . , (7) follows from Proposition 9 ( ii ) and from the fact that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

## 4 Asymptotic confidence interval

Actually, Theorems 3 and 4 allow us to build a confidence region to estimate for all t parameter σ t . Since the variance limits in their second part depend on the unknown parameters η 1 ( t ) and η 2 ( t ) , we focus on their first part (i) when h n / √ ∆ n (respectively lim sup n → + ∞ h 1 / 2+1 /q n / √ ∆ n &lt; + ∞ ). This confidence region could be defined as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and according to (4) or (6) with, for instance, asymptotic probability 0 . 95 , we get:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Thus, with 0 . 95 asymptotic confidence,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The confidence interval length is about r -1 2 n . Actually, the most interesting point is that we obtain an asymptotic confidence interval for the relative error:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Remark 20. Finally, to compare this result with respect to p , we have to compare asymptotic confidence intervals of σ t , depending on p , namely

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This interval length is about r -1 2 n √ m 2 p -m 2 p pm p , and this length order is unhappily increasing with p, so it could be not so good to use p &gt; 2 .

## 5 Simulations

In this section, we want to test numerically the volatility estimator. In order to be able to compare the estimations with the true volatility, we do not use some real datas but get our observations from quasi-exact simulations of toy models (by quasi-exact, we mean simulations of the process using an Euler scheme with a very small time-discretization step).

## 5.1 A numerical test in a continuous stochastic volatility model

In this part, we consider the stochastic volatility model proposed in [13] where the volatility is an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. Denote the price by ( S t ) and by ( σ t ) the (non-negative) stochastic volatility. Set X t := log( S t ) and v t := σ 2 t . The model is defined by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r, a, β and m are some positive parameters, ρ ∈ [ -1 , 1] and the processes W 1 and W 2 are independent one-dimensional Brownian motions.

We set X 0 = log(50) , v 0 = m and simulate quasi-exactly ( X t , v t ) at times 0 , 1 /n, 2 /n, . . . , 1 with the following parameters:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using the simulated observations X 0 , X 1 /n , . . . , X 1 , we compute the estimator Σ( p, 1 /n, h n ) on [ h n , 1] and compare its value with the true volatility. In Figures 1 and 2, we represent the corresponding graphics for n = 1000 and n = 10000 and h n = n -1 / 2 . In all the figures, we choose p = 2 since as shown in the computation of the confidence interval length in Remark 20, to increase p is not a good choice. The process ( σ t ) is plotted as continuous line whereas the estimator Σ(2 , 1 /n, h n ) is plotted as discontinuous line.

Figure 1: n = 1000 , h n = n -1 / 2 .

<!-- image -->

Figure 2: n = 10000 , h n = n -1 / 2 .

<!-- image -->

By Remark 5, taking r n = n ρ with ρ ∈ (0 , 1 / 2) and p ∈ { 2 }∩ (5 / 2 , + ∞ ) (or equivalently h n = n ρ -1 ), we obtain a rate of order n ρ/ 2 . In particular, we can derive that the best rate is obtained in the limit case ρ = 1 / 2 . This theoretical result is confirmed in the following computation. Denote by E n ( p, h n ) the mean relative error defined by:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We obtain the following results:

| E  n  (2  , n  -  0  .  4  )  E  n  (2  , n  -  0  .  5  )  E  n  (2  , n  -  0  .  6  )  n  = 10  3  18,9%  16  ,  6  %  18,6%  n  = 10  4  12,2%  11  ,  0  %  12,3%  E  n  (4  , n  -  0  .  4  )  E  n  (4  , n  -  0  .  5  )  E  n  (4  , n  -  0  .  6  )  n  = 10  3  20,3%  17  ,  5  %  19,2%  n  = 10  4  13,0%  11  ,  9  %  12,9%   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

Here, Remark 20 is confirmed by the fact: the estimations seem to be better with p = 2 than with p = 4 .

## 5.2 A numerical test in a jump model

In this last part, we assume that the volatility is a jump process solution to a SDE driven by a tempered stable subordinator ( Z ( λ,β ) t ) with Lévy measure π ( dy ) = 1 y&gt; 0 exp( -λy ) /y 1+ β dy . This model can be viewed as a particular case of the Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard model [5] (for other jump volatility models see e.g. [9, 12]):

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with the following choice of parameters:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This concerns Example (2) in Section 1 where Hypotheses ( H 1 q ) and ( H 2 q ) hold for any q ≥ β and Theorem 4 can be applied. As in the preceding example, we simulate ( X t , v t ) on the interval [0 , 1] with X 0 = log(50) and v 0 = 0 . 05 . In order to compare the two types of models, we chose some similar parameters. The main difference between these two models comes from the variations which are stronger in the first case. We obtain a quasi-exact sequel ( X k/n , v k/n ) with k ∈ { 0 , . . . , n } . In Figures 3 and 4, we represent the estimated and true volatilities for some different choices of h n = n -1 / 2 , n = 10 3 and n = 10 4 .

Figure 3: n = 1000 , h n = n -1 / 2 .

<!-- image -->

For these computations, we obtain the following mean relative errors:

<!-- image -->

Figure 4: n = 10000 , h n = n -1 / 2 .

| E  n  (2  , n  -  0  .  4  )  E  n  (2  , n  -  0  .  5  )  E  n  (2  , n  -  0  .  6  )  n  = 10  3  13,2%  8,3%  6  ,  3  %  n  = 10  4  9,1%  5,5%  3  ,  2  %  E  n  (4  , n  -  0  .  4  )  E  n  (4  , n  -  0  .  5  )  E  n  (4  , n  -  0  .  6  )  n  = 10  3  15,5%  11,0%  8  ,  8  %  n  = 10  4  10,1%  6,6%  3  ,  9  %   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

It seems the best result is obtained with h n = n -0 . 6 , according to Remark 5 in case η 1 = η 2 = 0 : the best convergence rate is obtained with ρ = 2 / 3 .

## 6 Appendix

Proof of Lemma 6: Since the arguments are almost the same for each statement of the main results, we only prove (4) (with p ∈ { 2 } ∪ [3 , + ∞ ) and t ≥ 0 .)

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ( X,σ ) satisfy ( H 1 q ) and ( H 2 q ) . Then, there exists a sequence ( T M ) M ≥ 1 of stopping times increasing to ∞ such that the processes ( a t ) , ( b t ) , ( η 1 ( t )) , ( η 2 ( t )) and ( ∫ (1 ∧| y | q ) F t ( dy )) are bounded on [0 , T M ] . Since ( ∫ | y |≥ 1 yF s ( dy )) s ≥ 0 is locally bounded, we can also assume that | ∆ Y t | ≤ M on [0 , T M ] . Then, let X M , σ M be defined by X M = X t ∧ T M and σ M = | Y M | where

By construction, ( X M , Y M ) satisfies ( SH ) q and ( H 2 q ) for every M ∈ N . It follows from the assumptions of the proposition that for every M ∈ N ,

where Σ M is the statistic related to ( X M , σ M ) as in (3), U ∼ N (0 , 1) and U is independent of F t . Let us now prove (4). Let g be a bounded continuous function on R and let H be a bounded F -measurable

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

random variable. Then, for all M ∈ N ,

Set B M = { ω, t + h 1 &lt; T M ( ω ) } . By construction, on B M , σ t M = σ t and Σ M ( p, ∆ n , h n ) t = Σ( p, ∆ n , h n ) t for every n ∈ N . Thus, uniformly in n , the first and third right-hand side terms are bounded by 2 ‖ g ‖ ∞ ‖ H ‖ ∞ P [ B c M ] for every M ∈ N . Then, since Assumption ( H 1 q ) implies that T M → + ∞ a.s , P [ B c M ] → 0 as M → + ∞ . Now, by (53), for every M ∈ N ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the result follows.

Proof of Lemma 7 (i). Let us prove (10). Thanks to Jensen's inequality, we can only consider the case r ≥ 2 . Since the jumps of Y are bounded, we can compensate the big jumps and write

where ˜ b t = b t + ∫ {| y | &gt; 1 } yF t ( dy ) . Then, using ( SH ) 2 and Burkholder-Davis-Gundy inequality, we have for every r ≥ 2 :

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C is a deterministic constant. Let us focus on the last term of the right-hand side. We can write:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where in the last inequality, we again used Burkholder-Davis-Gundy inequality and ( SH ) 2 . Set k 0 = min { k ∈ N , r ≤ 2 k } . By an iteration, we obtain

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Using that | u + v | ρ ≤ | u | ρ + | v | ρ when ρ ≤ 1 , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and the result follows.

(ii). For (11), when r ≥ 2 , we obtain by a similar approach:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C T is a deterministic constant. This yields the result when r ≥ 2 . When r &lt; 2 the result follows from the Jensen inequality. Let us prove (12). If 0 &lt; q &lt; 2 , using Jensen inequality and the concavity of the map x ↦→ x q/ 2 , we have

owing to (10). When q ≥ 2 , we first derive from Burkholder-Davis-Gundy inequality that

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Then, Jensen inequality and the convexity of the map x ↦→ x q/ 2 yield

Thus,

and (12) again follows from (10).

Finally, let us prove (13). With similar arguments as previously, we obtain:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and (13) follows from (11).

Acknowledgements. We are deeply grateful to the listeners of our presentations and to Jean Jacod for their valuable advices.

## References

- [1] Yacine Aït-Sahalia. Disentangling diffusion from jumps. Journal of Financial Economics , 74:487528, 2004.

- [2] Yacine Aït-Sahalia and Jean Jacod. Volatility estimators for discretely sampled Lévy processes. Ann. Statist. , 35(1):355-392, 2007.
- [3] Yacine Aït-Sahalia and Jean Jacod. Testing for jumps in a discretely observed process. Ann. Statist. , 37(1):184-222, 2009.
- [4] Alexander Alvarez. Modélisation de séries financières, estimations, ajustement de modèles et tests d'hypothèses. PhD thesis, Université de Toulouse, 2007.
- [5] Ole E. Barndorff-Nielsen. Modelling by Lévy processes. In Selected Proceedings of the Symposium on Inference for Stochastic Processes (Athens, GA, 2000) , volume 37 of IMS Lecture Notes Monogr. Ser. , pages 25-31. Inst. Math. Statist., Beachwood, OH, 2001.
- [6] Ole E. Barndorff-Nielsen, Svend Erik Graversen, Jean Jacod, Mark Podolskij, and Neil Shephard. A central limit theorem for realised power and bipower variations of continuous semimartingales, in From Stochastic Analysis to Mathematical Finance, the Shiryaev Festschrift , Y. Kabanov, R. Liptser, J. Stoyanov eds, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 33-68, 2006.
- [7] Ole E. Barndorff-Nielsen and Neil Shephard. Econometric analysis of realized volatility and its use in estimating stochastic volatility models. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B Stat. Methodol. , 64(2):253-280, 2002.
- [8] Ole E. Barndorff-Nielsen and Neil Shephard. Econometrics of Testing for Jumps in Financial Economics Using Bipower Variation , Journal of Financial Econometrics 4, 1-30, 2006.
- [9] Rama Cont and Peter Tankov. Financial modelling with jump processes . Chapman &amp; Hall/CRC Financial Mathematics Series. Chapman &amp; Hall/CRC, Boca Raton, FL, 2004.
- [10] Fulvio Corsi, Davide Pirino, and Roberto Renò. Volatility forecasting: the jumps do matter. Preprint, 2008.
- [11] G. K. Eagleson. Martingale convergence to mixtures of infinitely divisible laws. Ann. Probability , 3 no. 3:557-562, 1975.
- [12] Fernando Espinosa and Josep Vives. A volatility-varying and jump-diffusion Merton type model of interest rate risk. Insurance Math. Econom. , 38(1):157-166, 2006.
- [13] Jean-Pierre Fouque, George Papanicolaou, and K. Ronnie Sircar. Derivatives in financial markets with stochastic volatility . Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000.
- [14] Peter Hall and Christopher C. Heyde. Martingale limit theory and its application . Academic Press Inc. [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Publishers], New York, 1980.
- [15] Jean Jacod. Asymptotic properties of realized power variations and related functionals of semimartingales. Stochastic Process. Appl. , 118(4):517-559, 2008.
- [16] Jean Jacod, Mark Podolskij, and Mathias Vetter. Limit theorems for moving averages of discretized processes plus noise - madpn-3. Preprint.
- [17] Dominique Lépingle. La variation d'ordre p des semi-martingales. Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie und Verw. Gebiete , 36(4):295-316, 1976.
- [18] Cecilia Mancini. Disentangling the jumps of the diffusion in a geometric jumping Brownian. Giornale dell'Istituto Italiano degli Attuari , LXIV:19-47, 2001.

- [19] Cecilia Mancini. Estimating the integrated volatility in stochastic volatility models with Lévy type jumps. Technical report, Universita di Firenze, 2004.
- [20] Christian Y. Robert and Mathieu Rosenbaum. Volatility and covariation estimation when microstructure noise and trading times are endogenous to appear in Mathematical Finance, 2009.
- [21] Viktor Todorov and George Tauchen. Volatility jumps. Preprint, 2008.
- [22] Almuut E.D. Veraart. Inference for the jump part of quadratic variation of Ito semimartingales. Econometric Theory (26-02), 331-368, 2010.
- [23] Jeannette H. C. Woerner. Estimation of integrated volatility in stochastic volatility models. Appl. Stoch. Models Bus. Ind. , 21(1):27-44, 2005.
- [24] Jeannette H. C. Woerner. Power and multipower variation: inference for high frequency data. In Stochastic finance , pages 343-364. Springer, New York, 2006.