## GARCH(1,1) model of the financial market with the Minkowski metric

Richard Pincak 1 , 2 ∗ 3 †

Faculty

, Kabin Kanjamapornkul 1 Institute of Experimental Physics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Watsonova 47, 043 53 Kosice, Slovak Republic. 2 Bogoliubov Laboratory of Theoretical Physics, Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, 141980 Dubna, Moscow region, Russia 3 Department of Survey Engineering. of Engineering, Chulalongkorn University.

(Dated: August 14, 2018)

We solved a stylized fact on a long memory process of volatility cluster phenomena by using Minkowski metric for GARCH(1,1) under assumption that price and time can not be separated. We provide a Yang-Mills equation in financial market and anomaly on superspace of time series data as a consequence of the proof from the general relativity theory. We used an original idea in Minkowski spacetime embedded in Kolmogorov space in time series data with behavior of traders. The result of this work is equivalent to the dark volatility or the hidden risk fear field induced by the interaction of the behavior of the trader in the financial market panic when the market crashed.

PACS numbers: 98.80.-k, 04.50.Gh, 11.25.Yb, 98.80.Qc Keywords: GARCH; Time series; Minkowski metric; Volatility; Yang-Mills; Market panic

## I. INTRODUCTION

Bacheiler [1] was the pioneer of the efficient market hypothesis (EMH) [2] established on an assumption that the price obeys the random walk [3] in a spectacular market [4]. In economics, the time series data is a record in an Euclidean plane where price and time are independent to each other. In the general relativity, we cannot separate price and time under the Euclidean space with the T 2 -Hausdorff separation [5]. It is still a hidden loop space in time series data where price and time cannot be separated in the analogy with the Minkowski spacetime. There exists an empirical analysis and it is found stabilized fact on volatility cluster inducing long memory process in the financial time series. B. Mandelbrot introduced a new model of GARCH, so-called fractional Brownian motion and gave a result in FGARCH. The main problem in FGARCH is an infinite variance and the stylized fact still happens in the form of the power law distribution. With the development of the quantum field theory [6], the Chern-Simons current induced from the interaction of the dark energy in a living organism [7] , loop gravity [8] and some new emerging disciplines such as econophysics [9], complex system [10] and behavior economic theory [11], economists and econophysicists gradually get deeper understanding on the market hidden geometry induced from the interaction of buying and selling orderbook submissions of traders and hidden behavior [12] of traders in financial market [13] which we empirical observed from the financial time series data by using GARCH model [14]. Some experts in the complex system and fractal geometry [15] had been argued that EMH cannot be use to explain some weird phenomena of financial time series, e. g., volatility clustering phenomena. Scientists realized that the Euclidean plane is not enough to explain such a chaotic phenomenon without adding something more of the statistical theory of spinor field [16] in Wilson loop phase transition [17] to the plane. We can extended the Euclidean space to a non-Euclidean space under the superspace in the time series data with the supersymmetric property. In the Yang-Mills theory [18], the superspace is composed of a quantum foam and of the lattice gauge field with some extra properties of the Khovanov cohomology [19] and the Chern-Simons theory [20].

The problem comes from the classical financial mathematics. We just want to perform fundamental investigations to find an adequate stochastic processes matching the real financial time series data [21] without considering the market microstructure with the underlying orderbook [22] of the financial market scaling [23] and the hidden structure of the financial market as a D-brane [24] with extradimensions [25]. The financial time series data in the moment of the financial market crashed [26] are typical experimental results which we have for the complex systems [27]. In the analysis of an empirical work of the financial time series, nonlinearities and non-stationarities [28] are shown with the stylized fact of a volatility cluster phenomena in a long memory effect. Some statisticians and economists typically predicted macroeconomics of the time series and the financial time series by using statistical data analysis of, ARIMA, ARCH, GARCH and the Markov switching model using the assumption of the linearity and the stationary time series process which cannot be found in the most of the typical financial time series data. The main defect of the ordinary least square (OLS) [29] ARIMA and GARCH model is based on fitting the problem with the parameters of fitting or learning with a single stochastic process for infinite factors which is governed by an infinite stochastic process influence on the future expectation price. When we add one point of the future price and fit curve by using the data mining tool for the regression with GARCH(1,1), the coefficient of the equation which we used to describe the historical data will update and change the historical path so that it makes a non-realistic situation. In real life, we cannot change a historical event but we can influence an expected future event. We call this problem a prior effect in the scaling behavior of the time series data. There appears a prior effect on the wavelet transformation when we add a one more point and do a wavelet transform again, so the result is not the same as the previous result. In the case of Fourier transform or a Fourier series of an approximate function by using the periodic function, we called this the Joseph effect. In the Hilbert-Huang transform, we call this the end effect, in econometric we also can notice this by an ordinary least square (OLS) method so that beta was changed when you add more point. This problem will also happen in the hidden Markov model or the Bayesian network because of all the families of the tool are based on the simple statistic, not on the superstatistics or the hyperstatistical theory in which it is contained an infinite stochastic process for fitting. We call this effect in a general term as a prior effect or a prior problem, the problem that you lie people on by just changing your historical record in the event of what you did. In the present time, physicists [30] defined another type of the geometrical object on the financial market, which may live on the string [31] and the D2-brane world [32]. In order to build a new mathematical superstructure suitable for the financial market we need to take into account also a psychology factor of traders in the model of the equation. The spinor field in the model cannot be the price of the direct buy, it should be a covering space of the price arising from the interaction of the trader with the different expectations on the supply and the demand of the stock.

∗ pincak@saske.sk

† kabinsky@hotmail.com

It was found that the state space of the financial market is considered as a smooth manifold containing events as a fiber space endowed with the particular affine connection. Let the behavior of the trader be a sequence of the state spaces of the Riemannian manifold, so-called be behavior state space model, a cohomological sequence of agents and dual agents. The representation of the space trader is a so-called agent A t at time t and the sequence of the expectation price of the trader is a so called dual agent A ∗ t , the sequence is a homological algebra which induces a cohomological sequence as an evolution feedback of price evolution. Let us consider the path connected component of the quotient group between the circle and the boundary defined by the feedback evolution between the shape of the endpoint of time series of predictor and predictant after performing the transform into zeros band the transformation of the empirical mode decomposition.

In this work, we use a new approach to solve this problem by using differential geometry. We build a new GARCH(1,1) model based on [33], [34] in Wilson loop [35] of the connection for the description of the behavior of the interaction of the traders in the financial market. The gauge group action with the connection in the ChernSimons current is a source of the spinor field appearing as a hidden risk fear field in the financial market.

The paper is organized as follows: in section II, we review GARCH(1,1) invented by Bollerslev in another framework of differential geometry. The allowed volatility should be minus in order to interpret the result of the risk field. In order to open a new door to solve the stylized fact, we use a Minkowski space instead of the single Kolmogorov system for the volatility cluster. Volatility is used to express an emotional trade by defining a fear factor in the stock market or the stress factor. We discuss on stylized fact and give a new definition of the Grothendieck and the De Rham cohomology for the financial market with the Minkowski metric for GARCH(1,1). In section III, we provide a proof of volatility clustering phenomena in the hyperbolic space with the Yang-Mills equation for the financial market. In section IV, we summarize the results of work and discuss future work.

## II. GARCH(1,1) AND STYLIZED FACTS

Let σ t ( r t ) 2 be a volatility of the stock return. Using this mathematical transformation, we induce a dark volatility equivalent to a dark matter in the theoretical physics discovered by Wolfgang Pauli. The experiment which took place more than 20 years after death of Pauli confirmed neutrino in the balance of energy and momentum equation in his quantum field equation. Let F be a fiber bundle. Let g ij ∈ G be a cycle and g ij ∈ G ∗ be a cocycle, a group action acts on the fibre bundle of manifold. We have g ij = √ g ij √ g ij . Let x t be a time series in the section of the Riemannian manifold, x t ∈ T x 0 X = p -1 ( X ) . So, we have a differential 2-form of time series arising from the scalar production of the group transformation of the vector bundle, so-called principle bundle of time series, σ 2 t = &lt; x t , x t &gt; = g ij || x t || 2 with g ij = 1. The volume form is invariant with the respect to translation and rotation and the volatility in the normal form will preserve the transformation. In this paper, we are interested in the case of the dark volatility, σ 2 t &lt; 0, it happens when we change the Euclidean metric to the Minkowski metric g ij = -1 that allows the volatility minus, σ 2 t &lt; 0, because returns with multiplicative shock, ϵ n .

Here the observed financial return r n is modeled as the product of an iid innovation ϵ t and a positive scale factor σ t &gt; 0. One usually assumes that ϵ t has a mean value zero and, for the standardization, a unit variance. Specific models differ in their specification of the scale factors; an example is the stationary GARCH(1,1) recursion

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where κ, β, α &gt; 0 and α + β &lt; 1 .

The scale factors σ t (Jacobian in this model) are not observed (hidden), and one may use the daily close-to-close returns r n to estimate and evaluate the models for σ t . Let us consider GARCH(1,1) for the series of returns r ′ t = log ( r t ) which can be written as an additive shock,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The main problem of GARCH(1,1) is that the return is not in the log scale but we have a constant Euclidean distance. In this work, we change the metric to the hyperbolic distance in order to solve the volatility cluster phenomena. We found a complete solution in the complex time scale with the conjugate solution in the minus time scale. We called the volatility in the inert hidden time scale a hidden fear field or dark volatility σ ∗ t 2 ( A µ ) with a hidden variable of a risk field A µ as a connection in the gauge field theory.

The difference between the volatility and the dark volatility are the classes of different topological spaces as their mathematical objects.

The volatility σ 2 t is based on the statistical theory under the normal distribution and the usual treat is a random variable satisfying the Kolmogorov axiom of probability under the Hausdorff space with an outer spinor field. We define the dark volatility to be the general form of the normal distribution over the spinor field in the quotient superspace in the time series data under the T 0 -separation axiom. The volatility σ ∗ t 2 ( A µ ) is a spinor field of the behavior of the traders with a group action by the market cocycle g . The example of the dark volatility is a left chiral projection into the Euclidean plane with the left translation of the mean value only. It is just a volatility in the normal distribution if we take a group action as a left translation in the mean value. In the equilibrium of the statistical system, we have a normal distribution with the identity of the left translation of the gauge group appearing as a Gaussian random variable σ 2 t := 0, the identity of the Lie algebras as a result of the left adjoint map as volatility in the Euclidean plane. If we extend the group action as a spinor field action to the time series in the form of a gauge potential field x t := gA µ translation in the parallel direction of the left and the right translation with an extra property of the spinor invariant, we will get a new definition of the volatility as the Jacobian flow in both left and right direction simultaneously in the superspace of the time series data.

In the Minkowski space of time series data, we get supply and demand as focus points with the reflection of price in the light cone as a mirror symmetry from the left to the right chiral state in the financial market with the supply and the demand side. Therefore, we define the volatility in GARCH(1,1) as a gauge group action in the Jacobian flow with g := g ij = σ 2 t or h t term. We substitute h t with g ij ( t ), so we have a Jacobian flow equation of the parallel transport GARCH(1,1) model

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this case, we have an assumption that every risk from the stock investment in the stock market induces a fear field or risk field, so called volatility network. We denote this field C ∗ ( σ 2 t,i ) , i = 1 , 2 , 3 , · · · , n for n -stock in stock market. Let us denote a price in stock market as p t ( s i ), where s i is a code of stock i. We have an assumption that may be a source of risk field coming from the trader willing to win a high profit from stock market without their excess demand, but on the other side, they use too much leverage. This situation will induce both covariance and contravariance tensor field of the volatility of the price. Let us consider the Jacobian flow of GARCH(1,1) equation. Recall equation (2) of GARCH(1,1).

Discrete time volatility models were developed before the high-frequency data became readily available, and are typically applied to the daily or the lower frequency returns. Most discrete time models for the daily financial return r t satisfy the canonical product structure

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so we have an extension of the Euclidean plane to the non-Euclidean plane with the same as GARCH(1,1), so called Minkowski GARCH(1,1) in this context,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where g ik is an inverse of g kl representation for the market risk cycle and risk cocycle. In economic, most people assume || ϵ t || 2 ∼ N ( µ, σ 2 ) to be a random variable with random walk. In this work, we assume that this term is an induced spinor field from the interaction of the behavior of the trader with a risk aversion with no concept of the normal distribution. We use the differential geometry and the gauge theory approach for the approximation of this term with the Laurent polynomial in the Chern-Simons theory in the Kolmogorov space in the time series data with x ∈ X,y ∈ Y, x ∗ ∈ X ∗ , y ∗ ∈ Y ∗ . We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where C is a constant value representing a memory effect in the volatility clustering phenomena of the time series data and A µ is a connection.

Let p : Ω ∗ ( ∧ 2 T x 0 R ⊗ R ) → R with section matrix be a half volatility model, i.e. the matrix of error of the time series prediction ϵ t in the section of the supermanifold of the financial market, p -1 ( R ) = [ ϵ t ].

It is independent of the coordinate system, so we can use the Jacobian flow of the coordinate transform across a stack of time scale going in both directions of future and past,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

so we have a Jacobian flow as Minkowski GARCH(1,1) model,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a, b are constants and g ij ( t ) is a market cocycle. A parallel transport is a Wilson loop of connection W α,β ( A µ ) over a principle fibre of financial supermanifold as arbitrage opportunity in the financial market cocycle ( α, β ). It is obtained from the Jacobian flow of the market cocycle over the fibre space by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The intepretation of A µ is an error of the expected price from the physiology of the time series data, while trading induced from the interaction of the risk aversion and the hidden risk fear field from the behavior of the fundamentalist A µ =1 = A 1 . It is a chartlist or noise trader A µ =2 and bias traders A µ =3 in the financial market in the positive and the negative forward looking to the future price of the market as a group operation of the gauge group of an expected market cocycle g to the gauge field A µ .

Here A µ := Γ µ ij is a risk gauge potential induced form market cocycle g = g ijk = g ij ( k ) as gauge group action

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have gA = Ag + || ϵ || 2 with the gauge group action A g µ = g -1 A µ g + g -1 ∂ i g . The Wilson loop of the behavior trader in the connection A µ of fibre space is defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

From the typical classical differential geometry, the equation above allows us to work over the connection of the fibre space as an extradimension in the moduli space of Killing vector field approach. We just use the tool for the computation of the expected state in our new definition of the spinor field in the time series data. The spinor field induces coupling state between 4-types of tensor fields over Killing equation above.

Definition 1. Let support spinor be an arbitrage opportunity , Γ m ij in the financial market over moduli state space model in the time series data as a connection preserving scalar product over the parallel translation along the fibre space of the physiology layer in the time series data.

We define a Chern-Simons current as an arbitrage opportunity density by,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a connection Γ µ αν = ( A α ) µ ν , where A is a Chern-Simons current in the financial market. An arbitrage or arbitron is a Chern-Simons anomaly, K µ or an anomaly current induced from the behavior of the trader as a twist ghost field between 2 sides of the market. This field of the financial market induces a Ricci curvature in the financial market as an arbitrage opportunity for each connection in the coupling ghost field of the behavior of the trader. This curvature blends the Euclidean plane of the space of the observation to twist with the mirror plane behind the Euclidean plane and wraps to each other as the D-brane and the anti-D-brane interaction of the superspace of the financial time series data.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 2. The Ricci tensor in the time series data is a contraction of the curvature tensor of the risk defined by R ik ( σ 2 t ) = R j ikl ( σ 2 t ) with the respect to the natural frame of the connection

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Ad g { A } := [ g, A ] := g × Γ j ji := g × A = σ 2 t .

The market equilibrium occurs when the Ricci curvature is zero, R ik = 0 (arbitrage opportunity disappears and the physiology of the time series data contains no curvature).

The solution of the Patterson-Godazzi differential equation is a curvature of the superspace in the time series data.

If ∂σ 2 t = 1 or constant, we have an equal risk field in the market or the risk free market σ 2 t 2 -σ 2 t 1 = 1, so we have the price persistence with the shock given by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

but in the case of the dark volatility (as a hidden fear field) that induces an inertia in the price in hidden direction (and also if ∂σ 2 t = -1),

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We conclude that σ 2 t ∈ H is called the dark volatility. We can monitor or measure on the border of the universe outside of our galaxy with the light speed only.

Let us define an underlying coordinate of the Jacobian flow. If g ij = 1, we use a S 2 Riemann sphere as GARCH(1,1) coordinate. When -1 &lt; g ij &lt; 1, we use a cone or hyperbolic coordinate and when g ij = -1, we use the Minkowski space.

## A. Dark Volatility

In this work, we assume that the financial market be is an asymmetric superspace X t /Y t with the left and right supersymmetry in the Yang-Mills theory. The left chiral supersymmetry is a source of the demand D ∈ X t and the right chiral supersymmetry is a source of the supply in the hidden space S ∈ Y. The duality in the general equilibrium with the invisible hand is a source of the hidden dual superspace with the hidden demand D ∗ ∈ X ∗ and the hidden supply S ∗ ∈ Y ∗ . Most economists treat the price p t ∈ R n as the time series data embedded in the Euclidean plane with an outer extra property of the spinor field. We use an alternative approach of the differential geometry. Our price is defined by an extension of the Euclidean plane to a quaternionic projective space H P 1 , p t ( S, S ∗ , D, D ∗ ) is

where this space with an extraproperty of the spinor field from the interaction of the behavior of the trader from the supply and demand side as the connection A µ in the fibre space with the Hopf fibration. In econophysics, market depth is defined by a Taylor expansion of the price over an excess demand D . We have an equivalent class of the supply and demand when the price is a nonequilibrium of the matching by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ( α, β ) is an equivalent class market cocycle of the price matching.

We assume that the risk is composed of the observation risk and the hidden risk in the supersymmetric property of the left and the right chiral supersymmetry. The left chiral risk is the volatility in economics with the systematic risk σ 2 t and the right chiral risk is the dark volatility, the market risk with the hidden risk fear field induced from the behavior of the trader σ 2 t ( A µ =1 , 2 , 3 ). Let price be a transition state of the coupling hidden state between the supply pair, ( S, S ∗ ) and demand pair ( D,D ∗ ).

Hence, we have 2 systems of a hyperbola with the focus point D = βS ∗ , D ∗ = αS in the hidden supply and the hidden demand and the center in the demand and supply with pairs states twists space to each other with 2 Minkowski cones with the superdistribution pp ( k ) of the price momentum k . If we rotate the hyperbola light cone with θ = π 2 , we get 2 systems of equations,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A Wilson loop of the time series data, denoted as W α,β ( A µ ) is a twistor in acomplex projective space H P 1 . It turns one side of the Euclidean plane twist into another side of the plane with the help of modified Mobius map z = 1 z .

We have W α,β ( λS λD ) = D S . The equivalent class of the supply and demand is induced from the queuing process of 0 to ∞ by using modified Mobius map z = 1 z . Each of the components is defined by gluing an equivalent class of the supply and demand S ∈ [ s ] , D ∈ [ d ] such that [ s ] ∼ [ d ] if and only if there exists λ i such that x i = λ i y i , λ = ( α, β ).

The projective coordinate is a local coordinate on the Minkowski space, a Wilson loop of the unitary operator in the quantum mechanics. Let g ij be Jacobian matrix of the supply and demand, we have a shallow to the hidden state of the transformation by using the Wigner ray transform

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where λ = σ x , σ y are pauli matrix in Spin (2) group.

Definition 3. Let S be a supplied linear compact operator in Banach space and D be demand operator. A Wilson loop in the time series data at a general equilibrium point in the financial time series data is a point of price x t ( S, D ) such that there exists a ray of the unitary operator λ ∈ SU (2) ≃ Spin (3) ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The determinant of the correlation matrix or a wedge product of the column of the correlation of all returns of stocks in the stock market can be minus one and induces a complex structure as a spin structure in the principle bundle of the time series data. We found that when det ( Corr ( M )) 2 = 1, where Corr ( M ) , M ∈ SL (2 , C ) is a correlation matrix of the financial network M with Mobius map. This space of the time series data is in an equilibrium with 2 equilibrium points.

One is a real and explicit form, the other is hidden and in the complex structure like dark matter or invisible hand in the economics concept. If det ( Corr ( M )) = 0, the space of time series data is out of equilibrium and it can induce the market crash with a more herding behavior of the noise trader. This result is related to the definition of the log return of an arbitrage opportunity in econophysics.

The section of the tangent of the manifold is a Killing vector field of the manifold of the financial market. We introduce 3 types of the Killing vector field for the market potential field of the behavior of the traders in the market.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where + means optimistic behavior of the trader, -means the pessimistic trader, f is a fundamentalist trader, σ is a noise trader and ω is a bias trader. A 1 is an agent field of the adult behavior trader as fundamentalist. A 2 is an agent field of teenager behavior trader as herding behavior or the noise trader. A 3 is an agent field of the child behavior of the trader or the bias trader. The behavior is spin up and down as the expected states in the market communication layer of the transactional analysis framework. The upstate is signified as the optimistic market expected state and pessimistic as the market crash state of an intuition state of the forward looking trader cut each other as in the transactional analysis framework of the market communication between the behavior of the expected state and the behavior of the market state.

The strategy of the fundamentalist (we denoted shortly by f ) is the expected price in a period, where the price is in the minimum point s 4 and maximum point s 2 (crash and bubble price). Then the optimistic fundamentalist, f + will buy at the minimum point s 4 of the price below the fundamental value and the pessimistic fundamentalist f -will sell the product or short position at the maximum point of the price if the maximum point is over a fundamental value. The strategy of chartist or noise trader, σ ± is different from the fundamentalist. Let ω be a basic instinct bias behavior of trader.

We can use the Pauli matrix σ i ( t ) to define a strategy of all agents in the stock market as the basis of the quaternionic field span by the noise trader and the fundamentalist. Let +1 stay for buy at once and -1 for be sell suddenly. Let + i stay for being inert to buy and -i for being inert to sell. The row of the Pauli matrix represents the position of the predictor and the position in the column represents the predicted state.

Definition 4. For the noise trader, we use an finite state machine for the physiology of the time series to the accepted pattern defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where σ y is a Pauli spin matrix.

For the fundamentalist trader, we use an finite state machine for the physiology of the time series to the accepted pattern defined by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ω be a biased behavior A 3 of the market micropotential field. Since [ σ y , σ z ] = 2 iσ x ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where W is Wilson loop or knot state between the predictor and the predictant for the time series data and W -1 is the inverse of the Wilson loop for the time series data (unknot state between the predictor and the predictant).

We have an entanglement state inducing the strategy of the noise trader as herding behavior explained by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We use a Laurent series to decompose the risk field into the left excess demand, D and the right excess demand D ∗ in the hidden space knot the Laurent polynomial with the coefficient in the Wilson loop of the behavior of the trader over the knot of the market cocycle ( α, β ) , W α,β ( A µ ) by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

FIG. 1: Picture shown on the right is a knot model of the time series data in the left and right link of the Wilson loop of the behavior of the trader in the supersymmetry with an extra dimension. The picture on the left is a model of a supersymmetry theory E 8 × E 8 for the financial time series data.

<!-- image -->

where ( S, S ∗ ) is a pair of the supply and the hidden supply and ( D,D ∗ ) is a pair of the demand and a hidden demand field. The main problem of GARCH(1,1) is that return is not in a log scale but we have a constant Euclidean distance. In this work, we change the metric to the hyperbolic distance in order to solve a volatility of the cluster phenomena. We found a complete solution in the complex time scale with a conjugate solution in the minus time scale. We interpret the results with the index cohesive force. We called the volatility in the inert hidden time scale the hidden fear field or the dark volatility.

We model the financial market in the unified theory of E 8 × E ∗ 8 (Figs. 1) under the mathematical structure of the Kolmogorov space underlying the time series data. Let M ∈ H P 1 /Spin (3) be a market with the supply and demand sides and M ∗ : → H P 1 /Spin (3) → H P 1 be a dual market of the behavior of the noise trader, σ and fundamentalist f . Then we prove an existence of the general equilibrium point in the market by using equivalent classes of the supply [ s ] and the demand [ d ] in the complex projective space [ s ] , [ d ] ∈ C P 1 . The Kolmogorov space S 7 = H P 1 ≃ E 8 can use explicit states of the financial market and its dual H P 1 ∗ /spin (3) ≃ E ∗ 8 uses dark states in the financial market. It is a ground field of the first knot cohomology group tensor with the first de Rahm cohomology group H 1 ( x t ; [ G,G ∗ ]; H P 1 /spin (3)) ⊗ H 1 ( M ; H P 1 ∗ /spin (3)) . We induce free duality maps ξ : H 1 ( x t ; [ G,G ∗ ]; H P 1 /Spin (3)) → H 1 ( M ; H P 1 ∗ /spin (3)) as the market states E 8 × E ∗ 8 in the grand unified theory model of the financial market. For the simplicity, we let a piece of the surface cut out from the Riemann sphere with a constant curvature g ij defined as a parameter of a D-brane field basis with the same orientation as a definition of the supply and demand in the complex plane (flat Riemann surface). Now we blend the complex plane to the hyperbolic coordinate in 8-hidden dimensions of Ψ = (Ψ 1 , · · · Ψ ∗ 8 ) ∈ S 7 , 8 states in the explicit form.

## B. Yang-Mills equation for Financial Market

In this section, we explain the source of de Rahm coholomogy of the financial market. The mathematical structure in this section is related to the Chern-Simons theory of so- called gravitational field in 3 forms of the connection F ▽ ∈ Ω 2 ( T x M ⊗ T ∗ x M ) over 3 vector fields in the financial market: Ψ i ∈ M a market state field, A i an agent behavior field and [ s i ] a field of physiology of financial time series data over Kolmogorov space. We simplify the Chern-Simons theory to a suitable form to easy understand this section and also can just simplify the prototype of the real and useful new cohomology theory for the financial market. Let A = ( A 1 , A 2 , A 3 ) be a market micro potential field of the agent or the behavior of the trader in the market. Let Ψ ( S , D ) i ([ s i ] , [ s j ]) be a field of the market 8 -states of the equivalent class of the physiology of the time series [ s i ] , [ s j ].

In the financial market microstructure, we define a new quantity in microeconomics induced from the interaction of the order submission from the supply and demand side of the orderbook, so-called market microvector potential field or the connection in the Chern-Simons theory for the financial time series A ( x, t ; g ij , Ψ ( ⃗ S , ⃗ D ) i , s i ( x t )), where Ψ ( ⃗ S , ⃗ D ) i is a state function for the supply ⃗ S and the demand ⃗ D of the financial market. Let Ψ ( ⃗ S , ⃗ D ) i ( F i ) be a scalar field induce from news of market factor F i , i = 1 , 2 , 3 , 4. Let x t ( A , x ∗ , t ∗ ) be a financial time series induce from field of market behavior of trader. Where x ∗ and t ∗ are hidden dimension of time series data in Kolmogorov space.

In equilibrium state, the sequence is exact with ∂ 2 = 0 . We have demand in equilibrium state D = ∂ 2 A = 0 as property of short exact sequence in which can induce infinite cohomology sequence of sphere as sheave sequence of financial time series data.

Definition 5. Let S be a supply potential field be defined by rate of change of supply side of market potential fields of behavior trader in induced field of behavior of agent A in stock market.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 6. Let ⃗ D be a demand potential field (analogy to magentic field). It is defined by rate of change of market potential fields in induce field of ⃗ S ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 7. Let F µν be a stress tensor for market microstructure with component A µ of market potential field(analogy with connection one form in Chern-Simons theory) defined by the rank 2 antisymmetric tensor field,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

These 3 vector fields of behavior trader play role of 3 form in tangent of complex manifold. It is an element of section Γ of manifold of market, A ∈ Γ( ∧ 3 T ∗ x M ⊗ H ) = Ω 3 ( M ) .

Let consider 3-differential form of behavior of trader as market potential field A ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with a market state Ψ ( S,D ) ∈ C 1 ( M ) . A de Rahm cohomology for financial market is defined by using equivalent class over these differential form. The first class so called market cocycle Z n ( M ) = { f ∗ : C n ( M ) → C n +1 ( M ) } with commutative diagram between covariant and contravariant functor,

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

It is a kernel of co-differential map between supply and demand to market potential field.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Where [ s i ]( S, D ) is an equivalent class of physiology of time series data. The boundary map of cochain of market Ω 2 ( M ) is a second equivalent class used for modulo state,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Definition 8. The de Rahm cohomology for financial time series is an equivalent class of second cochain of market

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The meaning of new defined mathematical object is use for measure a market equilibrium in algebraic topology approach.

The section of manifold induce a connection of differential form. The connection typically gravitational field in physics. In finance, connection use for measure arbitrage opportunity. The connection allow us to use the PetersonCodazzi equations of Killing form of parallel transport of geodesic curve as hidden equilibrium equation for financial market over Riemannan surface of market,

Let A ν = F ▽ ν ∈ Ω 2 ( T x M ⊗ T ∗ x M ) , ▽ : Ω 0 ( M ) → Ω 1 ( M ).Let Ψ i ∈ M : H P 1 /Spin (3) → S 7 , [ s i ] ∈ Physio ( x t ) := G : C P 1 = S 3 /S 1 → S 3 = H . Where G is a Lie algebras of predictor and G ∗ is a predictant. Ψ ∗ i is dual basis of market state Ψ i . We have the Peterson-Codazzi equations of arbitrage opportunity as Jacobian flow g ij by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where ▽ is a connection of time series data over financial manifold. We get an equation of equilibrium point of traders hold when λ is eigenvalue of arbitrage g . The covariant derivative allow us to measure the rate of change of 3 fields in financial market. The rate of change of arbitrage opportunity behavior field of trader A i with respect to rate of change of physiology of time series data d [ s i ] = [ s ∗ i ] -[ s i ], the error between predictor and predictant is given by ▽ Ψ [ s ∗ ] = 0. The meaning of term ▽ Ψ [ s ∗ ] in the Peterson-Codazzi equations of arbitrage opportunity is the change of market state with respect to expectation field of physiology [ s ∗ ].

## C. Grothendieck Cohomology for Financial Time Series

Let Minkowski space of light cone in time series data be compose of 2 cones embedded into Euclidean plane in pointed space of time series as equilibrium node. The upper cone is for superspace of supply X t as Kolmogorov space in time series data. The down cone is superspace of demand side of market, Y t . We assume that in unit cell of nonEuclidean plane of time series data composed of 2 sheet with left and right hand supersymmetry. It is superposition to each others in opposite direction with left hand and right supersymmetry of hidden direction of time dt and reversed direction of time scale dt ∗ in which observe cannot be notice from outside the system. The quantization of hidden state of behavior of trader in superspace of time series data is an unoriented supermanifold with ghost field and anti-ghost field in side of Dbrane and anti-Dbrane sheet of normal distribution in Minkowski space in time series data. We define a new lattice theory with ghost pairs state of 2 pairs of supply and demand ghost field (Ψ L , Ψ R )

Definition 9. Let Ψ R ( D ∗ i ) be a market right state of demand side over behavior of trader [ A µ ] . Let Ψ L ( S ∗ i ) be a market right state of supply side over behavior of trader [ A µ ] = [ A ∗ µ ] . Let [ A µ ] ∈ A G be a space of gauge field of connection of behavior of traders in financial market. let [ A ∗ µ ] ∈ A ∗ G be a dual space of gauge field of connection of a genetic code of host cell define by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

if there exist a market transition state shift as dark volatility σ ∗ t with gauge group of evolution behavior of trader G such that,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

with σ ∗ 2 t ∈ A G ⊗A ∗ G .

The coupling of interaction of supernormal distribution induced from behavior of trader as pairs of ghost field and anti-ghost field can be classified by using link operator in knot theory, with link state &lt; L &gt; 0 , &lt; L &gt; + and &lt; L -&gt; . A unoriented superdistrubtion is in knot state with left and right link operator associate with left and right supersymmetry in chiral ghost field of supply and demand of market superstate. We work in level of Kolmogorov space. Let X t be Kolmogorov space of supply gauge field with S t ∈ X t and Y t be Kolmogorov space of demand gauge field with D t ∈ Y t . Let a momentum space of orbital of quantum price structure in supermanifold be coordinated by ( k x , k y ) ∈ X t /Y t | L ,we can choose X t /Y t := H P 1 , with twistor break a chiral supersymmetry from left to right in mirror space by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with skein relation over knot of Laurent polynomial q = e 2 πi n + k ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The dual behavior trader pair is ( k ∗ x , k ∗ y ) ∈ Y ∗ t /X ∗ t . We have a short exact sequence induced infinite sequence of Grothendieck cohomology for financial time series data

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let a behavior of traders be a ghost pairs Φ ± := (Ψ R , Ψ L ) with left supersymmetry be

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where g L i is an adjoint map of market chain of cocycles.

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let a supply side of market as a right supersymmetry be

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The inversion property of CPT produce parity inversion as ghost field and anti-ghost field pairs. Let ghost field pair be Φ + Ψ ∗ R ( A µ ) with arbitrage opportunity as a connection A µ and anti-ghost field pair be Φ -Ψ L ( A µ ) with partition map

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the parity map separate hidden supersymmetry of left right in supply demand equilibrium node represent as market general equilibrium point between supply and demand gauge field in 2 cones of with price surfaces by p : { Φ -Ψ L ( A µ ) , Φ + Ψ R ( A µ ) } → Z 2 = {-1 , 1 } with p (Φ -Ψ L ( x ∗ t ) ( A µ ))) = 1 -Φ + Ψ L ( x t ) ( A µ )) and p (Φ -Ψ R ( y ∗ t ) ( A µ ))) = 1 -Φ + Ψ L ( y t ) ( A µ )) as time reversal partity operator in moduli state space model of financial market.

Let define quantum price with for time reversal wave function by Ψ( x ∗ ) = Ψ( x t ) t = e -ik x t x . We have

The superspace in time series data use to measured (see fig. 2 for detail) the dual coupling behavior field derived from Laurent series over 4 hidden momentum spaces, X t , Y t , X ∗ t , Y ∗ t with both positive and negative coefficient of knot polynomial represent optimistic and pessimistic fundamentalist and noise traders behavior field. The knot behavior of behavior induced an arbitrage opportunity as a connection over Wilson loop represent market phase transition with ( α, β ) market cocycle in W β,α ( A µ ).

Let a momentum coordinate of price quantum be in functional coordinate over path integral of Wilson loop along loop space of ghost field behavior pairs. We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

A left pairs of behavior field represent supply side is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and right pair represent demand side of financial market with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

FIG. 2: Picture shown superspace in time series data with moduli stack [ s i ] . The cone inside superspace is a Minkowski space with light cone for time series data. We have spinor field in time series data as support spinor machine in this model.

<!-- image -->

The equilibrium node { ( ∗ x , ∗ y ) } in Minkowski market light cone Cone ( x ∗ , y ∗ ; pp ∗ ( k ∗ )) := { x ∗ 2 -y ∗ 2 = || pp ∗ ( k ∗ ) || 2 = 1 } is defined by cone

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and where pp ∗ ( k ∗ ) is a superdistribution of price quantization and x ∗ , y ∗ are a hidden demand and hidden supply , D ∗ , S ∗ . We define Galois connection to map between 2 dual Minkowski cones as market equilibrium path by { ( ∗ x ∗ , ∗ y ∗ ) } ∈ Cone ( x ∗ , y ∗ ; pp ∗ ( k ∗ )) with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In supernormal distribution, we have take into account spin as coupling field of behavior of trader appear as Wilson loop of Pauli matrix f + := A µ =1 := -W α,β ( σ z ) as behavior of fundamentalist. The behavior of chatlist is defined by Pauli matrix σ + := A µ =2 := σ y . The behavior of bias traders is an adjoint representation of fundamentalist and inversed of Wilson loop of chatlist A 3 := 1 2 i [ f, -W -1 ( σ )] . The optimistic behavior is denoted by A µ and pessimistic is denoted by A µ = ( A µ ) ∗ . Hence

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with || pp ∗ ( k ∗ ) || 2 = 1 and || A µ Φ + Φ R || 2 = 1 , || A µ Φ -Φ L || 2 = 1 . If A µ is a Pauli matrix represented spinor field of behavior of trader. The spinor invariant property of price quantum ϕ t in these normalization formula is a source of stationary process in superspace of time series data extended volatility to dark volatility by || ϕ i || 2 = 1 to || σ i ϕ i || 2 = 1.

Let S 2 be financial market as a Riemann sphere of price momentum space of price quantum without singularity, glue up from dual side of supply and demand in market with 2 disjoint cones with 2 equilibrium nodes. The market equilibrium node is composed of pairs opposite spinor field of behavior traders, ( ∗ x , ∗ y ) as a pointed space embedded inside Riemann sphere of energy surface S 2 .

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where x t ∈ X t , y t ∈ Y t , x ∗ t ∈ X ∗ t , y ∗ t ∈ Y t are Kolmogorov space for time series data.

This is a new kind of super mathematics theory in probability theory with new integral sign over tangent of supermanifold under Berezin coordinate transformation. The structure of supergeometry of superpoint induce a superstatistic of hidden ghost field in financial market. We let y t be an observe variable in state space model and x t be hidden variable of state. We denote Φ i ( y t ) ∈ A be a ghost field and Φ + i ( x t ) be an anti-ghost field in finance with relation of its ghost number ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have a parity p (Φ i ( y t )) = 1 -p (Φ + i ( y t )) and p (Φ i ( x t )) = 1 -p (Φ + i ( x t )) for both state and space variable in ghost field and anti-ghost field.

## D. Volatility Clustering Phenomena and General Equilibrium in Financial Market

We separate the system of financial market into 2 parts, first is state part X t of hidden demand state and second is a space part Y t of observation of supply space of state space model. In this work, we use algebraic equation from algebraic topology and differential geometry as a main tool for define a new mathematical object for arbitrage opportunity in DSGE system of macroeconomics.

Theorem 1. When market is in equilibrium , we have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

proof: see [13] .

We divide market into 2 separated sheet of Dbrane and anti-Dbrane of embedded indifference curve of supply curve and utility curve of demand. The interaction of 2 Dbrane induce from trade off between supply and demand as general equilibrium point. We define the Dbrane sheet of market is in real dimension and the anti self duality (AdS) of Dbrane to anti-Dbrane is induce from duality map from supply to demand.

Let ordinary least square (OLS) in superspace in time series data be written by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Take a ghost functor Φ i , Φ + i : X → ( A , s ) ≃ [ X,S ± k ]

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Let ϵ t be real present shock from economics and ϵ ∗ t be expected shock. in the futures. In equilibrium, we assume steady stead of macroeconomics with no shock i.e. ϵ 2 t = 0. Let 0 be space of equilibrium and equivalent with moduli state space model of supply space Y t and demand space X t of market with ϵ 2 t = &lt; ϵ t , ϵ ∗ t &gt; ≃ Y t /X t . Consider short exact sequence of macroeconomics in general equilibrium with market risk β t of sudden shock in demand side and transfer into supply side of economics and let systematics risk α t be a shock in both side of with price sticky market. The moduli group Z 2 define a state up and down of underlying financial time series data. When market is in equilibrium the short exact sequence will induce infinite exact sequence of market cocycle β t and α t ,

In order to proof the existence of dark volatility in financial market. We use tensor correlation field. Let τ be time lag of autocorrelation function of volatlity cluster,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

with power law parameter β ≤ 0 . 5. We define time lag of power law function by, x ∗ ( τ, β ) := τ β .

Let ds 2 = x 2 -x ∗ 2 be a Minkowski metric for GARCH(1,1). Let x be autocorrelation function x =: C | r | ( τ ) of return with volatility cluster phenomena. Then then there exist a dark volatility σ ∗ 2 t &lt; 0 with minus sign in complex hidden time scale as a homogeneous coordinate in quaternionic projective space H P 1 according to equation of projective hyperplane in Minkowski space x 2 -x ∗ 2 = 1.

Let κ be excess kurtosis, with σ 4 = µ 4 κ -3 . It is clear that σ 2 = ± √ µ 4 κ -3. Let us consider x := C | r | ( τ ) = Corr ( | r t | , | r t + τ | ) = C τ β = C x ∗ . So we have a rotated hyperbola graph, xx ∗ = C in with we can transform by using rotational eigenvalue to normal hyperbola graph x 2 -x ∗ 2 = C . If we normalize C ′ to one. If we use Euclidean distance in superspace in time series data with curvature constant over Minkowski cone so we have no arbitrage opportunity with time series is in stationary state. Although, in parallel transport of the connection A µ ( t ) is vary with time so we still have arbitrage opportunity in form of Wilson loop over market cocycle ( α, β ), W α,β ( A µ ).

In superspace of time series data X t /Y t , where x := C | r t | ( τ ) ∈ X t and y := C | r t + τ | ( τ ) ∈ Y t .We have tensor correlation as network of behavior traders, x ⊗ x ∗ , y ⊗ y ∗ , x ⊗ y, x ∗ ⊗ y ∗ by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We have a triplet of tensor correlation with memory in constant value C ,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This triplet has properties analogous with the gravitational field in the triplet of the Lie algebras in the Nahm equation for the monopole or the instanton in the theoretical physics. We defined a new form of the Yang-Mills equation in the financial market as a Nahm equation in the financial market version as a main consequence of the proved of volatility clustering phenomena. Let as denote x := D , a demand field, y := S a supply field. Let price be a moduli state space between the supply and demand p t = D t /S t .

Let [ D t ] := T O X 1 , [ S t ] := T O Y 2 , [ p t ] := T O X/Y 3 . The Nahm equations for transition states in financial market are

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The three equations can be written together by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

With the modified Nahm equation for the interaction of the behavior of the traders from the supply and the demand sides in the financial market, we let a pair of the co-states in the market from the pair of the supply and demand sides be modified Lax pair equations for the pairs of the market state in the financial market as the co-states between the fundamentalist and the chatlist with the optimistic and the pessimistic forward looking of the price under the risk fear field σ ∗ t 2 . It is trivial that the modified Nahm equations for biology can be written in the Lax pairs of the demand pairs, D -pairs wave function and the supply pairs, S -pairs wave function as following. Let

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

and

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where k is a D-brane of the market coupling constant in the Chern-Simons current as a transition state in the quantum price orbital, J µ = k . Notice that dark volatility induces from the supply a short term σ ∗ t 2 in market the transition state in the supply side of the financial market. The system of the Nahm equations is equivalent to the Lax pair equation for the financial market. The co-state Ψ ( D,S ) -pairs := (Ψ σ 2 t ,D k, O X , Ψ σ ∗ t 2 ,S k, O Y ). is a transition between the co-state of the interaction of the behavior field of the trader from the supply and the demand side in the financial market by the supply-demand pairs in the general equilibrium of the market co-state with ( σ 2 t , σ ∗ t 2 ) in the financial market.

These system equations have a property of the Chern-Simons current in the time series data as the eigenvalues of the Dirac operator, D for the financial market,

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where the critical current with some threshold of the risk aversion for an arbitrage opportunity of the behavior of the trader is denoted by J µ c . We have

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

We define a price as a transition state of an orbit state in the fibre space with the co-states of the transformation of the behavior field of the traders from the demand side of the market to the supply side by new coordinates ( p O D t , p O S t ) ∈ ( O X , O Y ) with

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The equation can be transformed to

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

The super stationary state of the demand pair solutions for the pairing of ( O D , O ∗ D ) and ( O S , O ∗ S ) states in ( O ∗ S , O ∗ D ) pairs can be solved by using the Paterson-Godazzi equation for an arbitrage opportunity. One part of the Lax pair equation for an arbitrage is a Paterson Godazzi equation for the demand side which has the pairing of ( O D , O ∗ D ) solution by

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where p t = dD dt / dS dt = dD dS is a parameter for the price as a transition market state by changing the coordinate of the D coordination in the demand side of the superspace of the financial market and S is the coordinate in the supply side. The new parameter σ ∗ t 2 is a hidden risk fear field or the dark volatility in this work. It comes from an evolutional factor of an adaptive behavior of the traders of the risk aversion and want to pursue an arbitrage opportunity. We let the transition of the states between the active price and the passive price while price are matching in double auction market defined by the phase parameters of the market cocycle ( α, β ) α 2 = 1 1 -p 2 , β 2 = 1 1 -p ∗ 2 , where an extra parameter k comes from the coupling constant of the behavior of the traders with the Chern-Simons current J µ = J µ c sin Ψ,

The ( O D , O ∗ D ) pairs and ( O S , O ∗ S )-pairs of the solution have a positive root and a negative root for ( α, β ) cocycle as a twist in the variable to produce an arbitrage opportunity from the general equilibrium in the mean reversion as the super stationary state with the Chern-Simons current for the financial market. The phase shift of the price quantum in the lax pairs (Ψ D -pair , Ψ S -pair ) takes the solution Ψ D -pair = 0 = Ψ S -pair to an adjacent with Ψ D -pair = 2 π = Ψ S -pair as a boundary condition for the price quantum with (Ψ D -pair , Ψ S -pair ) = (0 , 0)(mod2 π ) .

## III. RESULT AND CONCLUSION

In this work we introduced a new approach which was used to obtain the description of the dynamics of the market panic in the financial world by using the cohomology theory and the Yang-Mills theory over the traditional time series model, so-called GARCH(1,1). Because the financial events understudied by the social sciences evidence cannot be directly transported into the theory of Yang-Mills field for the financial market, we need to add some more assumptions also to soften some of the the assumptions of the Yang-Mills equations for the suitable use in the financial market with the equilibrium point in the Minkowski spacetime. We explained stylized facts in the financial time series data by using Yang-Mills equation for the financial market. We used Jacobian flow to construct the Minkowski metric with the hidden state in the time series data as the spinor field. We used ghost and anti-ghosts field in the Grothendieck cohomology to explain the interaction of the behavior of the traders from the supply and demand side of the market in an infinite cohomology sequence. We proved the power law in the volatility clustering phenomena by using the inversion invariant in the Yang-Mills theory. The result of this work is a new type of GARCH(1,1) model in the superspace of the time series data, so-called Minkowski GARCH(1,1). This theory is used to explain the spectrum of the nonstationary and nonlinear financial time series data as an analogy with the spectrum sequence of the behavior of the trader as pairs of the quantum field states in the underlying time series data in the spacetime geometry of the Kolmogorov space in time series data. We proved all the possibilities of the existence of the prior problem and all the possibilities of the theorem to solve with the precise proving procedure. A collection of the theories for solving this problem we called the evolution feedback path. The result of this solving can be used to predict the financial time series with a very high precision without end effect by using the mixture of filtering technique and tool of theoretical physics. In this paper, we discussed a stylized fact on the long memory process of the volatility cluster phenomena by using Minkowski metric for GARCH(1,1). Also we presented the result of the minus sign of the volatility in the reversed direction of the timescale. It is named as the dark volatility or the hidden risk fear field. These situations have been extensively studied and the correlations have been found to be a very powerful tool. Yet most natural processes in the financial market are the non-stationary. In particular, in times of the financial crisis, some accident events or economic shock news, stationarity is lost. The precise definition of a nonstationary state of time series can help to analyze the non-equilibrium state in the financial market. As an example, we may think about the financial market state from a mathematical point of view. There is no any classical stochastic process which will match with the real financial data, because there is not a single Kolmogorov space describing the whole financial market. Dynamics of the market panic (in the financial world) from the point of view of new financial model is presented. We hope that the precise definition of Kolmogorov topological space can hopefully introduce the better understanding of the macroeconomic models. The suitable algebraic reconstruction of space of time series could help with analysis of the prior effect and endeffect of time series models. Our presented approach together with the close connection with of empirical mode decomposition and intrinsic time scale decomposition of correlation matrix can serve as the main tools for a detection of market crash over time series data, as was introduced in [21].

## Acknowledgments

The work was partly supported by VEGA Grant No. 2/0009/16. R. Pincak would like to thank the TH division in CERN for hospitality. K. Kanjamapornkul thanks to 100th Anniversary Chulalongkorn University Fund for Doctoral Scholarship.

- [1] L. Bacheilier,'Th´ e orie de la sp´ e culation ' Annales Scientifiques de l' ´ E col Normale Sup ´ e rierer 3 tome 17. s. 21 (1900).
- [2] E.F. Fama, 'Efficient Capital Markets: A Review of Theory and Empirical Work' , Journal of Finance vol. 25, No. 2. 383 (1970).
- [3] P. L´ e vy , 'Th´ e orie de L' addition des variables al´ e atoires ' , Pairs: Gauthier-Vilars (1954).
- [4] B.B Mandebrot, M. , 'A Multifractal Walk down Wall Street' , Scientific American vol. 280,issue 2, 70 (1999).
- [5] R. Shaw, 'Strange Attractors, Chaotic Behavior, and Information Flow', Zeitschrift fuer Naturforschung A , Volume 36, Issue 1. Pages 80-112 (1981).
- [6] Atiyah, M. F. , 'Geometry on Yang-Mills fields' , Scuola Normale Superiore Pisa no.99 (1979).
- [7] Capozziello, S. and et. al.,'Chern-Simons current in system of DNA-RNA transcription,' Annalen der Physik 1700271 (2018).
- [8] A. Polyakov and V. Rychkov ,'Gauge fields -strings duality and the loop equation,' arXiv:hep-th/0002106v2 (2000).
- [9] R. N. Mantegna and H.E. Stanley,' An introduction to Econophysics Correlations and Complexity in Finance', Cambridge University Press. (2000).
- [10] Dror Y. Kenett and et al., 'Index Cohesive Force Analysis Reveals That the US Market Became Prone to Systemic Collapses Since 2002 ' , PLOS ONE vol 6. 1 (2011).
- [11] Cont, Rama, 'Volatility Clustering in Financial Markets: Empirical Facts and Agent-Based Models ' , In: Teyssiere G., Kirman A.P. (eds) Long Memory in Economics. (2007).
- [12] K. Kanjamapornkul, R. Pincak, S. Chunithpaisan, and E. Bartos,' Support spinor machine', Digital Signal Processing vol. 70, 59(2017).
- [13] Capozziello, S., Pincak, R. and Kanjamapornkul, K. 'Anomaly on Superspace of Time Series Data,' Zeitschrift fuer Naturforschung A , vol. 72, no. 12, 1077 (2017).
- [14] Andersen, T.G. and Bollerslev, T., ' Deutsche mark dollar volatility: Intraday activity patterns, macroeconomic announcements, and longer run dependencies' , Journal of Finance no.1 219 (1998).

- [15] B.B. Manibrot , 'Analysis of long-run Dependence in Price Records and other economics Time series ' , Econometrica, vol. 38 (1970).
- [16] W. Pauli, 'The connection between spin and statistics' , APS, (1940).
- [17] Capozziello, S. and Saridakis, E.N. and et. al., 'Cosmic space and Pauli exclusion principle in a system of M 0-branes' , International Journal of Geometric Methods in Modern Physics vol. 14 no.4 (2017) .
- [18] H. Stumpf, 'Yang-Mills Dynamics as Effective Nonlinear Field Theory of Composite Vector Bosons in Unified Spinorfield Models', Zeitschrift fuer Naturforschung A , Volume 41, Issue 5. Pages 683-703 (1986).
- [19] E. Witten, 'Khovanov Homology And Gauge Theory,' arXiv:1108.3103v2 (2012).
- [20] M. Aganagic, A. Klemm, C. Vafa,' Disk Instantons, Mirror Symmetry and the Duality Web', Zeitschrift fuer Naturforschung A , Volume 57, Issue 1-2, Pages 1-28 (2002).
- [21] K. Kanjamapornkul, R. Pincak and E. Bartos,'The study of Thai Stock Market during 2008 Crisis', Physica A Vol. 462 , 117, (2016).
- [22] Cont, R. and Stoikov, S. and Talreja, R., 'A stochastic model for order book dynamics' , Operations Research vol. 58, no. 3 ,549 (2010).
- [23] Mantegna, R.N. and Stanley, H.E., 'Scaling behavior in the dynamics of an economic index' , Nature vol. 376,no. 6535, 46 (1995).
- [24] R. Pincak, 'D-brane solutions under market panic' , Int. J. Geom. Methods Mod. Phys. doi.org/10.1142/S0219887818500998 (2018).
- [25] Horv´ a th, D. and Pincak, R., 'From the currency rate quotations onto strings and brane world scenarios' , Physica A vol. 391 no. 21, 5172 (2012).
- [26] Sornette, D. and Johansen, A. and Bouchaud, J.-P., 'Stock market crashes, precursors and replicas' , Journal de Physique I vol. 6, no. 1, 167 (1996).
- [27] Johansen, A. and Sornette, D., 'Stock market crashes are outliers' , European Physical Journal B vol. 1,no. 2. 141 (1998).
- [28] N. E. Huang and et. al., 'The empirical mode decomposition and the Hilbert spectrum for nonlinear and non-stationary time series analysis' , Proceedings of The Royal Society A vol. 454,903 (1998).
- [29] Kanjamapornkul, K. and Pincak, R.,'Kolmogorov space in time series data,' Mathematical Methods in the Applied Sciences 39 no. 15 , 4463 (2016).
- [30] R. Pincak, and E. Bartos, ' With string model to time series forecasting', Physica A vol. 436,135 (2015).
- [31] Bundzel, M. and Kasanicky, T. and Pincak, R., 'Using string invariants for prediction searching for optimal parameters' , Physica A vol. 444,680 (2016).
- [32] R. Pincak, and E. Bartos, ' Identification of market trends with string and D2-brane maps' , Physica A vol. 479,57 (2017).
- [33] Bollerslev, T., R.Y. Chou, and K.F. Kroner , 'ARCH Modeling in Finance: A Review of the Theory and Empirical Evidence' , Journal of Econometrics Vol.52, 5 (1992) .
- [34] Engle, R.F., ' Risk and Volatility: Econometric Models and Financial Practice ' , American Economic Review vol.94, 405 (1997).
- [35] C. Teitelboim, 'Gravitation Theory in Path Space', Zeitschrift fuer Naturforschung A , Volume 52, Issue 1-2. Pages 86-96 (1997).