## Designing Efficient Pair-Trading Strategies Using Cointegration for the Indian Stock Market

Jaydip Sen Dept of Data Science Praxis Business School Kolkata, INDIA email: jaydip.sen@acm.org

Abstract - Pair-trading strategy is an approach that utilizes the fluctuations between prices of a pair of stocks in a short-term time frame, while in the long-term the pair may exhibit a strong association and co-movement pattern. When the prices of the stocks exhibit significant divergence, the shares of the stock that gains at price are sold (a short strategy) while the shares of the other stock whose price falls are bought (a long strategy). This paper presents a  cointegration-based approach  that identifies stocks listed in the five sectors of the National Stock Exchange (NSE)  of  India  for  designing  efficient  pair-trading  portfolios. Based on the stock prices from Jan 1, 2018, to Dec 31, 2020, the cointegrated stocks are identified and the pairs are formed. The pair-trading portfolios are evaluated on their annual returns for the year 2021. The results show that the pairs of stocks from the auto  and  the  realty  sectors,  in  general,  yielded  the  highest returns among the five sectors studied in the work. However, two among the five pairs from the information technology (IT) sector are found to have yielded negative returns.

short  and  the  long  positions  for  both  stocks  are  detected accurately. The performance of a portfolio is evaluated based on its annual return. Five sectors are chosen from the National Stock Exchange(NSE) of India. Based on the NSE's monthly report of Dec 31, 2021, the top ten stocks of each of the five sectors are selected [2]. Pair trading portfolios are designed based on pairs from each sector that exhibited cointegration of the close prices for the training period Jan 1, 2018, to Dec 31, 2020. The portfolios are tested on the return for the test period Jan 1, 2021, to Dec 31, 2021.

KeywordsCointegration, Correlation, Ordinary Least Square (OLS) Regression, Residual Analysis, Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test, Return, Pair-Trading, Portfolio Position.

## I. INTRODUCTION

Pair-trading  strategy  is  a  portfolio  design  approach  that exploits the fluctuations between prices of a pair of stocks in a  short-term  time  frame,  while  in  the  long-term  the  pair exhibits a co-movement pattern and mean-eversion behavior. Explained  in  simple  terms,  pair-trading  identifies  a  pair  of stocks  that  exhibits  a  strong  correlation  over  a  long-term period  while  in  the  short-term  there  may  be  a  significant variation in their prices. When their prices diverge widening their  spread,  the  stock  gaining  at  price  is  supposed  to  be executed with a short strategy while the one experiencing a fall is executed with a long strategy. Here, the term short refers to the selling of the shares of stock while the term long refers to buying. When the prices of the two stocks exhibit a stable equilibrium, their spread reverts to its historical mean value. At that point, the investors can earn profit by reversing their portfolio positions. Pair-trading is considered a very simple yet effective approach to portfolio design. However, based on its  simple  principles,  a  set  of  more  complex  and  powerful approaches  to  portfolio  design  and  risk  mitigation  have evolved over the years. In this regard, the principles of long and short-term return anomalies including lead-lag anomalies, and anomalies of return reversals are worth mentioning [1].

This  work  proposes  a  cointegration-based  pair-trading approach that identifies stock pairs that exhibit robust cointegration  in  their  prices  over  three  years.  Once  the cointegrated pairs are identified, the pair-trading portfolios are formed and the performance of the portfolio is observed over a test period of one year. Suitable trigger points are identified using a very robust spread detection mechanism so that the The work has three unique contributions. First, the work proposes a cointegration-based pair trading approach for stock portfolio design that can be used to earn profit by the investors in  the  stock  market.  Second,  the  pair-trading  models  are trained and evaluated on real-world stock market data and the results are presented to demonstrate the effectiveness of the models.  Finally,  since  the  stocks  used  in  the  pair-trading portfolios  are  chosen  from  several  sectors  of  the  NSE,  the results are good indicators of the potential profit the investors can earn if they choose to invest in those sectors.

The  paper  is  structured  as  follows.  Section  II  briefly discusses  some  related  works  on  pair-trading  portfolios. Section III presents an outline of the methodology followed in the research. Section IV presents the results and their analysis. Section V concludes the paper and identifies future work.

## II. RELATED WORK

Portfolio design and optimization is a challenging problem for  which  numerous  solutions  and  approaches  have  been proposed  by  researchers.  Statistical  arbitrage  pair  trading refers  to  a  broad  approach  that  involves  multivariate  pairtrading,  generalized  pair  trading,  or  statistical  arbitrage  that has gained popularity over the years [3]. Several approaches to  pair-trading-based  portfolio  design  exist  in  the  literature including  distance-based  approaches  [4],  cointegration  [5], time series [6], and stochastic optimization methods [7].  For efficient  portfolio  design,  various  machine  learning  models have been used for the precise prediction of stock prices [810]. Models built on multiobjective optimization [11], principal component analysis [12], deep learning [13-14], and reinforcement learning [15]  have also found applications in portfolio optimization and pair-trading.

The present work involves designing portfolios based on cointegrated pairs of stocks from five chosen sectors  of the NSE,  India.  First,  from  the  five  sectors,  the  top  ten  most influential stocks are identified. All the stocks belonging to a sector  are  analyzed  on  their  correlation  and  cointegration characteristics in the training data. Those pairs that are found to  exhibit  robust  cointegration  are  selected  pair-trading.  An innovative trading strategy is then designed that provides the investors with reliable signals for triggering the short , long , or no action needed for carrying out transactions in the portfolio for one year from during the portfolio test period. At the end of  the  test  period,  all  the  pairs  are  evaluated  based  on  the annual return yielded by them. The returns yielded by the pairs also provide an insight into the sectoral profitability for the five sectors studied in this work. In summary, this work while proposing a robust approach to detect cointegration among the stocks of five sectors in the Indian stock market, also presents some useful information on the current returns and profitability of those sectors.

## III. DATA AND METHODOLOGY

The details of the data used and the methodology followed in this work are presented in this section. Cointegrated pairs of stock are first identified based on the training data from five sectors of NSE, and portfolios are built on those pairs. The annual  return  yielded  by  the pair-trading portfolios are computed.  The  pairs  and  the  sectors  are  finally  compared based on the returns of the portfolios over the test period. In the following, the nine steps involved in the research methodology are discussed in detail.

## A. Choice of the Sectors for Analysis

From the list of sectors listed in the NSE, five are chosen so that they exhibit diversity in the stock market.  The chosen sectors are the following: auto , banking , information technology (IT), pharma, and realty . For each sector, the top ten  stocks  are  selected  based  on  their  influence  on  the respective  sectors.  The  NSE's  report  published  on  Dec  31, 2021, is used for selecting the stocks [2].

## B. Extraction of Historical Stock Prices from the Web

The DataReader function of Python's pandas\_datareader module is used to extract the historical prices of the stocks from the Yahoo Finance website for the period from Jan 1, 2018, to Dec 31, 2021. The close values of the stock prices are used for building the pair-trading models. The evaluation is done based on the annual returns of the models on the test data from Jan 1, 2021, to Dec 31, 2021. In the current study, we have  chosen  pairs  from  the  specific  sectors  and  have  not considered pairs from diversified sectors like NIFTY 50.

## C. Computation of the Correlation Matrix of Stock Returns

At  this  step,  a  correlation  matrix  is  generated  for  each sector using the heatmap function of the seaborn library to get a rich visualization of the correlation coefficients among the pairs of stocks in that sector. Since there are 10 stocks in a sector,  Pearson's  product-moment  correlation  coefficients will be available for 45 distinct pairs. As a convention, the correlation  coefficients  are  computed  based  on  the  return values of the close prices. For computing the return series for each stock, the Python function pct\_change function is used. While the correlation coefficients serve as rough indicators of the strength of linear association between a pair of stocks, they are incapable of identifying the presence of any cointegration between the pairs.

## D. Identifying the Cointegrated Pairs of Stocks

A pair of time series variables are said to be cointegrated if they exhibit significant correlation in a long-term time frame while no relationship may be apparent in the short term. To identify the pairs which are cointegrated, the coint function defined  in  the stattools submodule  under  the statsmodels module of Python is used. The null hypothesis of the coint test assumes  that  a  given  pair,  which  is  passed  as  the  two parameters to the  function,  is  not  cointegrated  [16].  Hence, pairs with p -values below the threshold of 0.05 are assumed to be cointegrated. The p -values for the 45 pairs of stocks for a given sector are represented in the form of a heatmap for effective visualization. The pairs for which p -values are less than 0.05 are considered for building the pair-trading portfolios.

## E. Building OLS Regression Model with the Pairs

The pairs for which the null hypothesis of the cointegration  test  has  been  rejected  (i.e.,  the  pairs  which exhibit  cointegration)  in  Step D ,  an ordinary  least  square (OLS) regression model is built. As a convention, the stock that has a higher mean value of its close price is chosen as the predictor (i.e., independent) variable in the OLS model. The OLS function defined in the linear\_model submodule of the stasmodels module of Python is used for building the model. The  output  of  the  OLS  function  has  several  components. Some important among them are the following. (i) The hedge ratio and the p -value of its t -statistics, (ii) The p -value of the F -statistics, (iii) The prob. of the Omnibus test statistics, (iv) The value of the Durbin-Watson test statistics, (v) The prob. of  the  Jarque-Bera  test  statistics.  The  hedge  ratio  is  the coefficient parameter and for the predictor to have significant explanatory power on the target, the p -value of its t -statistics must be significant. The p -value of the F -statistic of the model should be significant (i.e., smaller than 0.05) for the regression model  to  be  accurate  in  its  prediction.  The  Omnibus  test statistic  should  also  have  a  significant p -value  so  that  it  is confirmed that the predictor has a significant influence on the target. The value of the Durbin-Watson test statistic should be close  to  2  so  that  there  is  no  autocorrelation  among  the residuals. While values between 0 and 2 indicate the presence of  a  positive  autocorrelation,  the  residuals  are  assumed  to exhibit  a  negative  autocorrelation  if  the  test  statistic  lies between  2  and  4.  The  cointegrated  pair  of  stocks  should exhibit significant p -values for F -statistics and the Omnibus test, and no significant autocorrelation among the residuals of the  model.  However,  there  is  an  additional  requirement  for cointegration, the residuals should be stationary. This condition is checked in the next step.

## F. Stationarity Analysis of the Residuals of the OLS Model

As  the  second  step  toward  validating  the  cointegration between a pair, the residuals of the OLS model are analyzed for the existence of a unit root (or the non-stationarity of the residual series). The Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test is used for checking the presence of a unit root in the residual series. The adfuller function defined in stattools submodule of the statsmodels module of Python is used for carrying out the ADF test. The ADF test yields test statistics and critical values at  1%  and  5%  levels  of  significance.  If  the  test  statistic  is negative and it is smaller than the critical value at the 1% level of significance, or if the test statistic is positive and it is greater than the critical value at the 1% level of significance, the null hypothesis is rejected.  The null hypothesis of  the  ADF test assumes that there is a unit root in the time series, and hence the series is not stationary. If the null hypothesis fails to gather enough support as judged from its p -value, the null hypothesis is  rejected,  and  the  series  is  assumed  to  be  stationary.  The ADF test is used to check whether the residual series of the OLS regression  model  is  stationary.  The  stationarity  of  the residuals  is  a  requirement  for  the  cointegration  of  the  pair. Hence, the stationarity of the residuals of the OLS is checked.

## G. Generating Trading Signals for the Pairs

After the cointegration for the pairs is validated, this step involves the generation of the trading signals for the pair. This involves  several  sub-steps.  First,  a  variable  called ratio is designed that stores the daily value of the ratio of the close value of the predictor time series (also called asset1 )  to  the close value  of  the  target  (also  called asset2 ).  Second,  the standardized  values  of  the  variable  ratio  are  computed  by subtracting the mean value from each ratio value and dividing the result by the standard deviation of the ratio values. The upper and lower limits of the Z -scores of the ratio values are computed by adding and subtracting the  standard  deviation from the mean value, respectively. Since, the mean value of the Z -scores is 0 and their standard deviation is 1, hence the values of the upper and lower limit of the Z -score of the ratio are 1 and -1, respectively. Third, a pandas dataframe called signals is now created with the following six columns: (i) date (ii) asset1 , consisting of the time series of the close values of the first stock, (iii) asset2 , consisting of the time series of the close values of the second stock, (iv) Z score , consisting of the standardized values of the ratio, (v) upper limit ,  storing  the upper limit of the Z scores (all entries are 1 under this column), and (vi) lower limit , storing the lower limit of the Z scores (all entries are -1 under this column).

Based on the Z -scores and their upper and lower limits, the trading signals for asset1 are now constructed. If the Z -score at a point exceeds the upper limit , then asset1 should be used with  the short strategy,  else  the long strategy  should  be followed. The short strategy for asset1 involves selling asset1 , while the 'long' strategy of asset1 involves buying more units of asset1 .  A  column signals1 is  now  added  to  the signals dataframe with an entry -1 for the short cases and entry of 1 for the long cases for asset1 . Another column signals2 is also added to the signals dataframe for asset2 . The entries under signals2 differ  in  sign  with  those  under signals1 .  In  other words, records with entry 1 under signals1 have an entry -1 under signals2 and  vice  versa.  This  is  because  the  trading strategies for the two assets are complementary in nature. At this  point,  the signals dataframe  consists  of  the  following columns:  (i) date ,  (ii) asset1 ,  (ii) asset2 ,  (iii) Z -score,  (iv) upper limit , (v) lower limit , (vi) signals1 , and (vii) signals2 .

## H. Identifying the Points of Investment Opportunities

To  identify  the  portfolio positions ,  i.e.,  the  points  of undervalued investment opportunities for the two stocks, two additional columns are added to the signals dataframe. For the first  stock  (i.e., asset1 ),  column positions1 is  added.  The entries  under  this  column  are  computed  based  on  the  firstorder  difference  of  the singals1 column.  Similarly,  for  the second stock, column positions2 is added based on the firstorder difference values of the signals 2 column. An entry of 0 under positions1 implies that there is no change in the current value  of signals1 with  its  previous  value.  An  entry  of  1 indicates  that signals1 has  exhibited  a  change  from  0  to  1, while an entry of -1 implies that the change is from 1 to 0. Similarly, the entries under column positions2 are determined. The records with positions1 value 1 correspond to a long trigger for asset1 , while positions1 values 0 indicate a short trigger for asset1 . A record with positions1 entry of 1 indicates that signal1 has  changed its  value from 0 to 1. In other words, asset1 has received a long trigger. Similarly, a short trigger is exhibited by a positions1 entry of -1. An entry of  0  for postions1 indicates  no  action  is  needed  for asset1 . Similarly, entries of -1, 1, and 0 for positions2 indicate a short trigger, a long trigger,  or no action needed, respectively for asset2 . A graph is plotted to identify the short and long trigger points for both stocks during the portfolio testing phase (i.e., over the year 2021).

## I. Computation of the Returns of the Pair Portfolio

In the final step, the portfolio returns for the year 2021 is computed. The pair-trading portfolio is formed on Jan 1, 2021, with an initial capital of 100000 units for each asset (i.e., with a total investment of 200000 units). For each day over the test period, the sum of the holding values and the cash amount for both the  stocks are  computed  and  stored  in  a variable total portfolio value .  At  the  end  of  Dec  31, 2021,  the  excess  (or deficit)  of  the  total  portfolio  value  over  the  total  initial investment of 200000 units is computed to arrive at the profit (or loss).  In  this  computation,  the  transaction  costs  are ignored.  Based  on  the  computed  profit,  the  return  of  the portfolio is derived.

## IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

This section presents the detailed results of the performances  of  the  pair-trading portfolios for different sectors.  Python  3.9.7  and  its  associated  libraries  of  numpy, pandas, matplotlib, statsmodels, and seaborn are used for data extraction, designing, and testing of the pair-trading models. The models are trained and validated on the GPU environment of Google Colab.

## A. Auto Sector

Ten pairs in this sector yield significant p -values for their cointegration, as depicted in Fig 1. Among these ten pairs, the following six are studied in this work: (i) Bharat Forge (BF) and Ashok Leyland (AL), (ii) Eicher Motors (EM) and Ashok Leyland (AL), (iii)  Maruti  Suzuki (MS)  and Eicher  Motors (EM), (iv) Maruti Suzuki (MS) and Ashok Leyland (AL),  (v) Eicher Motors (EM) and Bharat Forge (BF), and (vi) Maruti Suzuki (MS) and Bharat Forge (BF).

Fig 1. The p -values for the cointegration between pairs for the auto sector

<!-- image -->

Due to space constraints, the results of the pair BF and AL are  presented in detail.  For  the  other  pairs,  only  the  annual return figures for the year 2021 are presented. The daily close prices of BF and AL are depicted for the training period (i.e., Jan 1, 2018, to Dec 31, 2020) in Fig 2 to visually check the long-term association between them. As discussed in Section III, the next step involves building an ordinary least square (OLS)  regression  model  with  the  BF  time  series  as  the predictor variable and the AL time series as the target . The regression results are presented in Fig 3. The hedge ratio (i.e., the coefficient parameter for BF) is found to be 0.1839 with a standard error of 0.01. The highly significant p -value of the F - statistic  indicates  that  there  is  a  strong  linear  relationship between the two series. The Jarque-Bera test yielded a highly significant p -value for the test statistic indicating the skewness and the kurtosis of the residuals of the model are not like those of a normal distribution. The Durbin-Watson test statistic lies between 0 and 2 indicating a positive autocorrelation among the residual. Finally, the Omnibus test results support the p -value  of  the F statistic  indicating  the  presence  of  a  strong linear relationship between the target and the predictor . In the next step, the residuals of the model are computed and plotted.

<!-- image -->

Fig 2. Daily close prices plot for Bharat Forge and Ashok Leyland

Fig 3. The results of the OLS regression model with Ashok Leyland (asset2) as the target variable and Bharat Forge (asset1) as the predictor variable

Fig 4. The residual plot of the BF- AL OLS model

<!-- image -->

Fig 5. The Z-values of the ratio series and their limits for BF and AL

<!-- image -->

Fig 4 depicts the residual plot which looks like a stationary series.  The  Augmented  Dickey  Fuller  (ADF)  test  on  the residual  series  yielded  a  value  of  -2.7397  while  the  critical value at 1% level of significance is -3.4392. The results of the ADF test indicated that the residual series is not stationary. However,  as  the  BF  and  AL  series  are  cointegrated,  we proceed  to  execute  with  their  pair-trading  strategies.  Fig  5 depicts the plot of the Z -values of the ratio series and their upper and lower limits. The ratio series represents the ratio of the daily close prices of BF and AL for the training data. The pair-trading signal points are plotted in Fig 6, in which four types of signal points are identified, long strategy for BF, short strategy for BF, long strategy for AL, and short strategy for AL. The four strategies are denoted by different symbols in Fig 6. Finally, with an initial investment of 1000000 units of capital  for  each  of  the  two  stocks,  the  trading  strategy  is initiated on Jan 1, 2021. Fig 7 depicts the daily values of the portfolio for the year 2021. The value of the portfolio at the end of the year is found to be 235269 which corresponds to an annual return of 17.63%. Table I presents the annual returns for the six pairs of stocks from the auto sector which exhibited significant p -values in the cointegration test. All the pairs are found  to  produce  positive  returns  with  the  BF-AL  pair producing the highest return.

Fig 6. The pair trading scenario for the stocks BF and AL - trading signals and their positions identified

<!-- image -->

Fig 7. The total value of the pair trading portfolio of BF and AL for the year 2021

<!-- image -->

TABLE  I.  ANNUAL RETURNS OF AUTO SECTOR PAIR TRADING

| Stock Pair  Init Investment  Profit  Annual Return  BF - AL  200000  35270  17.63  EM - AL  200000  27773  13.89  MS - EM  200000  23968  11.98  MS - AL  200000  22503  11.25  EM - BF  200000  21608  10.80  MS - BF  200000  20300  10.15   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## B. Banking Sector

There are only three pairs from this sector that are found to have significant p -values for their cointegration as depicted in Fig 8. However, two additional pairs are included for the analysis as their p -values are also close to the threshold value of 0.05. The five pairs which are studied under this sector are as follows: (i) State Bank of India (SB) and IDFC First Bank (IF), (ii)  Federal Bank (FB) and IDFC First Bank (IF), (iii) HDFC  Bank  (HD)  and  Kotak  Mahindra  Bank  (KM),  (iv) ICICI Bank (IC) and Kotak Mahindra Bank (KM), and (v) Axis Bank (AX) and State Bank of India (SB).

While the results of the pair SB and IF are discussed in detail, for the remaining four pairs, only their annual return values for the year 2021 are presented. The daily close prices of SB and IF are plotted in Fig 9. The OLS regression results with IF as the target variable and SB as the predictor variable are presented in Fig 10. The hedge ratio is 0.1478, and the F -statistic has a highly significant p -value. The residual series is plotted in Fig 11.

<!-- image -->

Fig 8. The p -values for the cointegration between pairs for the banking  sector

<!-- image -->

Fig 9. Daily close prices plot for SBI and IDFC First Bank

Fig  10.  The  results  of  the  OLS  regression  model  with  IDFC  First  Bank ( asset2 ) as the target and SBI ( asset1 ) as the predictor

Fig 11. The residual plot for the SB-IF OLS model

<!-- image -->

Fig 12. The Z-values of the ratio series and their limits for SB and IF

<!-- image -->

The ADF test on the residual series yields a test statistic value  of  -2.5566  while  the  critical  value  at  1%  level  of significance  is  -3.4392.  Hence,  the  residual  series  is  not stationary. However, the pair trading strategy is still executed.

The plot of the Z -values of the ratio series and their upper and lower limits are shown in Fig 12. Fig 13 and Fig 14 show the trading signal points, and the daily total value of the portfolio for 2021, respectively. With an initial investment of 200000 on Jan 1, 2021, the total value of the portfolio at the end of 2021  is  found  to  be  219926.  The  return  yielded  by  the portfolio  is  9.96%.  Table  II  presents  the  returns  of  the portfolios of the five pairs of stocks in the banking sector, in which  except  for  the  pair  AX-SB,  all  other  pairs  have produced positive returns.

Fig 13. The pair trading scenario for the stocks SB and IF - trading signals and their positions identified

<!-- image -->

Fig 14. The total value of the pair trading portfolio of SB and IF for the year 2021

<!-- image -->

TABLE  II.  ANNUAL RETURNS OF BANKING SECTOR PAIR TRADING

| Stock Pair  Init Investment  Profit  Annual Return  SB - IF  200000  19926  9.96  FB - IF  200000  19300  9.65  HD - KM  200000  11056  5.53  IC - KM  200000  3638  1.82  AX - SB  200000  -17575  -8.79   |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## C. IT Sector

As depicted in Fig 15, six pairs  exhibited  significant p -values for their cointegration. These six pairs are as follows: (i)  TCS (TC) and Coforge (CF), (ii) Infosys (IF) and HCL Tech (HC), (iii) Tech Mahindra (TM) and L&amp;T Tech Services (LS), (iv) Wipro (WP) and L&amp;T Tech Services (LS), (v) TCS (TC) and Wipro (WP), and (vi) HCL Tech (HC) and L&amp;T Infotech (LI). The results for the pair TC-CF are presented in detail. Fig 16 exhibits the close values of the TC and the CF series for the period Jan 1, 2018, to Dec 31, 2020. The results of the OLS regression model built with TC as the predictor and CF as the target are presented in Fig 17. The hedge ratio is  0.7061.  The  highly  significant p -value  of  the F -statistics indicates that there is a strong linear relationship between the two series TC and CF.

The residuals of the OLS model are plotted in Fig 18. The Z -values of the ratio with their upper and lower bounds are depicted in Fig 19. The ADF test on the ratio series yielded a test statistic value of -1.2592, while the critical values at 1% level of significance is -3.4392. The ADF test results indicate that  the  residual  series  is  not  stationary.  However,  the  pair trading strategy is executed since the two series were found to be cointegrated.

<!-- image -->

Fig 15. The p -values for the cointegration between pairs for the IT sector

<!-- image -->

Fig 16. Daily close prices plot for TCS ( asset1 ) and Coforge ( asset2 )

Fig 17. The results of the OLS regression model with Coforge ( asset2 ) as the target and TCS ( asset1 ) as the predictor

Fig 18. The residual plot for the TC-CF OLS model

<!-- image -->

Fig 19. The Z -values of the ratio series and their limits for the TC and CF

<!-- image -->

The  signal  points  of  the  pair  trading  during  2021  are depicted in Fig 20. Fig 21 exhibits the daily portfolio value for the pair for the year 2021. The total portfolio value for the TCCF pair at the end of 2021 is 217462. For an initial investment of 200000, the pair yields a return of 8.73%. Table III presents the portfolio return for the six pairs from the IT sector. Except for  two  pairs  (i.e.,  TC-WP  and  HC-LI),  the  remaining four pairs have produced positive returns.

Fig 20. The pair trading scenario for the stocks TC and CF - the trading signals and their positions identified

<!-- image -->

Fig 21. The total value of the pair trading portfolio of TC and CF for the year 2021

<!-- image -->

TABLE  III.  ANNUAL RETURNS OF IT SECTOR PAIR TRADING

| Stock Pair  Init Investment  Profit  Annual Return  TC - CF  200000  17460  8.73  IF - HC  200000  10940  5.47  TM - LS  200000  6720  3.36  WP - LS  200000  3740  1.87  TC - WP  200000  -8660  -4.33  HC - LI  200000  13580  -6.79   |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## D. Pharma Sector

Fig 22 shows that two pairs have significant p -values for their cointegration. Three additional pairs are included in the study  as  their p -values  are  just  marginally  higher  than  the threshold value of 0.05. The five pairs in the pharma sector which are analyzed are as follows: (i) Lupin (LP) and Alkem Labs (AK), (ii) Lupin (LP) and Biocon (BI), (iii) Dr. Reddy's Labs (DR) and Divi's Labs (DV), (iv) Cipla (CI) and Biocon (BI), and (v) Lupin (LP) and Laurus Labs (LR).

Fig 22. The p -values for the cointegration between pairs for the pharma sector

<!-- image -->

The pair LP-AK is analyzed in detail. The close values for the LP and the AK series for the period Jan 1, 2018, to Dec

31,  2021,  are  plotted  in  Fig  23.  The  results  of  the  OLS regression  model  fitted  on  the  training  data  with  LP  as  the predictor and AK as the target are exhibited in Fig 24. The hedge ratio is 2.6030. A strong linear relationship between the two series is indicated by a highly significant p -value of the F -statistic.

<!-- image -->

Fig 23. Daily close prices plot for Lupin ( asset1 ) and Alkem Labs  ( asset2 )

Fig 24. The results of the OLS regression model with Alkem Labs ( asset2 ) as the target variable and Lupin ( asset1 ) as the predictor variable

<!-- image -->

Fig 25. The residual plot for the LP-AK OLS model

Fig 26. The Z -values of the ratio series and their limits for LP and AK

<!-- image -->

Fig  27.  The  pair  trading  scenario  for  the  stocks  LP  and  AK  -  the  trading signals and their positions identified

<!-- image -->

The residual values are plotted in Fig 25. The Z -values of the ratio and their upper and lower bounds are depicted in Fig

26.  The  ADF test  on  the  ratio  series  yielded  a  test  statistic value  of  -2.0947,  while  the  critical  value  at  a  1%  level  of significance is -3.4392. The ADF test results indicate that the residual  series  is  not  stationary.  However,  the  pair  trading strategy is executed as the pair is found to be cointegrated. The signal points for the short and long transactions for the pair trading  strategy  in  2021  are  presented  in  Fig  27.  The  daily portfolio values for the pair in 2021 are exhibited in Fig 28. The portfolio of the LP-AK pair is found to have yielded a profit of 34986 with an initial investment of 200000. Hence, the portfolio produced a return of 17.49%. Table IV presents the returns for the five pairs from the pharma sector. Barring LP-LR, the other pairs have yielded positive returns.

Fig 28. The total value of the pair trading portfolio of LU and AK for the year 2021

<!-- image -->

TABLE  IV.  ANNUAL RETURNS OF PHARMA SECTOR PAIR TRADING

| Stock Pair  Init Investment  Profit  Annual Return  LP - AK  200000  34986  17.49  LP - BI  200000  26993  13.50  DR - DV  200000  10942  5.47  CI - BI  200000  7614  3.81  LP - LR  200000  -15812  -7.91   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

## E. Realty Sector

As  depicted  in  Fig  29,  six  pairs  in  this  sector  have significant p -values  for  their  cointegration.  Alongside  these six pairs, another pair is included in the analysis since its p -value is also very close to the threshold value of 0.05.  The seven pairs included in the analysis are as follows: (i) Oberoi Realty (OR) and Prestige Estate Projects (PE), (ii) DLF (DL) and  Oberoi  Realty  (OR),  (iii)  Phoenix  Mills  (PM),  and Prestige  Estate  Projects  (PE),  (iv)  Oberoi  Realty  (OR)  and Sunteck (ST), (v) Oberoi Realty (OR) and Sobha (SB), (vi) Brigade  Enterprises  (BE)  and  Godrej  Properties  (GP),  (vii) Phoenix Mills (PM) and Brigade Enterprises (BE).

Fig 29. The p -values for the cointegration between pairs for the realty sector

<!-- image -->

The pair OR-PE is analyzed in detail. The results of the OLS regression model built using the PE series as the target variable and the OR as the predictor are presented in Fig 30. The residual series is plotted in Fig 31. The ADF test produced a test statistic value of -3.4499 while the critical value at 1%

level of significance is -3.4392. The ADF test results indicate that the residual series is stationary. The signal points for the OR-PE pair trading in 2021 are presented in Fig 32. Fig 33 exhibits the daily portfolio values for the pair in 2021. The OR-PE  pair  has  yielded  a  profit  of  32488  with  an  initial investment of 200000. The return for this pair is 16.24. Table V presents the returns of the seven pairs of the realty sector.

Fig 30. The results of the OLS regression model with Prestige Estate ( asset2 ) as the target and Oberoi Realty ( asset1 ) as the predictor

<!-- image -->

Fig 31. The residual plot for the OR-PE OLS model

Fig 32. The pair trading scenario for the stocks OR and PE - the trading signals and their positions identified

<!-- image -->

Fig 33. The total value of the pair trading portfolio of OR and PE for the year 2021

<!-- image -->

TABLE  V.  ANNUAL RETURNS OF REALTY SECTOR PAIR TRADING

| Stock Pair  Init Investment  Profit  Annual Return  OR - PE  200000  32488  16.24  DL - OR  200000  27337  13.67  PM - PE  200000  27184  13.59  OR - ST  200000  24481  12.24  OR - SB  200000  11711  5.86  BE - GP  200000  8339  4.17  PM - BE  200000  4457  2.23   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

A summary of results is exhibited in Table VI, in which for  each  sector,  the  number of pairs  studied,  the  number of pairs that produced positive returns, and the maximum return yielded by a pair for that sector are shown. All pairs from the auto  sector  and  the  pharma  have  produced positive returns.

Two pairs of the IT sector have yielded negative returns and this sector also has yielded the lowest value of the max return.

TABLE  VII.  SUMMARY RESULTS OF PAIR TRADING PORTFOLIOS

| Sector  No of Pairs  Positive Return Pairs  Max Ret  Auto  6  6  17.63  Pharma  5  4  17.49  Realty  7  7  16.24  Banking  5  4  9.96  IT  6  4  8.73   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

This  paper  has  presented  a  cointegration-based  pairtrading approach for stocks chosen from five sectors listed in the NSE of India. The top ten stocks are selected from each sector  and  pair-trading  portfolios  are  designed  with  the cointegrated pairs. The pair-trading portfolios are designed on the stock price data from Jan 1, 2018, to Dec 31, 2020, and they are evaluated over the year 2021. The auto sector and the realty sector produced the best results as all the cointegrated pairs from these two sectors yielded positive returns. However, two pairs from the IT sector and one each from the banking and the pharma sectors were found to have negative returns.  Comparison  of  the  cointegration-based  approaches with the clustering-based approaches is a future research plan.

## REFERENCES

- [1] H. Jacobs, 'What explains the dynamics of 100 anomalies?', Journal of Banking &amp; Finance , vol 57, pp. 65-85, 2015.
- [2] NSE Website: http://www1.nseindia.com.
- [3] C. Krauss, 'Statistical arbitrage pairs trading strategies: Review and outlook', Journal of Economic Surveys , vol 31, no 2, pp 513-545.
- [4] M. Fil  an  L.  Kristoufek,  'Pairs  trading  in  cryptocurrency  markets', IEEE Access , vol 8, pp. 172644-172651, 2020.
- [5] L. Shen, K. Shen, C. Yi and Y. Chen, 'An evaluation of pairs trading in commodity futures markets', Proc of IEEE Big Data'20 , pp 54575462, Dec 10-13, 2020.
- [6] J.  Sen  and  T.  Datta  Chaudhuri.  'An  investigation  of  the  structural characteristics of the Indian IT sector and the capital goods sector - An application of the R programming language in time series decomposition and forecasting, Journal of Ins. and Fin. Mgmt . vol 1, no 4, pp 68-132, 2016.
- [7] D-M. Zhu, J-W. Gu, F-H. Yu, T-K. Siu and W-K. Ching, 'Optimal pairs  trading  with  dynamic  mean-variance  objective', Mathematical Method of Ops Res , vol 94, pp. 145-168, 2021.
- [8] S.  Mehtab  and  J.  Sen,  "A  time  series  analysis-based  stock  price prediction using machine learning and deep learning models", Int. J. of Bus. Forcstng. and Mktg. Int , vol 6, no 4, pp. 272-335, 2021.
- [9] S. Mehtab and J. Sen, 'Stock price prediction using CNN and LSTMbased deep learning models', Proc. of DASA, Nov 8-9, 2020, Bahrain.
- [10] S.  Mehtab  and  J.  Sen,  "A  robust  predictive  model  for  stock  price prediction using deep learning and natural language processing", Proc. of 7 th  BAICONF , Dec 5-7, 2019, Bangalore, India.
- [11] Zhi  Wang,  X.  Zhang,  Z.  Zhang  and  D.  Sheng,  'Credit  portfolio optimization:  A  multi-objective  genetic  algorithm  approach', Borsa Istanbul Review , vol 22, no 1, pp 69076, 2022.
- [12] J. Sen and S. Mehtab, "A comparative study of optimum risk portfolio and eigen portfolio on the Indian stock market,' Int. J. of Bus. Forcstng. and Mktg. Intl. , vol 7, no 2, pp. 143-195, 2022.
- [13] J. Sen, A, Dutta and S. Mehtab, 'Stock portfolio optimization using a deep  learning  LSTM  model', Proc.  of  MysuruCon'21 ,  Oct  24-25, 2021, Hassan, India.
- [14] J. Sen, S. Mondal and G. Nath, 'Robust portfolio design and stock price prediction using an optimized LSTM  model', Proc of IEEE INDICON'21 , pp 1-6, Dec 19-21, 2021, Guwahati, India.
- [15] S-H.  Kim,  D-Y.  Park  and  K-H.  Lee,  'Hybrid  deep  reinforcement learning for pair trading', Applied Sciences , vol 12, no 3, Jan 2022.
- [16] J. G. MacKinnon, 'Approximate asymptotic distribution functions for unit-root  and  cointegration  tests', Journal  of  Business  &amp;  Economic Statistics , vol 12, no 2, pp. 167-176.